Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 4.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Amendments; Definitions; General Penalty
[Adopted 7-11-1991 as Ch. 1 of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 1-1. Publication and distribution of Code.
§ 1-2. Amendment procedure.
This Code shall be amended by ordinance. The title of each amendatory
ordinance, adapted to the particular circumstances and purposes of the
amendment, shall be substantially as follows.
A. Publication of the codification of the ordinances of the Charter
Township of Northville is hereby directed.
B. Twenty-five copies of the Code shall be printed and distributed as
follows:
(1) Supervisor: 1 copy.
(2) Each Board member: 1 copy each.
(3) Clerk: two copies.
(4) Attorney: two copies.
(5) Treasurer: one copy.
(6) Finance Director: one copy.
(7) Director of Public Safety: two copies.
(8) Planning and Zoning Administrator: one copy.
(9) Director of Public Services: one copy.
(10) Building Official: one copy.
(11) Planning Consultant: one copy.
(12) Township Engineer: one copy.
(13) Reserve: five copies.
C. Copies of the original printing of this Code shall be published and made
available to the public at a reasonable charge. In addition, the Clerk
shall keep one copy of the Code available for public inspection during
office hours. (State law reference: MCL 41.641)
A. To amend any section:
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND SECTION (OR SECTIONS______ AND)
OF CHAPTER______ OF PART OF THE CODE OF THE CHARTER
TOWNSHIP OF NORTHVILLE.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:3
§ 1-3. Publication and distribution of amendments.
Amendments to the Code shall be published as required by law and not
less than 25 copies of each amendment shall be published suitable for
insertion in the copies of the Code. The Township Clerk shall distribute such
copies to the officers of the Township having copies of the Code assigned
to them. Each officer assigned a copy of the Code shall be responsible for
maintaining the same and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as
received. Each copy of said Code shall remain the property of the Township
and shall be turned over by each officer having custody thereof upon
expiration of his term of office to his successor, or to the Township Clerk, in
case he shall have no successor.
§ 1-4. Headings.
No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any
chapter or section heading.
§ 1-5. Responsibility.
Whenever any act is prohibited by this Code, by an amendment thereof, or
by any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, such prohibition shall extend
to and include the causing, securing, aiding or abetting of another person
to do so said act.
§ 1-6. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this Code and any
amendment thereto, shall for the purposes of this Code have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section except in those instances
where the context clearly indicates a different meeting:
PERSON — Includes any individual, copartnership, corporation,
association, club, joint adventure, estate, trust and any other group of
combination acting as a unit and the individuals constituting such group or
unit.
B. To insert a new section, chapter or part:
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CODE OF THE CHARTER
TOWNSHIP OF NORTHVILLE BY ADDING A NEW SECTION (NEW
SECTIONS, A NEW CHAPTER OR A NEW PART, as the case may
be) WHICH NEW SECTION (SECTIONS, CHAPTER OR PART) SHALL
BE DESIGNATED AS SECTION______ (SECTIONS ______ AND ______)
OF CHAPTER ______ OF PART___________ (or proper designation if a
chapter or part is added) OF SAID CODE.
C. To repeal a section, chapter or part:
AN ORDINANCE TO REPEAL SECTION ______(SECTIONS _____AND
_____), CHAPTER ______, PART ______, (as the case may be) OF THE
CODE OF THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF NORTHVILLE.
§ 1-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 1-6
1:4
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to or upon which the public resorts to travels,
whether such place is owned or controlled by the Township, Wayne County,
or any agency of the State of Michigan or is a place to or upon which the
public resorts or travels by custom or by invitation, express or implied.
STREET, HIGHWAY and ALLEY — The entire width subject to an easement
for public right-of-way or owned in fee by the Township, County or state of
every way or place, or whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open
to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of public travel.
The word "alley" shall mean any such way or place providing a secondary
means of ingress and egress from a property.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curblines or lateral lines
and the right-of-way lines, which is intended for the use of pedestrians.
TOWNSHIP — The Charter Township of Northville.
§ 1-7. Title of officer to include deputy or subordinate.
Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer of the Township is
assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, the title of
said officer shall mean and include such officer or his deputy or authorized
subordinate.
§ 1-8. Tense and gender.
Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the content, all
words used in this Code indicating the present tense shall not be limited to
the time of adoption of this Code but shall extend to and include the time
of the happening of any act, event or requirements for which provision is
made herein either as a power, immunity, requirement or prohibition, and
any words denoting masculine gender shall include the feminine gender.
§ 1-8.1. (Reserved)
§ 1-8.2. (Reserved)
§ 1-8.3. (Reserved)
§ 1-8.4. (Reserved)
§ 1-8.5. Severability. [Added 5-20-2004]
Should any portion, provision or section of this Code, or of any ordinance
adopted by the Township Board, be held unconstitutional or invalid, such
holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the
remaining portions, provisions or sections, it being the intent of the
Township Board that this Code and its ordinances shall stand,
notwithstanding the invalidity of any portion, provision or section thereof.
The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any section
of this Code and to any ordinance adopted by the Township Board, whether
or not the wording of this section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-9
1:5
§ 1-9. Notice.
Notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections, dangerous
structures, abating nuisances, or any other act, the extension of which if
performed by the Township may be assessed against the premises under the
provisions of this Code, shall be served:
§ 1-10. General penalty.
A. By delivering the notice to the owner personally, or by leaving the same
at his residence, office or place of business, with some person of
suitable age and discretion; or
B. By mailing said notice by certified or registered mail to such owner at
his last known address; or
C. If the owner is unknown, by positing said notice in some conspicuous
place on the premises at least five days before the act or action
concerning which the notice is given. No person shall interfere with,
obstruct, mutilate, conceal or tear down any official notice or placard
posted by a Township officer, unless permission is given by said officer
to remove said notice; or
D. As otherwise specified in this Code.
A. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code for any
particular provision or section, every person convicted of a violation of
any provision of this Code or any rule or any rule or regulation adopted
or issued in pursuance thereof, other than a violation which is
designated as a civil infraction or a municipal civil infraction, shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $500 and costs of prosecution or by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by both such fine and
imprisonment. A civil fine shall be imposed for any violation which is
designated as a civil infraction without limitations as to amounts. Each
act of violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur
shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section,
unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the
amendment of any section of this Code, whether or not such penalty is
reenacted in the amendatory ordinance.
B. In case of the amendment of any section of the Code for which a penalty
is not provided, the general penalty, as provided in Subsection B of this
section of the Code, applies to the section as amended. In case the
amendment contains certain provisions for which a penalty other than
the aforementioned general penalty provided in another section of the
same chapter, the penalty provided in the other section applies to the
section amended, unless that penalty is specifically repealed.
C. In any misdemeanor under this Code, or adopted by this Code from
state law, the court may assess any penalty provided by this Code or
under adopted state law. In addition to those penalties, the court may
sanction the defendant upon a finding of guilt, no contest plea or guilty
§ 1-9 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 1-10
1:6
plea, for court costs, including but not limited to the following: [Added
9-18-2014]
(1) The expenses for which costs may be ordered under this section
include all of the following:
(a) The salaries, wages or other compensation, including
employment benefits, overtime pay of law enforcement
personnel for time spent responding to the incident from which
the conviction arose, arresting the person convicted,
processing the person after the arrest, preparing reports on
the incident, investigating the incident, and collecting and
analyzing evidence, including, but not limited to, determining
bodily alcohol content and determining the presence of and
identifying controlled substances in the blood, breath, or urine.
(b) The salaries, wages, or other compensation, including
employment benefits, overtime pay of fire department and
emergency medical service personnel, including volunteer
firefighters or volunteer emergency medical service personnel,
for time spent in responding to and providing firefighting,
rescue, and emergency medical services in relation to the
incident from which the conviction arose.
(c) The cost of medical supplies lost or expended by Fire
Department and emergency medical service personnel,
including volunteer firefighters or volunteer emergency
medical service personnel, in providing services in relation to
the incident from which the conviction arose.
(d) The salaries, wages, or other compensation, including, but not
limited to, overtime pay of prosecution personnel, for time
spent investigating and prosecuting the crime or crimes
resulting in conviction.
(2) If police, Fire Department, or emergency medical service personnel
from more than one unit of government incurred expenses as
described in Subsection C(1), the court may order the person
convicted to reimburse each unit of government for the expenses it
incurred.
(3) The amount ordered to be paid under this section shall be paid to
the Clerk of the court, who shall transmit the appropriate amount
to the unit or units of government named in the order to receive
reimbursement. If not otherwise provided by the court under this
subsection, the reimbursement ordered under this section shall be
made immediately. However, the court may require that the person
make the reimbursement ordered under this section within a
specified period or in specified installments.
(4) If the person convicted is placed on probation, any reimbursement
ordered under this section shall be a condition of that probation.
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-10
1:7
The court may revoke probation if the person fails to comply with
the order and if the person has not made a good faith effort to
comply with the order. In determining whether to revoke probation,
the court shall consider the person's employment status, earning
ability, number of dependents, and financial resources, the
willfulness of the person's failure to pay, and any other special
circumstances that may have a bearing on the person's ability to
pay.
(5) An order for reimbursement under this section may be enforced by
the prosecuting attorney in the order to receive the costs in the
same manner as a judgment in a civil action.
(6) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a person shall
not be jailed, or incarcerated for a violation of probation, or
otherwise, for failure to pay costs as ordered under this section
unless the court determines that the person has the resources to
pay the ordered costs and has not made a good faith effort to do so.
(7) As used in this section:
COSTS — Shall also mean restitution for costs of prosecution.
EMPLOYMENT BENEFITS — The costs of prorated fringe benefits
paid to an employee for time spent in the conviction of the case.
§ 1-10 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 1-10
1:8
ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 10-17-2002]
§ 1-11. Adoption and enactment of Code.
The Code of ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 176, is adopted and
enacted as the "Code of Ordinances, Charter Township of Northville,
Michigan" and supersedes all general and permanent ordinances of the
Township adopted on or before October, 2002.
§ 1-12. Repeal of enactments not included in Code.
All Township ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted on or
before October 17, 2002, and not included in the Code or recognized and
continued in force by the Code are repealed from and after the effective
date of the Code.
§ 1-13. Revival of repealed ordinances.
The repeal provided for in § 1-12 above does not revive part or all of any
ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.
§ 1-14. Penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided, a violation of any provision
of the Code, or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted or issued
pursuant to the Code, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500 or
by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. Each act of violation
and each day upon which any continuing violation exists constitutes a
separate offense.
§ 1-15. Additions or amendments.
Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to
indicate the intention of the Township Board to make them a part of the
Code, are incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes
the additions and amendments.
§ 1-16. Applicability of penalty provisions.
In case of the amendment of any section of the Code for which a penalty
is not provided, the general penalty, as provided in § 1-14 of this ordinance
and in § 1-10 of the Code, applies to the section as amended. In case
the amendment contains provisions for which a penalty other than the
aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section in the same
chapter, the penalty provided in the other section applies to the section
amended, unless that penalty is specifically repealed.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:9
§ 1-17. Matters not affected by repeal.
The repeal provided for herein shall not abrogate or affect any offense or
act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any pending
litigation or prosecution of any right established or occurring prior to the
effective date of this ordinance.
§ 1-18. Amendment of and referral to ordinances in Code.
Any ordinance adopted after October 17, 2002, which amends or refers to
ordinances, which have been codified in the Code, amends or refers to like
provisions of the Code.
§ 1-19. Copy of Code on file.
A complete copy of the Code is available at the office of the Township Clerk
for inspection by the public during regular business hours.
§ 1-20. Effective date.
This ordinance and the Code shall become effective October 24, 2002, after
publication in a manner prescribed by law.
§ 1-21. Adoption of this ordinance.
This ordinance is declared enacted by the Township Board of the Charter
Township of Northville at a meeting duly called and held on the 17th
day of October, 2002, and ordered to be given publication in the manner
prescribed by law.
§ 1-17 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 1-21
1:10
Chapter 4
APPEARANCE TICKETS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Constables — See Ch. 8. Issuance by police officers — See Ch. 113, Art.
II.
§ 4-1. Appointment of public servants to issue and serve appearance
tickets.1
The following public servants are hereby appointed and authorized to issue
and serve appearance tickets in the Township with respect to certain
offenses of less than felony grade:
§ 4-2. Duties of authorized public servants.
The duties of those public servants who are authorized to issue and serve
appearance tickets shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
A. The Township Building Official and his designated assistants;
B. The Township Ordinance Enforcement Officer and his designated
assistants;
C. The Township Fire Chief, the assistant Fire Chief, and two fire-fighter
inspectors.2
A. Investigation of violations of the Township Code;
B. Service of notice of such violations;
C. Issuance and service of appearance tickets as authorized under MCL
764.9c, as amended;
D. Appearance in court or other judicial proceedings to assist in the
prosecution of ordinance violators; and
E. Such other ordinance enforcing duties as may be delegated by the
Township Supervisor assigned by the Township Attorney.
1. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
2. Editor's Note: Original Section 41.020, Appointment or revocation of authority by Board,
which immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 1-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-2
1:11
Chapter 8
CONSTABLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Execution of bench warrants — See Charter
§ C-21b.
§ 8-1. Purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of Public Act No. 426 of 1976, as amended
(MCL 41.82), the Township enacts this chapter for the duties proscribed by
state law for Township Constables, to require compliance with the minimum
employment standards imposed by Public Act No. 203 of 1965, as amended
(MCL 28.601 et seq.) and to establish liability for volitions of the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 8-2. Limitation of powers.
Pursuant to the authority vested in the Township of Northville Board of
Trustees by Public Act No. 426 of 1976 (MCL 41.82), no elected or
appointed Constable of the Township shall exercise any power or assume
any duty prescribed by the laws of the State of Michigan, except as set forth
below:
A. Township Constables shall be authorized to serve all criminal warrants,
civil notices or other criminal or civil process lawfully directed to them
by the Township within the County in which this Township is situated.
B. Township Constables shall be authorized to serve any writ, process or
order lawfully directed to them by the Township within the County in
which this Township is situated.
C. Township Constables shall be authorized to be ministerial officers of the
District Court and may be appointed as a District Court Officer and may
perform the duties permitted pursuant to Public Act 236 of 1961, as
amended (MCL 600.8301 to 600.8396).
D. Township Constables shall be authorized and may be appointed by the
Township Board as traffic officers, pursuant to MCL 41.813, to perform
the duties of that office, including the authority to issue appearance
tickets but not to make arrests except pursuant to § 8-2.
E. Township Constables shall be authorized and may be appointed by the
Township Board as ordinance enforcement officers to perform the
duties of that office, including the authority to issue appearance tickets
but not to make arrests except pursuant to § 8-2.
§ 4-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 8-2
1:12
§ 8-3. Peace officer functions.
No Township Constable shall perform any peace officer function or similar
statutory criminal and/or civil duty until such Township Constable shall have
complied with the minimum employment standards established by the Law
Enforcement Officer Training Council of the State of Michigan. In the event
that a Township Constable is directed by the Township Board to obtain such
training, the cost of complying with these standards in this section shall
not apply when a Township Constable is authorized to perform duties under
§ 8-1 as set forth above. (State law reference: MCL 28.609)
§ 8-4. Weapons.
No Township Constable shall carry any firearm or other weapon in the
performance of his duties unless such Township Constable shall have
completed a weapons training program conducted by the Michigan State
Police or other certified range instruction officer and unless the Township
Constable shall secure appropriate concealed weapons permits.
§ 8-5. Liability.
Any elected or appointed Township Constable who shall violate any
provision of this chapter shall thereby assume sole responsibility and
liability for any damages resulting from such action constituting said
violation.
Chapter 12
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
§ 12-1. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide the means and
methods for encouraging and assisting industrial and commercial
enterprises in locating, purchasing, constructing, reconstructing,
modernizing, improving, maintaining, repairing, furnishing, equipping and
expanding in the Township and to encourage the location and expansion of
F. Township Constables shall be authorized, when directed by the
Township Board, to serve as civil preparedness officers.
G. Township Constables shall be authorized, when directed by the
Township Board, to serve as deputy conservation officers; provided,
however, that such Constables obtain prior certification under
regulations issued pursuant to MCL 249.2 by the Department of
Natural Resources.
H. Township Constables shall be authorized to perform such other duties
or powers of their office only when specifically so directed by the
Township Board pursuant to resolution. (State law reference: MCL
41.82)
§ 8-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-1
1:13
commercial enterprises to more conveniently provide needed services and
facilities to the Township and its residents and for assisting the Township
and its citizens in strengthening their industrial, commercial and residential
base.
§ 12-2. Approval of application for permission to incorporate.
The application for permission to incorporate the Economic Development
Corporation of the Township submitted to the Township Board at its regular
meeting held on May 31, 1977, by William Miron, Ross B. Northrop and
John Dugan pursuant to Act 38 of the Public Acts of 1976, being §§ 125.1601
through 125.1636 of the Compiled Laws of the State of Michigan, was
brought on for public hearing on June 23, 1977, after notice of the time
and place of the hearing was published in the Northville Record on June
8, 1977, being not less than 10 days before the date set for the hearing,
and the Township Board having duly held said public hearing and well and
truly considered the matter and no other applications having been filed,
the Board of Trustees of the Township approved the incorporation of the
Economic Development Corporation in the same form and substance as in
the application, including the Articles of Incorporation set forth as follows.
§ 12-3. Articles of Incorporation.
These Articles of Incorporation are signed by the incorporators for the
purpose of forming an Economic Development Corporation pursuant to the
provisions of Public Act 338 of 1974, as amended, as follows:
Chapter 16
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
§ 12-1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 12-3
1:14
ARTICLE I
Insurance
[Adopted 7-11-1991 as Ch. 5 of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 16-1. Plan created.
The Township hereby creates and establishes certain group insurance plans
covering life, health hospitalization, medical and surgical service and
expense, accident and income disability insurance for its officers and
employees enumerated herein and their dependents; and, for such purpose,
it also hereby authorizes the Township Supervisor and the Township Clerk
to contract, in the name of the Township, subject to approval of the
Township Board, with any company authorized to transact such business
within the State of Michigan for such group insurance policies.
§ 16-2. Coverage.
The group insurance plans created and established and contracted for
under this chapter shall cover each person within the following classes of
officers and employees:
§ 16-3. Contribution.
The Township shall annually contribute 100% of the premium arising under
such life, health, hospitalization, medical and surgical service and expense
and accident and income disability insurance contract for each person
within the class of persons enumerated in § 16-2 hereof. Such contributions
shall be secured from the general fund of the Township.
§ 16-4. Eligibility.
Each individual as enumerated in § 16-2 hereof who is employed as set forth
therein on the effective dates of this article shall be eligible for and covered
as of such date. Every individual who becomes subsequently employed shall
be eligible for and become covered as provided for in such contracts as are
in existence at the date such individual becomes a covered employee.
§ 16-5. Exclusion from coverage.
Any individual desiring not to be covered by the group insurance plans shall
give written notice to the Township Clerk of such desire not to be covered
and, if the notice is received before the person has become covered under
the contract, such coverage shall not ensue. If the notice is received after
A. All Township Building Inspectors and their full-time assistants;
B. All Township Fire Chiefs;
C. All Township Police Chiefs;
D. All Township employees who are employed for more than 30 hours per
week on a regular basis.
§ 16-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-5
1:15
the individual has become covered, such coverage shall cease as provided
for in said contract.
§ 16-6. Ratification of prior plans.
The Township hereby ratifies and confirms the validity of any and all life,
health, hospitalization, medical and surgical service and expense, accident
and/or income disability insurance plans in existence on June 17, 1981.
(State law reference MCL 41.901 et seq.)
§ 16-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 16-6
1:16
ARTICLE II
Pension Plan
[Adopted 7-11-1991 as Ch. 6 of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 16-7. Plan created.
The Township hereby creates and establishes an annuity or pension plan
and program for the pensioning of its officers and employees and, for such
purposes, it also authorizes the Township Supervisor and the Township
Clerk to contract, in the name of the Township, subject to approval of the
Township Board, with any company authorized to transact such business
within the State of Michigan for annuities and pensions.
§ 16-8. Coverage.
The annuity or pension plans created, established and contracted for under
this article shall cover each person within the following classes of officers
and employees:
§ 16-9. Contribution.3
The Township shall make an annual contribution to the pension or annuity
contract of each individual (within the classifications of officers and
employees) identified in § 16-8 of this article. The contribution shall be
based on a percentage of the employee's gross yearly salary. The actual
percentage (e.g., 10%, 14%) shall be determined annually by resolution of
the Township Board of Trustees. The contribution shall be secured from
the various funds of the Township. Each covered individual may voluntarily
contribute a percent of his or her gross yearly salary toward such annuity
or pension contract up to the maximum permitted by law. The Township
Treasurer is hereby authorized to deduct all designated voluntary
contributions from each person's pay, salary or compensation and to apply
the same to such person's annuity or pension contract.
§ 16-10. Eligibility.
A. All Township Building Inspectors and their full-time assistants.
B. All Township Fire Chiefs;
C. All Township Police Chiefs;
D. All Township employees who are employed for more than 35 hours per
week on a regular basis;
E. The Township Manager.
A. Each employee who is employed on the effective date of the annuity or
pension plan shall be eligible for coverage on that day, provided he or
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 16-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 16-10
1:17
§ 16-11. Exclusion from coverage.
Any person desiring not to be covered by this annuity or pension contract
shall give written notice to the Township Clerk of such desire not to be
covered and, if the notice is received before the person has become covered,
such coverage shall cease as provided for in said contract.
§ 16-12. Vesting.4
Each individual covered under the annuity or pension contract established
herein shall have a vested right or interest in such plan 60 months from the
date the plan becomes effective for such individual.
§ 16-13. Ratification of prior plans.
The Township hereby ratifies and confirms the validity of any and all annuity
or pension contracts or plans in existence on June 17, 1981. (State law
reference: MCL 41.110b et seq.)
she then meets the following requirements; otherwise, eligibility shall
occur on the first policy anniversary on which he or she meets such
requirements:
(1) He or she has completed at least one month of continuous
employment;
(2) His or her age, based on the nearest birth date, is at least 18 years
and not more than 75 years.
B. Each employee who becomes subsequently employed shall be eligible
on the first policy anniversary on which he or she meets the following
requirements:
(1) He or she has completed at least one month of continuous
employment;
(2) His or her age, based on the nearest birth date, is at least 18 years
and not more than 75 years.
C. An employee's normal retirement date shall be determined based upon
his or her age at entry into the plan for such annuity or pension contract
as set forth below:
Age at Entry Retirement Date
18 - 55 65th birthday
55 - 75 After 10 years participation or upon
reaching his or her 75th birthday, if sooner
4. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 16-10 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 16-13
1:18
Chapter 28
PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU ORDINANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Traffic Code — See Ch. 166.
§ 28-1. Authority, establishment and supervision.
Pursuant to Section 8395 of the Revised Judicature Act, State of Michigan,
as amended by Public Act 74, of 1984, as amended, being MCL 257.742, the
Parking Violations Bureau is hereby established for the Charter Township
of Northville. The Parking Violations Bureau shall be under the supervision
and control of the Township Supervisor.
§ 28-2. Location and administration.
The Supervisor shall, subject to the approval of the Township Board,
establish a convenient location for the Parking Violations Bureau, appoint
qualified Township employees to administer the Bureau and adopt rules and
regulations for the operation thereof.
§ 28-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARKING VIOLATIONS — The Bureau established by this chapter for the
processing of all civil infractions involving the parking or standing of a
motor vehicle within the Charter Township of Northville.
PARKING VIOLATIONS NOTICE — A notice, other than a citation, directing
a person to appear at the Parking Violations Bureau and to pay the fines
and costs, if any, prescribed by the ordinances of the Charter Township of
Northville for the parking or standing of a motor vehicle in violation of said
ordinance.
§ 28-4. Service of parking violations notice.
In a civil infraction involving the parking or standing of a motor vehicle,
a copy of the parking violation notice need not be served personally upon
the defendant, but may be served upon the registered owner of the motor
vehicle by attaching the copy to the vehicle. Such parking violation notice
may be issued by either an officer of the Charter Township of Northville or
by any other Township employee duly authorized by the Township Board to
issue such a notice.
§ 16-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-5
1:19
§ 28-5. Form of parking violations notice.
The issuance of the parking violation notice shall be deemed an allegation of
a parking violation. Such parking violation notice shall set forth the nature
of the offense and the date, time and location of the offense. In addition,
the parking violation notice shall also indicate the length of time in which
the person to whom the same was issued must respond before the Parking
Violations Bureau. It shall also indicate the address of the Bureau, the hours
during which the Bureau is opened, the amount of the penalty scheduled
for the offense for which the parking violation notice was issued, and advise
that a civil infraction will be sought if such a person fails to respond within
the time limited.
§ 28-6. Settlement of violations.
No violation may be settled at the Parking Violations Bureau except at the
specific request of the alleged violator. No penalty for any violation shall be
accepted from any person who denied having committed the offense, and
in no case shall the person who is in charge of the Bureau determine, or
attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to
such alleged violation. No person shall be required to dispose of a parking
violation at the Parking Violations Bureau, and all persons shall be entitled
to have such violation processed before a court having jurisdiction thereof
if they so desire. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation
at the Parking Violations Bureau shall not prejudice him/her or in any way
diminish the rights, privileges and protections accorded to him/her by law.
§ 28-7. Procedure for all contested and/or unresolved violations.
If a parking violation notice is attached to a motor vehicle, and if an
admission of responsibility is not made and the civil fines and cost, if any,
for the violation are not paid at the Parking Violations Bureau, a citation
may be filed with the court having competent jurisdiction thereof, and a
copy of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the registered
owner of the vehicle at the owner's last known address. The citation shall
consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the parking
violation notice and shall fairly inform the defendant how to respond to the
citation. Thereafter, the citation for the parking or standing violation shall
be processed in the same manner as provided in Public Act 510 of 1978, as
amended (MCL 257.6a et seq).
§ 28-8. Schedule of fines. [Amended 5-15-2014]
The amount of fines for parking and standing violations processed by the
Parking Violations Bureau shall be as follows:
A. Prohibited/posted sign violations: Refer to 35th District Court schedule
of fines.
B. Handicap parking violations: Refer to 35th District Court schedule of
fines.
§ 28-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 28-8
1:20
§ 28-9. Handicap parking violation; failure to display handicap
parking permit. [Added 5-15-2014]
In the event that a recipient of a handicap parking violation failed to display
a handicap parking permit, that he or she lawfully could use, that individual
may appear at the Parking Violations Bureau prior to requesting a court
hearing at the 35th District Court and pay a violation fee for failure to
display handicap parking permit in the amount of $15. If the recipient of
a handicap parking violation requests a court date and failed to display a
handicap parking permit, then the fine established in the 35th District Court
fee schedule shall be applicable for handicap parking violations.
Chapter 32
PUBLIC SAFETY, DEPARTMENT OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Criminal Code — See Ch. 67.
C. Hines parks parking/standing violation: Refer to 35th District Court
schedule of fines.
D. Fire lane violations: Refer to 35th District Court schedule of fines.
E. All other parking violations: Refer to 35th District Court schedule of
fines.
§ 28-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 28-9
1:21

ARTICLE I
Establishment
[Adopted 7-11-1991 as Ch. 7 of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 32-1. Creation of Police Department.
The Township does hereby create and establish a Township Police
Department to be called the Charter Township of Northville Department of
Public Safety.
§ 32-2. Purpose.
The purpose of said Department of Public Safety shall be to enforce the
statutes of the state and the ordinances of the Township.
§ 32-3. Supervision.
The Department of Public Safety shall be supervised by a duly appointed
Director of Public Safety who shall be appointed by the Township Board
and shall be under the direct supervision and control of the Supervisor.
The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized and instructed to employ
such police personnel as are deemed necessary by the Supervisor; provided,
however, that the setting of the salaries or wages of such police personnel,
including the Director of Public Safety, are to be done only with the consent
of the Township Board. (State law reference: MCL 42.12)
§ 32-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-3
1:23

ARTICLE II
Police Reserve Officers
[Adopted 7-11-1991 as Ch. 8 of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 32-4. Appointment by Director of Public Safety; purpose.
The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized and directed to appoint
special patrolmen, to be known as "Police Reserve Officers," in such
numbers as he may deem necessary to perform specific police duties. The
primary purpose of the appointment of such officers is the control of large
gatherings at such events and other emergencies that may arise. The duties
of the Police Reserve shall be performed in compliance with such rules and
regulations as the Director of Public Safety shall promulgate.
§ 32-5. Uniform and equipment.
Such Police Reserve Officers shall wear such badges, dress and insignia
as the Director of Public Safety shall direct and shall be equipped in the
manner which he deems necessary for the proper discharge of their duties.
§ 32-6. Qualifications; removal.
The Director of Public Safety shall promulgate rules relating to the
qualifications, appointment and removal of such Police Reserve Officers.
Such officers shall serve without compensation unless pay is authorized by
the Township Board.
§ 32-7. Training.
The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to appoint instructors,
supervisors and commanding officers to train, direct and supervise such
Police Reserve Officers.
§ 32-8. Rights and benefits under state law.
Police Reserve Officers shall be entitled to all rights and benefits provided
under the provisions of the Worker's Disability Compensation Law of
Michigan, as amended (MCL 418.101 et seq.).
§ 32-9. Authority when not on duty.
It shall be grounds for dismissal for any Police Reserve Officer to exercise
his authority as a patrol officer or to wear the uniform or insignia or to
display his badge in an attempt to exercise his authority except during the
performance of actual authorized police duty.
§ 32-10. Impersonation of Police Reserve Officers.
It shall be unlawful for any person not duly appointed and sworn in as
a Police Reserve Officer to impersonate such officer or to wear, carry or
§ 32-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-10
1:25
display the badge designated dress or insignia or such Police Reserve
Officer.
§ 32-11. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall
be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the following
penalties:
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is
specified in connection with a particular section:
(1) First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of not less than $150, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each offense.
(2) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $300, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of, the
chapter.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
Code of the Charter Township of Northville, any equitable or other
remedies available may be sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses as provided by the law.
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
§ 32-10 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 32-11
1:26
ARTICLE III
Reimbursement for Prisoner Expenses
[Adopted 7-11-1991 as Ch. 9 of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 32-12. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this article to provide for the reimbursement
of certain expenses incurred by the Township in regard to prisoners held in
the Township prison facilities or sentenced to the County jail for the purpose
of protecting the public health, safety and welfare and fiscal integrity of the
Township pursuant to Public Act 359 of 1947 (MCL 42.1 et seq.) and Public
Act 246 or 1945 (MCL 41.181 et seq.).5
§ 32-13. Reimbursement of jail expenses.
The Township may seek reimbursement for expenses incurred by the
Township in relation to a charge or charges for which a person was
sentenced to a County jail or held prior to arraignment or trial as follows:
§ 32-14. Reimbursement of medical expenses.
The Township may seek reimbursement for expenses incurred in providing
medical care and treatment while in custody for persons charged under the
state law or local ordinance from the following:
A. From each person who is a prisoner not more than $30 per day for the
expense of maintaining that prisoner or the actual per diem cost of
maintaining that prisoner, whichever is less, for the entire period of
time that the person was confined in the County jail, including any
period of detention prior to trial or arraignment;
B. To investigate the financial status of persons held in the County jail to
determine the ability of the persons to pay;
C. Any other expenses incurred by the Township in order to collect
payments under this article.
A. The prisoner or person charged; or
B. Insurance companies, health care corporations or other sources (if the
prisoner or person charged is covered by an insurance policy), a
certificate issued by a health care corporation or other source for those
expenses.
5. Editor's Note: Original Section 9.020, Reimbursement for Prisoner Expenses, which
immediately followed this section, was deleted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. II). See MCL 801.82 for definition of "County jail."
§ 32-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-15
1:27
§ 32-15. Cooperation.
A prisoner or person charged shall cooperate with the Township in seeking
reimbursement for all jail or medical expenses incurred by the Township for
or on behalf of the prisoner or person charged.
§ 32-16. Information from prisoner or person charged.
The following information shall be obtained from the prisoner or the person
charged prior to seeking reimbursement of expenses:
§ 32-17. Civil responsibility.
§ 32-18. Penalty.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of § 32-15 of this article, or
any other section of the article shall be responsible for a municipal civil
infraction, subject to the following penalties:
A. Age;
B. Marital status;
C. Number and ages of children;
D. Number and ages of other dependents;
E. Type and value of real estate;
F. Type and value of personal property, including cash, bank accounts,
investments, pensions, annuities and any other personal property of
significant cash value; and
G. Health or other insurance coverage.
A. This article shall be construed to be a civil responsibility of the prisoner
and shall not be construed to conflict with, contravene, enlarge or
reduce any criminal liability or responsibility, including fines and costs
which may be imposed by a judge under state law or this Code for a
person found guilty of an offense.
B. A Judge may, however, order reimbursement of expenses of jail or
medical attention as part of the costs otherwise imposed under state
law or this Code for a prisoner found guilty of an offense.
C. If the medical or jail expenses are not reimbursed by the prisoner,
either voluntarily or as part of any criminal sentence imposed, the
Township may seek reimbursement by filing a civil suit in the district
court.
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is
specified in connection with a particular section:
§ 32-15 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 32-18
1:28
(1) First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of not less than $150, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each offense.
(2) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $300, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of this
article.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
Code of the Charter Township of Northville, any equitable or other
remedies available may be sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses as provided by the law.
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
§ 32-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-18
1:29

ARTICLE IV
Emergency Response Fee
[Added 7-20-2017]
§ 32-19. Fee established.
The Northville Township Department of Public Safety shall initiate service
fees for the delivery of Northville Township Department of Public Safety
services, personnel, supplies and equipment to the scene of motor vehicle
crashes. The rate of the service fees shall be that which is the usual,
customary and reasonable costs, which includes any services, personnel,
supplies and equipment and may vary based on the actual costs of the
individual accident.
§ 32-20. Fee filing and collection.
The service fees shall be charged to the responsible parties or at-fault
driver, jointly and severally. Fees shall be initially filed with the responsible
parties' motor vehicle insurance, representing an add-on cost of the claim
for negligent driving and for damages of the vehicles, property and/or
injuries. The claim costs shall be filed with the insurance company of the
owner of a vehicle, owner of property, or other responsible parties. The
Township shall be entitled to pursue any other remedy or may institute
any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction
as permitted by law to collect assessable costs from a responsible party,
including expenses, costs and reasonable attorney's fees incurred to collect
those costs. The recovery of charges imposed under this article does not
limit liability of responsible parties under any other local ordinance, or state
or federal law, rules or regulations.
§ 32-21. Amendments to billing and collection rules and
regulations.
The Northville Township Board of Trustees may make rules, regulations,
and from time to time may amend, revoke or add rules and regulations
relating to this section as they may deem necessary or expedient in respect
to billing for these fees or the collection thereof.
§ 32-22. Allocation of fees collected.
All amounts collected as a result of this article shall be placed into a Public
Safety Fund as established by the Northville Township Board of Trustees.
§ 32-23. Compliance with requirements for formal actions.
It is found and determined that all formal actions of the Northville Township
Board of Trustees concerning and relating to the adoption of this article
were adopted in open meetings of the Northville Township Board of
Trustees and that all deliberations of the Northville Township Board of
Trustees and any of its committees that resulted in such formal actions were
§ 32-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-23
1:31
in compliance with all legal requirements, and the Codified Ordinances of
the Township of Northville, County of Wayne, State of Michigan.
§ 32-24. Severability.
Should any provision or part of this article be declared by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unenforceable, the same shall not
affect the validity or enforceability of the remainder of this article.
§ 32-23 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 32-24
1:32
Chapter 39
(RESERVED)
Chapter 43
TOWNSHIP SUPERINTENDENT/MANAGER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pension plan — See Ch. 16, Art. II.
§ 43-1. Purpose.
The Charter Township of Northville hereby creates the position of Township
Superintendent as authorized by the Charter Township Act, MCL 42.10 et
seq. The Superintendent shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the
Township and shall report directly to the Township Board of Trustees. The
Board of Trustees shall appoint the Superintendent and the Superintendent
shall serve at the pleasure of the Township Board. A contract specifying the
terms of the appointment may be agreed to between the Township and the
Superintendent.
§ 43-2. Position created.6
The position of Township Superintendent or Township Manager is hereby
created. The terms "Township Superintendent" and "Township Manager"
shall refer to the same position created by this chapter.
§ 43-3. Appointment and terms.
The Township Manager shall be appointed by the Township Board and shall
hold office at the pleasure of the Township Board. A contract of employment
may be executed between the Township Board and Manager specifying
employment, compensation and benefits.
§ 43-4. Supervision of Township departments.
All Township Departments shall be under the supervision of the Township
Manager.
§ 43-5. Other powers and duties.
The Township Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the
Township. The Manager shall attend all regular meetings of the Township
Board and report to the Township Board regarding the administration of the
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 32-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 43-5
1:33
Township. The duties, authority and responsibility of the Township Manager
are as follows:
A. To be the Chief Administrative Officer of the Township and shall be
responsible and report to only the Township Board.
B. To direct and supervise all Township Departments unless separate
supervision for a department is provided by this chapter or another duly
adopted ordinance of the Township. The Manager shall be responsible
for all human resource matters or delegate such duties to some other
Township officer or employee.
C. To see that all laws and Township ordinances are enforced.
D. To manage and supervise all public improvements, works and
undertakings of the Township.
E. To have charge of the construction, repair, maintenance, lighting and
cleaning of streets, sidewalks, bike paths, bridges, pavements, sewers
and all the public buildings or other property belonging to the
Township.
F. To manage and supervise the operation of all Township utilities.
G. To be responsible for the preservation of property, tools and appliances
of the Township.
H. To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the Township or
its inhabitants in any public utility franchise or in any contract are
faithfully kept and performed.
I. To attend all meetings of the Township Board, with the right to take part
in discussions, but without the right to vote.
J. To be a member, ex officio, of all committees of the Township Board.
K. To prepare and administer the annual budget under policies formulated
by the Township Board and to keep the Board fully advised at all times
as to the financial conditions and needs of the Township.
L. To recommend to the Township Board for adoption such measures as
may be deemed necessary or expedient.
M. To be responsible to the Township Board for the efficient administration
of all departments of the Township government.
N. To act as the purchasing agent for the Township or to delegate such
duties to some other Township officer or employee.
O. To conduct all sales of personal property which the Township Board
may authorize to be sold.
P. To submit regular reports to the Township Board.
§ 43-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 43-5
1:34
§ 43-6. Qualifications.
The Township Manager shall hold office at the pleasure of the Township
Board and shall be selected by the Township Board on the basis of training,
education, experience and ability alone, without regard to his or her
political or religious preference.
§ 43-7. Consultants.
The Board of Trustees shall have authority to direct Township consultants
including, but not limited to, attorneys, auditors, engineers, and planning
consultants to perform certain tasks or assignments. The Township Board
shall have sole and exclusive authority to appoint consultants including
attorneys, auditors, engineers, planning consultants and other
professionals; however, the Manager may make recommendations and
monitor the performance of all consultants.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 49
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
False alarms — See Ch. 67, §§ 67-21 and
67-54.
§ 49-1. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted to regulate the use of alarm systems and penalize
those responsible for alarm systems which give false alarms, thereby
diverting the resources of the Township away from actual alarms.
§ 49-2. Definitions.
These words and phrases shall be defined as follows:
ALARM SYSTEM — A detection device or an assembly of equipment and
devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard or the commission
of a crime requiring urgent attention or to which police or firemen are
expected to respond. This definition includes fire alarm systems which
Q. To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this act or
required of the Manager by ordinance or by direction of the Township
Board, or which are not assigned to some other official in conformity
with the provisions of the Charter Township Act.7
7. Editor's Note: See the Charter and MCL 42.1 et seq.
§ 43-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-2
1:35
monitor temperature, humidity or other conditions and alarm systems
directly related to the detection of an unauthorized intrusion into a
premises or an attempted robbery at a premises.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an alarm system through mechanical
failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner
or lessee of an alarm system or of his employees or agents. "False alarm"
does not include an alarm caused by a hurricane, tornado, earthquake or
other violent condition beyond the control of the owner or lessee of an alarm
system or of their employees or agents and does not include a prearranged
alarm system test.
POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS — The Police and Fire Departments of
the Township, including the Police and Fire Dispatch Center of the Township
or of any agency providing that service to the Township.
§ 49-3. Equipment and installation standards.
§ 49-4. Responsibility for maintaining system.
The owner or lessee of an alarm system shall be responsible for the proper
installation, operation, and maintenance of the alarm system in compliance
with this chapter and state law and may be charged and prosecuted for any
violation.
§ 49-5. Disconnection of faulty alarm systems.
Following three false alarms from an alarm or three violations of this
chapter by those responsible for an alarm system during any twelve-month
period, the Police or Fire Department may remove, disconnect and refuse to
respond to further alarms from that alarm system until it has been inspected
and recertified by a licensed alarm systems contractor as being properly
A. An alarm system installed in commercial or public buildings shall utilize
equipment and methods of installation equivalent to or exceeding
minimum Underwriters Laboratory, American National Standards
Institute or any other nationally recognized testing laboratory
requirements for the appropriate installation and shall be certified as
such by an alarm system contractor licensed under the laws of the State
of Michigan.
B. An alarm system installed in a residence shall utilize equipment
equivalent to or exceeding minimum applicable Underwriters
Laboratory or American National Standards Institute requirements for
household burglar and fire alarm systems, and shall be certified as such
by an alarm system contractor licensed under the laws of the State of
Michigan.
C. If the alarm system was installed prior to the effective date of this
chapter, it shall be inspected and certified by an alarm system
contractor licensed under the laws of the State of Michigan within six
months after the effective date of this chapter.
§ 49-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 49-5
1:36
installed, operated and maintained in compliance with this chapter and the
laws of the State of Michigan. The Police and Fire Departments shall not
take any action pursuant to this section or refuse to respond to further
alarms until 10 days after the party responsible for maintaining the alarm
system has been served by registered mail, return receipt requested, with a
written notice of intent to take action pursuant to this section and, if at the
expiration of the 10 days, documentation of inspection and recertification
has not been delivered to the Police or Fire Department. If the Police or
Fire Department is unable to effect service by registered mail, then service
may be effected by posting the notice on any exterior door of the premises,
which the alarm system serves and action may be taken under this section
10 days after posting.
§ 49-6. Automatic dialing devices.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall institute, use or operate, attempt to
use operate or cause to be used or operated or arrange, adjust,
program or otherwise provide or install any device or combination of
devices that will upon activation, either mechanically, electronically or
by other automatic means, initiate the calling, dialing or connection to
any telephone number assigned to any subscriber, including without
limitation any police, fire, public safety, ambulance or health service
agency or entity by a public telephone company without the prior
written consent of such subscriber. It shall be presumed that any such
unconsented calling, dialing, or connecting was initiated or instituted
by and emanated due to use or operation hereinbefore prohibited by the
person, firm or corporation assigned the telephone number from which
such call, dialing or connection originated, emanated or was
transmitted.
B. The term "telephone number" means any number assigned to a person,
firm or corporation by a public utility company engaged in the business
of providing communication services and facilities, including without
limitation any additional numbers assigned by a public utility company
engaged in the business of providing communication services and
facilities to be used by means of a rotary or other system to connect a
subscriber to such primary number if the primary telephone number is
in use.
C. No person, firm or corporation shall publish or cause to be published or
disseminate or cause to be disseminated any telephone number of any
police, fire, public safety, ambulance or health agency or entity which is
not the true and correct telephone number of said agency or entity.
§ 49-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-7
1:37
§ 49-7. Liability.8
The owner or lessee of the alarm system shall be liable to the Township for
any expenses incurred by the Township in controlling or responding to false
alarms after the third occurrence within any twelve-month period.
§ 49-8. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the following
penalties:
Chapter 51
AMUSEMENT DEVICES, COIN-OPERATED
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is
specified in connection with a particular section:
(1) First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of not less than $150, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each offense.
(2) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $300, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of the
chapter.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
Code of the Charter Township of Northville, any equitable or other
remedies available may be sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses as provided by the law.
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 49-7 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 51-1
1:38
§ 51-1. Definitions.9
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any automatic, mechanical or
electronic amusement device for skill or entertainment, whether coinoperated
or not, including but not limited to pinball machines, video games,
bagatelle, console, cathode-ray tube game machine or similar devices that
use a display screen for points, lines or dots of light that can be manipulated
to stimulate games or other types of entertainment.
§ 51-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and license the operation of coinoperated
amusement devices within the Township.
§ 51-3. Licensing.
Any person, firm, association, company, partnership or corporation
maintaining or operating within the Township a commercial enterprise
having on a single premises one or more coin-operated amusement devices
shall obtain from the Township Clerk a license therefor pursuant to the
following procedure:
A. Application for said license shall be made on an application form
provided by the Township Clerk. The application shall set forth the full
name of the applicant or applicants and the name of every person
interested in the outcome of the license application, together with the
business and residence address of each such person, provided that if
the applicant is a corporation, the names of the officers and directors
thereof shall be required. The application shall also state the address of
the premises upon which the coin-operated amusement devices are to
be maintained and operated and the number and description of said
devices.
B. Upon receipt of an application for a license to operate coin-operated
amusement devices, the Township Clerk shall record said application
and request the Director of Public Safety, the Fire Chief, and the
Building Inspector or their designees to conduct an investigation. Upon
completion of an appropriate investigation and being satisfied that the
information contained in the application is true and that issuance of
said license shall promote the health, safety and general welfare of
persons and property within the Township, the Director of Public Safety
and Building Inspector shall direct the Township Clerk to issue the
license upon payment of the fee or fees as hereinafter provided.
C. In the event that an application is denied, the applicant shall be notified
thereof by the Township Clerk. Upon a written request by the applicant,
the Township Clerk shall set forth in writing the reasons for denial of
9. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 51-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-3
1:39
§ 51-4. Responsibilities of licensee.
the application. The applicant shall be entitled to request a hearing on
the denial of the application before the Township Board. Said request
shall be made within 30 days of notification by the Clerk of the denial.
D. Upon acceptance of the license application, the applicant shall pay to
the Township Clerk an annual license fee in an amount to be set by
resolution of the Township Board. The annual fees shall be assessed on
a calendar year basis and shall be due and payable on January 1 of each
year. No license shall be issued or renewed unless the Township Clerk is
satisfied that such fees have been properly paid.
A. Premises licensed under the provision of this chapter shall be closed to
the public from midnight to noon daily and from midnight until 2:00
p.m. on Sunday. No person under the age of 17 years shall be permitted
or allowed to remain on the premises after 11:00 p.m. unless
accompanied by his parent or legal guardian. Premises licensed by the
Liquor Control Commission shall be exempt from this provision.
B. The license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be conspicuously
displayed upon the premises so licensed.
C. The licensee, his agents or assigns shall be responsible for maintaining
quiet and good order at all times in and about the licensed premises,
and no person or persons shall be permitted to loiter or stand in or
about the doorway of said premises or in the parking lot of said
premises if owned, leased or under the control of the licensee.
D. The licensee, his agents or assigns shall have the responsibility for
ensuring that no person shall play any games on which a bet or wager is
made or shall lay any wager or bet on the outcome or result of any game
played on the licensed premises.
E. The licensee, his agents or assigns shall have the responsibility for
ensuring that no person shall operate any card tables for the public play
of cards or play any games with dice or other gambling devices
including pools, numbers, lotteries and punch board on the licensed
premises.
F. The licensee, his agents or assigns shall exclude from the licensed
premises any person who appears to be intoxicated or under the
influence of a controlled substance as defined by state law.
G. The licensee, his agents or assigns shall exclude from the licensed
premises any person or persons who are engaging in or soliciting
persons to engage in illegal acts, including, but not limited to,
prostitution, illegal possession, sale or use of alcoholic liquor and illegal
possession, sale or use of controlled substances as defined by state law.
H. No establishment licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall
serve prepared foods unless first having given the Township Clerk
§ 51-3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 51-4
1:40
§ 51-5. License revocation.
§ 51-6. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal infraction, subject to the following penalties:
adequate proof that a license has been obtained for the operation
of a restaurant and that approved food handler's permits have been
obtained for all personnel engaged in the preparation of food for human
consumption within the licensed premises.
I. No screens, drapes, curtains, shades, partitions or other obstructions
shall be permitted which obstruct from view of the street any or all
portions of the licensed premises. All such screens, drapes, curtains,
shades or partitions or other obstructions shall hereby be declared a
nuisance per se. Establishments licensed by the Liquor Control
Commission shall be exempt from this provision.
J. No person under the age of 18 years shall be employed, permitted or
allowed to work in any establishment licensed under this chapter.
Premises licensed by the Liquor Control Commission shall be exempt
from this provision.
A. Alleged violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, including
nonpayment of fees, shall be submitted in writing to the Township
Clerk.
B. The Township Clerk shall prepare a written notice of the alleged
violations and shall schedule a hearing on said violations before the
Township Board.
C. A copy of the notice of alleged violations and notice of hearing date
shall be served upon the licensee at the licensed premises at least 20
days before the scheduled hearing date.
D. The notice of hearing shall inform the licensee of his right to be
represented by an attorney.
E. The Township Board shall conduct a hearing at which the licensee shall
have the opportunity to be heard and to present evidence to the Board.
The Board shall render a written decision and shall, in the case of a
decision to revoke, state the findings of fact upon which the decision is
based.
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is
specified in connection with a particular section:
(1) First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of not less than $150, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each offense.
§ 51-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 51-6
1:41
Chapter 53
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dead animals define as refuse — See Ch. 106.
Noise caused by animals — See Ch. 117,
§ 117-2A(5).
Strewing of garbage by animals — See Ch.
149, Art. I, § 149-9.
(2) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $300, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of the
chapter.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
code of ordinances, any equitable or other remedies available may be
sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses as provided by the law.
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
§ 51-6 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 51-6
1:42
ARTICLE I
Keeping of Animals
§ 53-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the conduct, keeping
and care of animals within the Township.
§ 53-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
DOMESTICATED ANIMAL — Various animals domesticated by humans so
as to live and breed in a tame condition.
EXOTIC/WILD ANIMAL — Undomesticated animals or any dangerous
animal normally classified as wild, including, but is not limited to,
nondomestically bred parrots, parakeets or other exotic birds, Canada
geese, alligators, bears, birds of prey, monkeys, panthers, cougars, lions,
wolves, coyotes, chimpanzees, venomous or constrictor reptiles, and wild
felines. In addition, exotic/wild animals shall include any hybrid between a
wild animal and a domesticated animal, such as a hybrid between a dog and
a wolf, a dog and a coyote, a cat and a bobcat, or other wild feline.
KENNEL/STABLE (COMMERCIAL) — Any lot or premises where animals, of
at least six months in age, are kept either permanently or temporarily as a
business operation for the purposes of breeding, boarding, training, sale or
transfer.
KENNEL/STABLE (PRIVATE) — Any lot which is zoned or used as singlefamily
residential property on which up to five animals, over the age of six
months or more, are kept either permanently or temporarily by the owner
or resident of said property for the purpose of breeding, training, a sporting
activity or the sale.
LIVESTOCK — Domesticated animals such as cattle, sheep, pigs, goats,
donkeys, mules, buffalo, or oxen that are raised in an agricultural setting.
POULTRY — Domesticated birds such as chickens, turkeys, ducks, or geese
raised for meat or eggs.
VICIOUS/DANGEROUS ANIMAL — Any animal that attacks, bites or
physically injures a human being or other animal without provocation.
§ 53-3. General requirements.
A. No person shall keep an animal upon their property that creates a
nuisance by means such as, but not limited to, the annoyance, injury, or
endangerment of safety, health or quiet enjoyment of persons upon
public or private property.
B. Any enclosures used for the keeping of animals shall be constructed and
maintained as to prevent rats, mice, or other rodents from being
harbored underneath, within or within the walls of the enclosure.
§ 53-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-3
1:43
§ 53-4. Specific requirements for private use when accessory to
single-family residential use.
C. Animals shall not be permitted to run at large.
D. Locations for the keeping of horses, poultry, livestock and private or
commercial kennels are authorized in the Zoning Ordinance.10
E. No animal shall be kept or harbored, nor shall any kennel be maintained
or operated, in any unclean, unsanitary or unsightly manner, or in such
manner as to cause unpleasant or obnoxious odors, or in such manner
as to constitute a menace to the public health, safety and welfare.
F. No person shall keep any animal which, by loud and frequent barking,
howling, yelping or other similar noise, is a nuisance in the area in
which the animal is kept, possessed or harbored.
G. The slaughtering of animals is not permitted.
H. Accessory buildings, structures and uses associated with animals shall
comply with standards contained in Article 3, General Use and
Operating Provisions, of the Zoning Ordinance.11
I. Fences shall comply with Chapter 77, Fences.
A. Pets.
(1) No person shall keep or house any nondomesticated animals as
pets.
(2) Unless approved as a private kennel/stable, pets shall be kept for
personal use and enjoyment, not for any commercial purpose.
(3) On lots less than two acres and residences within site
condominiums or multiple-family residential developments, up to
three animals are permitted per residence.
(4) On lots two acres or more, up to five animals are permitted.
B. Livestock, horses, llamas, alpaca and other similar animals.
(1) A minimum two-acre parcel is required, and the property shall not
be located within a site condominium or multiple-family residential
developments.
(2) One animal is permitted for each full acre.
C. Poultry.
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Zoning.
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Zoning.
§ 53-3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 53-4
1:44
§ 53-5. Kennel license.
(1) A minimum two-acre parcel is required and shall not be located
within a site condominium or multiple-family residential
developments.
(2) Birds are permitted at a rate of one bird per 1/4 acre.
(3) Roosters are not permitted.
D. Exotic/wild animals. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a
publicly maintained and supervised zoo, a licensed and authorized
circus or an accredited and licensed facility, to possess, harbor, buy or
sell any exotic or wild animal in the Township.
A. Requirements.
(1) Any person who operates a private or commercial kennel, as
defined herein, shall annually apply to the Township for kennel
license. The issuance of a kennel license shall be in lieu of the
individual license required under this chapter.
(2) This section shall not apply to a litter of puppies, so long as such
dogs are less than six months of age.
(3) With each kennel license, the Township shall issue a number of tags
equal to the number of dogs authorized to be kept in the kennel.
Such tags shall be readily distinguishable from the individual
license tags issued. The licensee of a kennel shall, at all times, keep
one of the tags issued under this division attached to a collar on
each dog six months old or older. No dog bearing a kennel tag shall
be permitted to stray or be taken anywhere outside the limits of the
boarding kennel. This section does not prohibit the taking of dogs
having a kennel license outside the limits of the kennel temporarily
and in leash, nor does it prohibit the taking of such dogs out of the
kennel temporarily for the purpose of hunting, breeding, trial or
show.
(4) Upon conviction of a violation of this chapter, and upon notification
to the licensee, the Township may revoke the license granted under
this chapter.
(5) It shall be the duty of all kennel licensees to keep the kennel
enclosures, stalls and/or runs clean and free from any accumulation
of dirt, mud, fecal matter or debris. Further, all kennel licensees
shall clean, at least daily, any and all refuse matter, including fecal
matter, from inside and outside the kennel enclosures.
(6) All kennels shall be reasonably open to inspection at all times.
(7) The annual fee for kennel licenses shall be established by
resolution of the Township Board.
§ 53-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-5
1:45
§ 53-6. Appeals; variances.
The Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) shall have the power to hear and decide
appeals resulting from enforcement of this article. The ZBA process and
variance criteria specified in the Zoning Ordinance13 shall apply.
B. Standards for issuance.
(1) No private or commercial kennel license shall be issued unless the
use is in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance.12
(2) Private kennels shall only house animals owned by the occupant of
the dwelling unit and shall be licensed if the following standards
are met:
(a) A minimum two-acre parcel is required.
(b) Up to five animals are permitted.
(c) The breeding of animals shall be restricted to two litters per
year.
(d) Accessory buildings, structures or fenced enclosures
associated with the animals must be located in the rear yard.
(e) Accessory buildings and structures must be set back at least 25
feet from any lot line and 100 feet from any dwelling located on
an adjoining lot.
(f) Fenced enclosures associated with the animals shall be set
back at least 50 feet from any lot line.
(3) Commercial kennels shall be licensed if the following standards are
met:
(a) Any kennel shall be subject to all permit and operational
requirements established by county and state regulatory
agencies.
(b) Accessory buildings, structures and fenced enclosures
associated with animals must be set back at least 25 feet from
any lot line and 100 feet from any dwelling located on an
adjoining lot.
(c) Outdoor kennel enclosures shall adequately screened from
view of adjacent property with vegetation.
(d) Floors and runs shall be of cement, gravel or stone and shall be
appropriately sloped to drain.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Zoning.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Zoning.
§ 53-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 53-6
1:46
ARTICLE II
Dogs
§ 53-7. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is the control and regulation of dogs to secure
the public health, safety and welfare of persons and property within the
Township, the implementation of certain statutes, including, among others,
Public Act 287 of 1969, as amended (MCL 287.331 et seq.).
§ 53-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
HUNTING — Allowing a dog to range freely within sight or sound of its
owner while in the course of hunting legal game or an unprotected animal.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any person employed or elected by
the people of the state or by any county or municipality whose duty is
to preserve peace, to make arrests or to enforce the law and includes
conservation officers and members of the state police.
OWNER — Every person having a right of property in the dog and every
person who keeps or harbors the dog or has it in his care and every person
who permits the dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him.
POUND — A facility designated by the Township to impound and care for
dogs found in streets or otherwise at large contrary to any provision of the
Township Code or state law.
§ 53-9. General regulations.
A. Any dog which is six months or older shall be licensed by the Township
and have a valid Township license tag attached to its collar.
B. Only the owner or his authorized agent may remove any valid license
tag from a dog in the Township.
C. A person who owns or harbors a dog in the Township shall be required
to produce proof of a valid dog license upon request of any person who
is authorized to enforce this article.
D. Any dog six months or older must be immunized against rabies.
E. No person shall own, keep or harbor a fierce or vicious dog.
F. Every animal shall be confined upon the premises of its owner, except
when the animal is leashed and otherwise under the reasonable control
of the owner, except as allowed by this chapter. [Amended 4-20-2017]
(1) No dog or animal shall be permitted at any time to be on a public
highway or street, or in a public park, public building, sidewalk,
any other public place, common area of any residential
§ 53-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-9
1:47
§ 53-10. License; tags; fees; transfer of license.
§ 53-11. Liability for damages.
Every owner of a dog is liable for damages for any and all injuries to
persons and property that may be caused by such dog, such damages
development or in any place to which the public is generally
invited, or in any retail, commercial or industrial developments,
except when restrained by and under the reasonable control of
the owner thereof, or when confined in a shipping receptacle or
vehicle, or when on the premises of a duly authorized dog training
facility or dog park.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog or animal to allow or
permit the animal to enter onto the private property of another
without the express permission of the landowner or occupant of the
private property.
(3) "Owner" shall be defined as the person who owns the dog or animal
or any person having the care, custody or control of the dog or
animal at the time of the offense.
(4) The penalty for the first violation of this Subsection F shall be a
municipal civil infraction with a fine of $150 plus costs as assessed
by the court. Any subsequent violation shall be a misdemeanor
punishable by up to 90 days in jail and/or up to a fine of $500 plus
costs as assessed by the court.
A. On or before January 1 of each year, the owner of any dog six months or
older shall apply to the Township for a dog license. Each application for
a dog license must be accompanied by a valid proof of rabies
vaccination with a vaccine licensed by the United States Department of
Agriculture and signed by an accredited veterinarian. Any person
becoming the owner of a dog six months old or older after January 1
shall have 30 days to apply for a license.
B. Upon verification of vaccination and compliance with other applicable
regulations, the Township shall issue a dog tag containing the number
of the license and the year of issuance.
C. The fees for dog licenses shall be established by resolution of the
Township Board.
D. No license or dog tag issued to one dog shall be transferable to another
dog. Whenever the ownership or possession of any dog is transferred
from one person to another within the Township, the license may be
transferred, upon notice to the Township by the last registered owner.
This chapter does not require the procurement of a new license, or the
transfer of a license already secured, where the possession of a dog is
temporarily transferred for the purpose of boarding, hunting, game,
breeding, trial or show.
§ 53-9 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 53-11
1:48
to be determined and collected through appropriate legal proceedings, in
which proceedings any failure or refusal by such owner to comply with
the requirements of this article shall constitute prima facie evidence of
negligence on the part of the owner.
§ 53-12. Seizure of dogs.
It shall be the duty of every law enforcement officer to enforce the
provisions of this article and shall promptly seize and deliver to the
veterinarian, or place in the pound, any dog that is:
§ 53-13. Appointment of veterinarian; impoundment; notification;
recordkeeping; fee; release from pound.
A. Suspected of having rabies or of having bitten any person; or
B. Found running at large; or
C. Harbored or owned contrary to the provisions of this chapter.
A. The Township Board shall appoint a veterinarian and designate a
pound.
B. The veterinarian or any officer, agent or employee of the Township shall
not sell or otherwise dispose of a dog taken into custody or acquired
pursuant to the terms of this article within four days after its
acquisition, provided that the provisions of Subsection C below do not
apply.
C. Any dog having a collar, license or other evidence of ownership shall
cause the operator of the pound to immediately communicate such
information to the Township, which shall notify the owner, if
ascertainable, in writing, of the description of the dog, the date it was
acquired and the place where and date by which the dog shall be
claimed by the owner. Failing such timely claim and the payment of all
required fees, the dog shall be sold or destroyed. Any such dog shall not
be sold or otherwise disposed of within seven days from the date of the
mailing of such notice to the last known address of the owner.
D. The Township shall maintain a record of each identifiable dog acquired,
including a basic description of the dog, the date it was acquired, the
date of mailing the notice to the owner, the addressee's name and the
postal address and the subsequent disposition.
E. An impounding fee schedule shall be established by resolution of the
Township Board.
F. No dog shall be released from the pound until all of the following are
provided:
(1) Proof of current rabies vaccination.
(2) Proof of current license.
§ 53-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-13
1:49
§ 53-14. Killing of dogs.
§ 53-15. Impounded dogs.
Any impounded dog not claimed and released within four days after its
acquisition, except an impounded dog having a collar, license or other
evidence of ownership and in such case within seven days of the mailing of
notice hereinbefore provided, may be sold at the pound by a public auction
at 12:00 noon of the next succeeding day to the highest bidder, and the
amount of said bid shall be paid to the Township Treasurer, or may be
otherwise disposed of by the veterinarian. The body of any dog destroyed
pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be disposed of in such manner
as the veterinarian shall determine, and the veterinarian shall promptly
notify the Township Treasurer of the date and nature of disposition of each
dog.
§ 53-16. Observation of dogs.
(3) All fees and charges are paid to the Township.
A. Any person, including a law enforcement officer, may kill any dog which
is seen in the act of attacking persons, and there shall be no liability on
such person in damages or otherwise for such killing. Any dog that
enters any field or enclosure which is owned by or leased by a person
producing livestock or poultry, unaccompanied by his owner or his
owner's agent, shall constitute a trespass, and the owner shall be liable
in damages. Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for
any person, other than a law enforcement officer, to kill or injure or
attempt to kill or injure any dog which bears a license tag for the
current year.
B. A law enforcement officer may kill a dog determined to be molesting
wildlife and not hunting as defined in this article.
A. Any person having ownership, possession or control of a dog which
shall have bitten any person, bitten by an animal which has contracted
rabies, has been subjected to rabies or is suspected of having rabies
shall forthwith notify the Township Police Department and deliver the
dog to the veterinarian. At the expense of the owner, the veterinarian
shall observe and examine such dog for the existence of rabies, and the
owner shall provide the veterinarian with all information pertaining to
the dog's health, actions, history and vaccinations.
(1) If the veterinarian determines the dog is not rabid, then the dog
shall be returned to the owner.
(2) If the veterinarian determines that the dog is afflicted with rabies,
the dog shall be destroyed in such manner as the veterinarian may
determine, and the cost thereof shall be paid to the Township by
such person, and following the destruction of the dog, such tests
§ 53-13 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 53-16
1:50
§ 53-17. Penalties.
shall be made of the dog as the veterinarian may determine and
costs thereof paid by the owner to the Township.
(3) If the veterinarian determines the dog may be afflicted with rabies
but no positive final diagnosis is then possible, the veterinarian
may order the dog held at the pound and establish such temporary
quarantine as may be necessary to prevent the spread of the
disease or to make a final diagnosis. The cost thereof shall be paid
by the owner to the Township, or the veterinarian may order the
dog restrained, confined or muzzled at such place and in such form
and manner and subject to such duration and other regulations as
the veterinarian may determine, and thereafter if the dog is
determined by the veterinarian to be afflicted with rabies, the dog
shall be destroyed subject to the provisions of the foregoing
Subsection A(2).
B. Any dog which shall be delivered to the pound or veterinarian by a law
enforcement officer and is suspected of having bitten any person,
having been bitten by an animal or having contracted rabies shall be
subject to the provisions of § 53-13A.
C. If the dog is determined not to be afflicted with rabies at the conclusion
of the procedures provided for in this section, and if the owner does not
apply for the return of the dog and pay all applicable fees and costs, the
dog shall be sold or destroyed in accordance with the provisions of
§ 53-15 applicable to impounded dogs.
D. The veterinarian shall forward a record of all dogs examined pursuant
to the provisions of this section to the Township, which shall maintain
the same for a period of 90 days.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties specified for a violation of the Township Code.14
B. Any minor, as defined in this state's Probate Code, who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be dealt with by the Juvenile Division of
the Probate Court or as otherwise prescribed by state law.
14.Editor's Note: See §§ 1-10, 1-14 and 1-16.
§ 53-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 53-17
1:51
Chapter 58
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Appearance tickets — See Ch. 4.
Design and construction standards — See Ch.
72.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 79.
Grading and drainage — See Ch. 85.
Littering — See Ch. 106.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 152.
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 53-17 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 53-17
1:52
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Building Codes
§ 58-1. Adoption of codes by reference.
The Township hereby assumes responsibility for the administration and
enforcement within the Township of the State Construction Code Act, Act
No. 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan 1972 (MCLA § 125.1501 et seq.),
as amended, and the Building, Residential, Uniform Energy, Electrical,
Plumbing, and Mechanical Codes promulgated thereunder, as amended.
§ 58-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-1
1:53

ARTICLE II
Enforcing Agency
§ 58-2. Agency designated. [Amended 4-15-2010]
Pursuant to the State Construction Code Act, Act No. 230 of the Public Acts
of Michigan 1972 (MCLA § 125.1501 et seq.), as amended, the Township
hereby designates the Code Official and such building inspectors, plumbing
inspectors, mechanical inspectors, electrical inspectors, and other officers
and employees as shall be designated by the Code Official as the enforcing
agency to discharge the responsibilities of the Township under the State
Construction Code Act, as amended, and the building, residential, uniform
energy, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical codes promulgated
thereunder, as amended.
§ 58-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-2
1:55

ARTICLE III
Amendments
§ 58-3. Construction Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to the State Construction Code Act, Act No. 230 of the Public
Acts of Michigan 1972 (MCLA § 125.1514), a Construction Board of Appeals
is hereby established. The Board shall consist of three members. Prior to
convening the Board of Appeals, the appellant shall pay a fee as determined
by the Township to the Township Treasurer, and the Township Treasurer
shall utilize said fee to assure payment to the Board members.
§ 58-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-3
1:57

ARTICLE IV
Accessory Building Requirements
§ 58-4. Nuisance animal and pest prevention.
Section 105.2(a)(i) of the Building Code and Section R105.2(a)(i) of the
Residential Code are hereby amended to define requirements to prevent
nuisance animal and pest infestation in accessory buildings, as provided in
the State Construction Code Act, No. 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan
1972 [MCLA 125.1508a(10)]. Nuisance animal and pest prevention must
be provided to prevent the infestation and harborage of insects and rats
or other burrowing den-building animals. All detached accessory buildings
shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
A. For buildings requiring continuous foundations, the minimum footing
depth shall be 24 inches.
B. For buildings not requiring a continuous foundation, the following
requirements shall apply:
(1) Aprons. Where an apron is provided, the apron shall not be less
than eight inches (203 mm) above nor less than 24 inches (610 mm)
below grade. In all cases the apron shall not terminate below the
lower edge of the siding material. The apron shall be constructed of
an approved nondecayable, water-resistant, ratproof material
installed around the entire perimeter of the building. Apron
material shall be 26-gage or heavier galvanized-steel material or
four-inch-thick (102 mm) masonry or concrete material. Alternate
material may be approved at the discretion of the Building
Department.
(2) Grade floors. Where continuous concrete grade floor slabs are
constructed, open spaces shall not be left between the slab and
walls.
C. All openings shall be protected as follows:
(1) Wall or apron openings required for ventilation or other purposes
shall be guarded with corrosion-resistant ratproof shields of not
less than nominal 0.034-inch (0.032 inch) or nominal 0.064-inch
expanded-steel or wire-mesh screen, with not more than one-halfinch
(13 mm) mesh openings.
(2) Slab openings shall be protected with concrete, masonry, metal or
other corrosion-resistant noncombustible cover of adequate
strength to support the floor loads.
(3) All openings for pipe, conduit, cable and similar purposes at or near
grade shall have snugly fitted collars to eliminate all open spaces.
(4) Windows and doors must be gasket sealed or weather flashed for
resistance to rodent entry.
§ 58-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-4
1:59

ARTICLE V
Certificates of Occupancy
[Amended 4-15-2010]
§ 58-5. Certificate of occupancy required.
It shall be unlawful to occupy or permit the occupancy of any land, building,
or structure for which a permit has been issued, or to occupy or permit
the occupancy of any building or structure hereafter altered, extended,
erected, repaired, reoccupied, or moved, unless and until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued by the Code Official for such occupancy and use
in accordance with the Building Code and this chapter.
§ 58-6. Temporary certificate of occupancy.
A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for all or a portion of
a building or structure in instances where building or site improvements,
as required by this chapter and any other permits or approvals issued by
the Township, are not completed, provided that such portion of the building,
structure or site is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and the
Building Code, and provided further that no threat to public safety exists.
The Code Official may set a time limit for the duration of the temporary
certificate of occupancy, which shall be indicated on the temporary
certificate, and thereafter occupancy may only be authorized under a final
certificate of occupancy. Failure to obtain a final certificate of occupancy
within the specified time shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 58-7. Performance guarantee.
Before the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy, a performance
guaranty shall be posted with the Township in accordance with Article VIII
of this Chapter 58.
§ 58-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-7
1:61

ARTICLE VI
Construction Site Maintenance
§ 58-8. Purpose.
This article is for regulating, controlling, preventing, reducing and
eliminating the dumping or depositing of garbage, litter, debris or waste
material at construction sites or buildings under construction and areas
adjacent thereto; preventing, reducing and eliminating the dumping or
depositing of debris, dust, sand or mud on streets; providing for the removal
of the same; ensuring that incomplete buildings, structures and site
improvements are maintained in a safe and sightly condition; and providing
for the public health, safety and general welfare of persons and property
within the Township.
§ 58-9. Legislative intent.
In the development and enactment of this article, it is recognized that
the proper handling and prompt removal of litter, garbage, debris, waste
material, dust, sand, mud and dirt from construction sites, buildings under
construction and areas, streets, roads, highways and other public or private
property abutting or adjacent thereto and ensuring that incomplete
buildings, structures and site improvements are maintained in a safe and
sightly condition are essential to the preservation of the public health,
safety and general welfare. The failure to properly satisfy these objectives
has severe adverse effects on the community by tending to create a
nuisance; creating hazardous conditions which may result in injury to
person or property; attracting vermin; causing annoyance to residents and
other persons who work in or pass through the Township; and detracting
from the aesthetics of the neighborhoods involved. This article is enacted to
eliminate the aforementioned consequences, and it is also recognized that,
if the prohibited acts are committed in violation of this chapter, the needs
of the Township may require expeditious correction of the violation by the
Township itself. To this end, a procedure is hereby established by which
the Township, after due notice is given to the builder and/or owner of a
construction site or building under construction, may correct the violation
and charge the cost of said correction to the builder and/or owner or party
in interest in whose name the subject property appeared upon the last local
tax assessment records.
§ 58-10. Definitions.
Certain words and phrases when utilized in the provisions of this chapter
shall be defined and mean:
CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL — Any material used for the purpose of the
erection, alteration, repair, reconstruction, conversion, demolition, moving
or equipping of any building or structure or the excavation, filling, grading
or regulation of a lot in connection therewith.
§ 58-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-10
1:63
CONSTRUCTION SITE — A lot on which the erection, alteration, repair,
reconstruction, conversion, demolition, moving or equipping of any building
or structure or the excavation, filling, grading or regulation of a lot in
connection therewith is taking place, has taken place or will take place.
DEBRIS — Any accumulation of broken or detached matter, including,
but not limited to, pieces of stone, brick, cement, plaster, lumber, pipe,
wallboard and shingles.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable matter.
LITTER — Garbage and debris as defined herein and all other matter which,
if thrown, dumped, placed, left or deposited as herein prohibited, may tend
to create a danger to the public health, safety or general welfare.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, limited partnership,
association or corporation and their lessees, trustees or receivers appointed
by any court. In the instance of a legal entity, the individual(s) who is(are)
the general partners of a partnership, whether limited or not, the trustees(s)
and any beneficiary having the power to appoint or constitute a trustee of
a trust, the officers and directors of a corporation and any receiver thereof
shall be equally liable with the legal entity for any requirements or penalties
provided in this chapter. In any instance, an agent having the apparent
authority to control the use or occupation of such persons having property
regulated by this chapter shall be equally liable with his, her or its principal
for any requirements or penalties provided in this chapter.
WASTE MATERIAL — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except
body waste), including, but not limited to, garbage, debris, uprooted
vegetation and herbage, tree limbs and stumps and any other matter which,
if thrown, dumped, placed, left or deposited as herein prohibited, may tend
to create a danger to the public health, safety or general welfare.
§ 58-11. Mandatory action.
Any person who owns, controls or is in possession of a construction site or
building under construction shall:
A. Provide a receptacle or receptacles at each construction site and
building under construction, which shall be of sufficient size and
dimensions to adequately contain all litter, garbage, debris and/or
waste material as may be found at the construction site or building
under construction.
B. Place all litter, garbage, debris and/or waste material within said
receptacle or receptacles.
C. Place and maintain all construction materials within the confines of the
lot lines of the construction site or building under construction.
D. Sweep all streets, roads or highways adjacent to or abutting the
construction site or building under construction at least once per week
or more frequently should any litter be found dumped, deposited,
placed or thrown on said streets, roads or highways.
§ 58-10 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 58-12
1:64
§ 58-12. Prohibited actions.
No person who owns, controls or is in possession of a construction site or
building under construction shall:
§ 58-13. Notice to correct. [Amended 4-15-2010]
The Code Official or his designated representative is hereby authorized and
empowered to notify the builder and owner of a construction site or building
under construction to correct any violation of § 58-11 or § 58-12. Said notice
shall be given by first-class mail addressed to said builder and owner at
their last known address or by any other means reasonable calculated to
give notice to the builder and owner. Said notice is deemed effectuated
on the second regular day for delivery of mail after the day the notice to
remove is placed in the mail.
A. Dump, deposit, place, throw, leave, bury or cause or permit the
dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, leaving or burying of litter,
garbage, debris or waste material at any construction site or building
under construction.
B. Dump, deposit, place, throw, leave or cause or permit the dumping,
depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of dust, sand, mud, dirt, litter,
garbage, debris or waste material on any street, road, highway or other
public or private property adjacent to or abutting any construction site
or building under construction.
C. Place on any street, road, highway or right-or-way adjacent to or
abutting any construction site or building under construction any form
of construction materials.
D. Fail to remove all litter, garbage, debris or waste material from a
construction site, building under construction or area adjacent thereto
within 48 hours after notice to remove the same is effectuated pursuant
to § 58-13 herein.
E. Fail to remove all dust, sand, mud, dirt, litter, garbage, debris or waste
material from any street, road, highway or other public or private
property adjacent to or abutting a construction site, building under
construction or area adjacent thereto within 48 hours after notice to
remove the same is given pursuant to § 58-13 herein.
F. Fail to diligently proceed with the construction of any building,
structure or site improvement, which shall mean the failure to perform
any material work on such building, structure or site improvement for a
period of one year, as determined by the Code Official. [Amended
4-15-2010]
G. Fail to maintain any incomplete building, structure or site improvement
in a safe and sightly condition, as determined by the Chief Building
Official.
§ 58-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-14
1:65
§ 58-14. Correction by Township; emergencies.
§ 58-15. Cost of Township work. [Amended 4-15-2010]
Any costs incurred by the Township in taking any action permitted under
§ 58-14, including any administrative charges, shall immediately become a
lien against the real property involved and shall be reported by the Code
Official or his designated representative to the Township Supervisor, who
shall assess the cost against the property. The owner or party in interest
in whose name the property appeared upon the last local tax assessment
records shall be notified of the amount of all such costs by first-class mail at
the address shown on such tax records. If such person fails to pay the same
within 30 days after mailing of the notice of the amount due, the Township
Supervisor shall add the same to the next tax roll of the Township, which
shall then be collected in the same manner in all respects as provided by
law for the collections of taxes.
§ 58-16. Presumption.
In a proceeding for a violation of §§ 58-11 and 58-12, proof that a building
permit was issued to a person for the subject construction site or building
under construction shall constitute in evidence a presumption that the
building permit holder owns or controls that construction site or building
under construction.
A. If a builder or owner of a construction site or building under
construction notified pursuant to § 58-13 herein shall fail, neglect or
refuse to correct such violation within five days after the effective date
of written notice as provided in § 58-13, the Code Official or his
designated representative is hereby authorized and empowered and
may in his discretion correct such violation or have such violation
corrected by an independent contractor. In case of an emergency
presenting an imminent risk to life, health or safety, the Township may
immediately take any of the aforementioned measures or other
necessary measures to protect life, health or safety. The Code Official is
authorized and empowered in his sole discretion to determine what
constitutes the appropriate action to be taken under this section and
what constitutes an emergency under this section. [Amended
4-15-2010]
B. The Township shall provide notice to the builder and owner of the cost
of the action taken pursuant to the preceding subsection, which costs
shall be reimbursed to the Township by the builder and owner within 30
days after notice and become a lien against the property in accordance
with § 58-15. Such notice shall be provided in the manner provided in
§ 58-13, within five days after the completion of the action taken by the
Township.
§ 58-14 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 58-16
1:66
ARTICLE VII
Property Maintenance
[Added 4-15-201015]
§ 58-17. International Property Maintenance Code. [Amended
3-17-2011; 12-18-2014]
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition, as published
by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Charter Township of Northville.
§ 58-18. Changes.
Sections and subsections of the International Property Maintenance Code
are changed as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Charter Township of Northville, hereinafter
referred to as "the code."
102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to
a structure, or change of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with
the procedures and provisions of the Michigan Building Code, Michigan
Uniform Energy Code, Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing
Buildings, Michigan Mechanical Code, and the Michigan Plumbing Code.
Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any
provision of Chapter 170 of the Code of the Charter Township of Northville.
103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the
department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be
those adopted by the Building Department.
106.4 Violation penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of
this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements
thereof, shall be prosecuted in accordance with Article IX of Chapter 58 of
the Code of the Charter Township of Northville.
Section 111 Means of Appeal. [Entire section deleted].
112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after
having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as that
person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be prosecuted in accordance with Article IX of Chapter 58 of the Code
of the Charter Township of Northville. [Added 3-17-2011]
15.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the redesignation of former Art. VII,
consisting of §§ 58-17 through 58-22, and Art. VIII, consisting of §§ 58-23 through 58-24,
as Art. VIII, consisting of §§ 58-19 through 58-24, and Art. IX, consisting of §§ 58-25
through 58-26.
§ 58-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-18
1:67
302.4 Weeds. All premises and the exterior of developed property, or
undeveloped property within 150 feet of developed property, shall be
maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 10 inches. All
noxious weeds shall be prohibited. "Weeds" shall be defined as all grasses,
annual plants and vegetation, other than weeds or shrubs; provided,
however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
Upon failure of owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and
destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject
to prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 and as prescribed by the
Charter Township of Northville. Upon failure to comply with the notice of
violation, any authorized employee of the Charter Township of Northville or
contractor hired by the Charter Township of Northville shall be authorized
to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy weeds growing
thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent
responsible for the property.
Charges for cutting or destroying weeds by the Charter Township of
Northville shall constitute a lien on the property in violation. On or before
October 1 of each year, the Code Official shall submit to the Township
Treasurer a certified statement of unpaid charges. The Township Treasurer
shall place such charges on the next general tax role, and the same shall
be collected as part of the general Township taxes.
304.14 Insect screens. During the period from April 1 to November 1,
every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of
habitual rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas
where products to be included or utilized for food for human consumption
are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with
approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh
per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a selfclosing
device in good working condition.
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means,
such as curtains or insect repellant fans, are employed.
602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building that rents,
leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either
expressed or implied, to furnish heat to occupants thereof shall supply heat
at all times necessary to the dwelling areas to maintain a temperature of
not less than 68° F. (20° C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet
rooms.
Exception: When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor
design temperature, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall
not be required, provided that the heating system is operating at its
full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature shall be as
indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code.
602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Interior occupiable work spaces shall be
supplied with heat at all times necessary to maintain a temperature of not
less than 65° F. (18° C.) during the period the spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
§ 58-18 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 58-18
1:68
1. Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling
or special temperature conditions.
2. Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous
physical activities.
§ 58-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-18
1:69

ARTICLE VIII
Performance Guarantees
§ 58-19. Purpose; definitions.
§ 58-20. Work to be guaranteed. [Amended 4-15-2010]
Any applicant for a building permit shall, in the discretion of the Code
Official, be requested to deposit a performance guarantee sufficient to
guarantee the following:
A. The purpose of this article is to establish the authority and procedures
for requiring, accepting and enforcing performance guarantees, in
order to assure that development and construction projects are
completed and maintained in accordance with Township standards,
requirements and approved conditions.
B. A "performance guarantee," for purposes of this chapter, shall mean a
form of financial security posted to secure the timely performance of
obligations under this chapter. Performance guarantees may be in the
form of cash, certified check, irrevocable unconditional bank letter of
credit (so long as the terms and conditions of such letter of credit are
acceptable to the Code Official), or other similar instrument acceptable
to the Code Official at his discretion. [Amended 4-15-2010]
C. An "applicant," for purposes of this chapter, shall mean the person or
entity that has a legal or equitable right to develop or improve the real
property subject to a building permit for which a performance
guarantee must be provided. Only the applicant may post a
performance guarantee. If such real property is transferred, conveyed
or sold (other than as an individual, single-family lot or unit), the
successor (with legal proof of ownership) shall replace any outstanding
performance guarantees at the time of purchase. If the successor does
not replace all performance guarantees, then the applicant shall
continue to be responsible under such performance guarantees for
completing the improvements in accordance with their terms.
A. The establishment or reestablishment of ditches and culverts to
properly drain the building area covered by the site plan and the
reopening or reestablishment of any drainageways that may have been
interrupted by the building construction.
B. The repair, replacement and reconstruction of any public road surfaces
damaged in the course of construction so that the same shall be in
comparable status as they existed prior to the commencement of
building construction.
C. The repair of all public utility structures damaged during the course of
construction and the restoration and adjustment of all manholes, catch
basins, grate wells, hydrants and shutoff boxes to the same conditions
that they were in prior to the commencement of building construction.
§ 58-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-20
1:71
§ 58-21. Authority. [Amended 4-15-2010]
§ 58-22. Timing and amount. [Amended 4-15-2010]
D. The establishment of grades on the site pursuant to plans approved by
the Township.
E. The completion of all work necessary to obtain a final certificate of
occupancy for any building for which a building permit has been issued.
F. The full and complete compliance with all of the provisions of this
chapter and other chapters of the Township Code.
A. The Code Official is authorized to require all applicants constructing
improvements under any permits and approvals granted pursuant to
the Building Code and this chapter to post a performance guarantee
with the Township to guarantee the completion of all required building
and site improvements and restoration activities in accordance with
this chapter.
B. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter with regard to the
issuance of permits for specific improvements, performance guarantees
shall require actual construction and installation of all required
improvements within either two years after the issuance of the initial
permit and the posting of the necessary performance guarantee or
within the time period determined by the Code Official for a temporary
certificate of occupancy, whichever is shorter or occurs first. The time
limit may be extended for up to six months at the discretion of the Code
Official upon determination that work is proceeding toward completion
and that the delay is not dilatory or unreasonable under all the
circumstances. In reaching this determination, the Code Official shall
take into consideration weather conditions and delays in securing
required approvals/permits from a schedule for completion of all
remaining work. At the time an extension is requested, a site inspection
will be conducted, with the cost of such inspection being the direct
responsibility of the applicant, to confirm work remaining on the site.
A. The performance guarantee required for site maintenance, public
infrastructure, grading or other construction activity as set forth in
§ 58-20 shall be submitted at the time of issuance of the permit
authorizing the activity or project. The exact amount of the
performance guarantee shall be determined by the Code Official, with
any necessary input from the builder or developer and the Township
Engineer, Planner and Landscape Architect or other professional.
B. The performance guarantee for incomplete work shall be submitted at
the time of issuance of the temporary certificate of occupancy. The
amount of the performance guarantee for incomplete work shall not be
less than 120% of the estimated remaining cost to complete the
building and site improvements. The exact amount of the performance
guarantee shall be determined by the Code Official, with any necessary
§ 58-20 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 58-22
1:72
§ 58-23. Release. [Amended 4-15-2010]
The performance guarantee shall be returned to the applicant when all
fees that are due have been paid; inspection of the building and site
improvements for which the performance guarantee was provided have
been performed; and the Code Official has determined that the conditions
and requirements of the permit/approval for which the performance
guarantee is to secure have been met and final approval of same has
been granted. There shall be no interest paid to the applicant for any
performance guarantee. The performance guarantee may be returned by
sending the same by first-class mail to the applicant at the address set forth
in the application for the building permit. In the event that said mailing
is returned undelivered, all such funds shall be held by the Township and
returned to the applicant on demand. If no such demand is made within one
year after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy, any such funds so
held shall be forever forfeited.
§ 58-24. Default and forfeiture. [Amended 4-15-2010]
input from the builder or developer and the Township Engineer, Planner
and Landscape Architect or other professional.
C. When no temporary or final certificate of occupancy has been issued for
more than two years after a building permit has been issued, then such
building permit shall not be extended or renewed unless, prior to
extending or renewing the building permit, the applicant shall furnish a
performance guarantee in the amount of 100% of the estimated
remaining cost to complete the remaining building and site
improvements, as determined by the Code Official. [Amended
4-15-2010]
A. If the applicant fails to timely complete all improvements and/or timely
take the required action for which the performance guarantee was
required within 30 days after written notice to the applicant, the
applicant shall be deemed to be in "default." Unless a shorter period
has been specified in a permit or approval issued, or elsewhere in this
chapter, "timely" completion of the improvements shall mean not longer
than two years from the date of issuance of the initial permit for
improvements, unless such time is extended by the Code Official in
accordance with § 58-21.
B. In the event of a default, the performance guarantee shall be deposited
in the general fund of the Township, and upon written notice to the
applicant (which may be given within the notice provided for under
Subsection A above), the Township shall have the right (but not the
obligation) to use the performance guarantee deposited to complete the
improvements or take the appropriate actions to achieve completion,
and the application for the permit or approval shall be deemed to have
authorized the right of the Township to enter upon the property to bring
about such completion. Written notice to the applicant given under
§ 58-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-24
1:73
§ 58-24 may be provided by one or more of the following methods:
regular first-class mail or overnight delivery to the address on the
application for permit/approval, delivery of the notice to the applicant
at such address, personal delivery to the applicant, or posting on the
property. Such notice shall be deemed given two business days if
delivered by first-class mail, the next business day if delivered by
overnight courier for next-day delivery, upon personal delivery to the
applicant, or three days after posting on the property.
C. In the event the performance guarantee posted is insufficient in amount
to allow the Township to complete the improvements and/or actions, the
applicant shall be required to pay to the Township such additional costs
as are needed for the completion of such improvements and/or actions.
Should the Township use the performance guarantee, or a portion
thereof, to achieve such completion, any amounts remaining shall first
be applied to the Township's administrative costs, which shall be equal
to 20% of the cost of such completion, and to payment of actual
attorneys' fees, consultant fees, and completing the improvements and/
or actions; the balance remaining thereafter, if any, shall be refunded to
the applicant. The Township may contract with a third party to
complete work required pursuant to this chapter.
D. The applicant shall be responsible for ensuring that the required
performance guarantees remain in place until all site improvements are
complete and the performance guarantees have been released by the
Township. The applicant shall not permit a performance guarantee to
lapse or expire without renewal or replacement. The Code Official may
call or collect upon any such performance guarantee prior to its
expiration if it reasonably appears to the Code Official that the
performance guarantee will be permitted to lapse or expire.
§ 58-24 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 58-24
1:74
ARTICLE IX
Violations and Penalties
[Amended 4-15-2010]
§ 58-25. Notice of violation.
The Code Official, or his designee, is authorized to serve a notice of violation
or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration,
extension, repair. moving, removal, demolition, use or occupancy of a
building or structure in violation of the provisions of this chapter or in
violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this Code.
Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the illegal action or condition
and the abatement of the violation.
§ 58-26. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or who shall
fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
construct, alter or repair a building in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of the Code Official or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this Code shall be responsible for a municipal
civil infraction. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense subject to the following
penalties:
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is
specified in connection with a particular section:
(1) First offense: The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of $300, plus costs and other sanctions, for each offense.
(2) Repeat offense: The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of $500, plus costs and other
sanctions for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or enjoin violation of the
chapter.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
Code of Ordinances, any equitable or other remedies available may be
sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses provided by the law.
§ 58-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-26
1:75
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser-included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
§ 58-26 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 58-26
1:76
Chapter 60
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 60-1. Establishment of identification numbers.
A property identification number shall be established for each developed
property within the Township by the Fire Chief in consultation with the
United States Postal Service and the public utilities.
§ 60-2. Location of property identification numbers.
All property upon which houses, dwellings, buildings, businesses and other
structures are constructed within the Township shall be considered
developed property and shall have a property identification number which
shall be posted on the face or other appropriate side of the house, dwelling,
business or structure in a manner and location so that said identification
number is clearly readable to a person of normal vision from the roadway
while traveling in either direction. In the event the house, dwelling,
business or structure is located on the property so that the posted number
is not clearly readable from the roadway due to the distance or intervening
sight barriers such as, but not limited to, shrubbery, terrain features or
structures, the identification number shall also be posted separately from
the main structure in a fashion that is clearly readable from the roadway
while traveling in either direction. Such additional identification number
shall be either located centrally between the side boundaries of the property
or located immediately adjacent to the driveway providing ingress to the
property.
§ 60-3. Number form, color and size.
The property identification number shall use numerals rather than script
words and shall not be less than three inches in height. The numerals shall
be in a color and size such that they are readable from the center line of the
roadway by a person of normal vision.
§ 60-4. Temporary and permanent identification of buildings under
construction.
All applicants for building permits for new construction within the Township
shall be required to comply with this chapter. During the course of
construction, an identification number shall be posted separately from the
structure in a fashion such that it is clearly readable from the roadway while
traveling in either direction. Permanent identification pursuant to §§ 60-2
and 60-3 of this chapter shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy.
§ 58-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 60-5
1:77
§ 60-5. Responsibility for compliance.16
The owner, occupant, lessee or other person in control of any developed
property shall be the person responsible for compliance with this chapter.
§ 60-6. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal infraction, subject to the following penalties:
Chapter 61
BUSINESS REGISTRATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sexually oriented business — See Ch. 143.
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is
specified in connection with a particular section:
(1) First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of not less than $150, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each offense.
(2) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $300, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of, the
chapter.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
Code of the Charter Township of Northville, any equitable or other
remedies available may be sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses as provided by the law.
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 60-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 60-6
1:78
§ 61-1. Title.
This chapter and the state laws adopted by reference herein shall be
collectively known and may be cited as the "Northville Township Business
Registration Ordinance."
§ 61-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
BUSINESS — Any trade, occupation, profession, work, commerce or other
activity owned or operated for profit by any person within the Township,
excluding, however, political, charitable or religious establishments.
CHARTER TOWNSHIP — The Charter Township of Northville.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association or corporation.
REGISTRATION AGENT — The Charter Township Clerk or such other
Township official or employee as may be designated by resolution of the
Charter Township Board.
§ 61-3. Purpose.
The purpose of the chapter is to assist the Charter Township with
information to provide more adequate police and fire protection; more equal
and equitable real and personal property taxation; better efficiency and
economy in furnishing public utility services within the Township; more
comprehensive and informed planning and zoning for uses of land and
structures within the Township; and to establish a registry of businesses
operating within the Township for the general information of the public and
for the promotion of the Township.
§ 61-4. Registration requirements.
No person may commence or continue a business, as herein defined, within
the Charter Township without having first registered with the Charter
Township therefor as hereinafter provided and without maintaining such
registration in current effect during any business operation or activity.
Annual registration updates will be required, and the penalty provision
of this chapter may be exercised for failure to supply the Township with
requested annual updates.
§ 61-5. Procedure for registration.
Registration to commence or continue a business shall be required, and the
registration certificate will be issued upon submission of the application and
payment of the registration fee by the owner or operator to the Clerk of the
Charter Township on a form provided by the Township for such purposes.
A fee, established annually by resolution of the Board of Trustees, shall
accompany the application. The information provided in the application
§ 60-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-5
1:79
shall be complete and truthful. Upon the filing of a properly completed
application and upon payment of the fee, the Township shall issue a
certificate of registration to the person to commence or continue the
business designated in said application if the business complies with the
terms of this chapter.
§ 61-6. Conditions of registration.
The registration issued under this chapter shall be effective until December
31 of the succeeding year, with renewals required annually. No registration
shall be issued by the Township where the existing or proposed business
would be in violation of any law or ordinance of the United States of
America, the State of Michigan, the County having jurisdiction thereof, or
the Township. Transfers by the holder to any other person are required to
be submitted to the Township on a new business registration application,
and the new owner or holder will be required to pay the appropriate
registration fee, except upon prior approval of the Charter Township Board.
The registration agent shall have the right of inspection of the business
premises to assure compliance with this and other Township ordinances.
§ 61-7. Exemptions.
No registration shall be required of any political, charitable or religious
establishment situated within the Township. The provisions of this chapter
are not applicable to any agency of the United States of America, the State
of Michigan, or any political subdivisions thereof.
§ 61-8. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of this chapter or any part thereof shall be punishable by a
fine not to exceed $100 plus court costs and/or confinement in the County
Jail for a term not to exceed 90 days. In addition, the Charter Township
specifically reserves the right to proceed in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the purpose of obtaining an injunction, restraining order or
other appropriate remedy to compel compliance with this chapter.
Chapter 64
(RESERVED)
Chapter 67
CRIMINAL CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
False alarms — See Ch. 49. Hunting with firearms — See Ch. 93.
§ 61-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 67-1
1:80
§ 67-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Criminal Code."
§ 67-2. Definitions.
§ 67-3. Disorderly conduct.
Any person found guilty of any of the following offenses in the Township
shall be deemed to be a disorderly person and shall be punished as is in this
code provided:
A. In this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
terms shall have the meanings indicated:
COUNTY — The County of Wayne.
MISDEMEANOR — Any of the offenses prescribed in this chapter.
OFFICERS — Every regular or reserve police officer of the Northville
Township Department of Public Safety.
PERSON — Includes firms, joint adventurers, partnerships,
corporations, clubs and all associations or organizations or natural
person, either incorporated or unincorporated, howsoever operating or
named and whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or
fiduciary, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors and
assigns thereof.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any street, alley, park, public building or any place
of business or assembly open to the public or frequented by the public.
STATE — The State of Michigan.
TOWNSHIP — The Charter Township of Northville.
B. Word usage.
(1) Tense. Words used in the present or past tense shall be construed
as including the future as well as the present or past.
(2) Titles, headings and catch lines. The keywords used in this chapter
as headings, titles or catch line sections and subsections are
inserted for convenience and to facilitate the use of same, and they
shall not be construed to limit or effect the meaning of any of the
provisions hereof.
(3) Gender. Words importing masculine gender shall apply to females
and to firms, associations, partnerships and corporations.
C. Whenever any word or phrase used herein not defined but is defined in
the Michigan Penal Code (MCL 750.1 et seq.), any such definition
therein shall be deemed to apply to such word or phrase as used herein.
§ 67-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-3
1:81
A. Any person who shall make, aid, countenance or assist in making any
improper noise, riot, disturbance, breach of the peace or diversion
tending to a breach of the peace.
B. Any person who shall engage in any indecent or obscene conduct in any
public place.
C. Any person who shall collect in bodies or crowds for any unlawful
purpose or for any purpose to the annoyance or disturbance of other
persons.
D. Any person who is idle or dissolute and goes about begging.
E. Any person who uses or exercises any cheating or unlawful game or
play.
F. Any person who is found in houses of ill fame or in gambling houses.
G. Any person who engages in window peeping.
H. Any person who makes an immoral exhibition or indecent exposure of
himself.
I. Any person who is lodging in or found at any time in motor vehicles,
sheds, barns, stables or unoccupied buildings or public places not
giving a good account of himself.
J. Any person who willfully assaults another or engages in or aids in any
fight, quarrel or other disturbance.
K. Any person who engages in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to
obtain money or other valuable thing or who aids, abets or in any
manner is concerned therein.
L. Any tout, roper, steerer or capper, so called, for any gambling house or
house of ill fame or so acting for any gambling house or house of ill
fame or so acting for any person of either sex, who shall ply or attempt
to ply his calling in any public place.
M. Any person found loitering in or about any hotel, barroom, tavern
gambling house, disorderly house, public building or public place or
wandering about the streets without any known means of support, or
without being able to give a satisfactory account of himself.
N. Any person who jostles or crowds persons in any street, alley, or public
place.
O. Any person who shall have or carry any pistol, knife, dirk, knuckles,
sling shot or other dangerous weapon concealed on his person.
P. Any person who solicits or accosts any person for the purpose of
committing any unlawful and immoral act. (State law reference: MCL
750.167)
§ 67-3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 67-4
1:82
§ 67-4. Assemblage of noisy or riotous persons.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any noisy or riotous persons
to assemble in any house owned, occupied or controlled by him to the
annoyance or disturbance of the neighborhood and the public peace.
§ 67-5. Disturbance of religious worship.
It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or disquiet any congregation
or assembly met for religious worship by making any noise or making any
profane discourse or engaging in any indecent behavior in or near the place
of worship as to disturb the solemnity of the meeting.
§ 67-6. Violent acts, vulgar language and disturbance of the peace.
It shall be unlawful for any person to act in a violent, boisterous, turbulent,
quarrelsome, indecent or disorderly manner, or to use profane, obscene or
vulgar language, or to disturb the good order, peace and dignity of the
Township, its inhabitants or other persons.
§ 67-7. Marihuana establishments.17 [Added 1-17-2019]
§ 67-8. Loitering in public places.
A. The Charter Township of' Northville ordains that pursuant to the
Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act (MRTMA), Section
6.1, marihuana establishments as defined by the MRTMA are hereby
prohibited within its boundaries.
B. Violation of this section shall result in penalties assessed pursuant to
§ 1-10 of this Code. In addition, any violation of this section is a public
nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The
imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief or civil or
quasi-judicial enforcement. In the enforcement of this section by
injunctive or equitable relief, the responsible party shall be responsible
for all reasonable attorney fees. (State law reference: MRTMA, MCL
333.27951 to 333.27967 and as amended.)
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter on any street, sidewalk or
public place. For the purpose of this section, loitering is defined as the
act of standing or idling in or about any street, sidewalk or public place
so as to hinder or impede or tend to hinder or impede the passage of
pedestrians or vehicles.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to linger, loiter, sit or stand in any
public room in any hotel, office or business establishment in the
Township or in the hallways or entrances of any public building or to
use any public room for business or social purposes or to obstruct the
entrance to any business establishment without so doing for some
17.Editor's Note: Former § 67-7, Trespassing, was repealed 9-18-2003. See § 67-14 for other
provisions regarding trespassing.
§ 67-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-8
1:83
§ 67-9. Spitting and urinating.
No person shall spit or urinate upon any other person or upon any public
place, sidewalk or parking area or upon the floor or interior of any public
conveyance or upon the floor or walls of any theater, hall, assembly room,
church, school or public building or in any area open to the view of the
public.
§ 67-10. Malicious mischief.
lawful purpose or if contrary to the expressed wish of the owner, lessee,
managing agent or person in control or in charge of the building or
premises. The words "public rooms" for the purpose of this section
include any basement, attic, building entrance or doorway, lobby,
hallway, stairway, mezzanine elevator, foyer, public rest room, sitting
room or any other place used in common by the public, tenants,
occupants, guests or customers and situated in a hotel, office building,
public building or business establishment in the Township.
A. Malicious destruction of property, houses, building or real property of
another. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously
destroy or injure any house or other building of another or to paint,
inscribe, write or scrape messages, words, numbers, symbols or any
type of picture upon the building of another without the express
consent of the owner or to willfully and maliciously destroy or injure
any appurtenance to such house or building thereof, including lawns,
shrubs, trees, pools, gardens and mail receptacles, if the damage
resulting from such damage or injury shall not exceed the sum of $100.
B. Malicious destruction of personal property. It shall be unlawful for any
person to willfully and maliciously destroy or injure the personal
property of another by any means.
C. Destroying and injuring of signs, bills and notices. It shall be unlawful
for any person to willfully tear down, destroy or, in any manner
whatsoever, deface any signs, bills or notices on any private land within
the Township or on any lots or premises of another; provided, however,
that such signs, bills or notices are not in the violation of any provision
of the Township Code and were placed by the owner or lessee or by
their consent.
D. Destruction of tombs and memorials. It shall be unlawful for any person
to willfully destroy, mutilate, deface, injure or remove any tomb,
monument, gravestone or other structure before mentioned or of any
enclosure for the burial of the dead or to willfully destroy, mutilate,
remove, cut, break or injure any tree, shrub or plant placed or being
within any such enclosure.
E. Malicious annoyance by writing. It shall be unlawful for any person to
knowingly send or deliver or to make for the purpose of being delivered
or sent or to part with possession of any letter, postal card or writing
§ 67-8 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 67-10
1:84
§ 67-11. Removal of vegetation.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the Township to wrongfully
take and carry away from any place within the Township any soil, grass
vegetation, ground cover, fruit tree, ornamental tree, shade tree,
ornamental shrub or any plant, vine, bush or vegetable tree growing,
standing or being with intent to deprive the owner thereof or without right
and with wrongful intent to detach from the ground or injure any fruit tree,
ornamental tree, shade tree, ornamental scrub or any plant, vine, bush,
vegetable or garden produce.
§ 67-12. Vandalism in state or public recreation areas and property;
penalties.
containing any obscene language with or without a name subscribed
thereto or signed with a fictitious name or with any letter, mark or
other designation with the intent thereby to cause annoyance, shock
or threaten such person or with a view or intent to extort or gain any
money or property of any description belonging to another.
F. Malicious destruction of public property. It shall be unlawful for any
person within the Township to maliciously destroy, injure, damage, mar
or deface any building, monument, sign or structure, fence, tree, shrub,
plant, park or public property of any kind which is owned, controlled or
managed by the state, County, Township, school district or by any other
unit or agency of government whose operating budget is raised in
whole or in part by public taxation or to commit any act of vandalism on
or in any such property.
G. Malicious injury of fences or gates of another. It shall be unlawful for
any person within the Township to maliciously break down, injure, mar
or deface any fence or gate belonging to or enclosing lands not his own.
H. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall
be subject to a maximum fine of $500 and/or a maximum imprisonment
of 93 days. [Added 9-18-2003]
A. It is unlawful to destroy, damage, deface or remove any state or publicly
owned property in any state or public park or recreational area.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to reoccupy, use or remain on park or
public property after the posted closing hours or to enter a park or
public property if posted or fenced. It shall further be unlawful for any
person within the Township to drink intoxicating beverages or to bring
intoxicating beverages on public or park property where unauthorized
to do so by law.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
D. In addition to the penalties provided in this section for violating its
provisions, any person convicted of an act of vandalism shall reimburse
§ 67-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-12
1:85
§ 67-13. Disorderly conduct on and around school property.
the state or public agency for up to three times the amount of the
damage as determined by the court.
E. In every case of conviction for the offense, the court before whom such
conviction is obtained shall enter judgment in favor of the state or
public agency and against the defendant for liquidated damages in the
sum as provided in Subsection D. The state or public agency shall, with
the assistance of the prosecuting attorney, collect the award by
execution or otherwise. If two or more defendants are convicted of the
vandalism, the judgment for damages shall be entered against them
jointly. If the defendant is a minor, the judgment shall be entered
against his or her parents.
F. Upon collection, the sums shall be credited to the general fund of the
public agency involved and shall be used for repairs and improvements
to the parks. For proceedings relative to state law, see MCL 324.74119.
A. Unauthorized persons are not to enter or trespass on school property.
Any person who is not a regularly enrolled student or parent or
guardian thereof or a school official, teacher or other public or school
employee shall enter or trespass upon or loiter in or upon any public
private or parochial school building or school property in the Township
for any reason whatsoever, unless such person has received written
permission from the principal or other person designated by the
principal to be in or upon or to remain in or upon such public or
parochial school building or school property; provided, however, that
such written permission need not be secured by persons engaging in or
attending a school or recreation board authorized activity or by persons
using school playground or playground equipment after school hours or
when school is not in session, unless such entry or use shall have been
otherwise prohibited by a rule or regulation of the school board, school
principal or other person, board or committee with the authority to
prohibit such use or entry.
B. Disturbing schools. No person shall willfully or maliciously make or
assist in making any noise, disturbance or improper diversion by which
the peace, quietude or good order of any public, private or parochial
school is disturbed.
C. Duty of person creating disturbance to leave premises. Any person,
whether lawfully or unlawfully in or upon any public, private or
parochial school building or school property, who is found to be
creating a disturbance in or upon any such school building or property
shall leave immediately when so directed by the principal or by any
other person designated by the principal.
D. Extortion. No person shall by violence, threat of violence or other form
of coercion force or attempt to force any public, private parochial
§ 67-12 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 67-13
1:86
§ 67-14. Trespass upon lands or premises of another. [Amended
9-18-2003]
No person shall willfully enter upon, destroy, injure, deface, or in any
manner interfere with or hinder the use of the lands or premises of another,
including parks, public buildings, or public property, without lawful
authority after having been forbidden to do so by the owner or occupant,
agent or servant of the owner or occupant if the property is posted or
fenced, nor shall any person being upon the land or premises of another,
upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, the
agent or servant of either, who without lawful authority, neglect or refuse to
depart therefrom.
§ 67-15. Malicious use of telephones or electronic devices.
[Amended 6-16-2011]
school student or other person to give or to lend any money or other
things of value to any person at any time.
E. Unauthorized borrowing of money or thing of value from students in the
school or traveling to or from school. No person shall borrow or attempt
to borrow any money or thing of value from any student in or upon any
public, private or parochial school building or school property in the
Township or during any time when such student is engaging in, going to
or returning from any regularly scheduled session or activity of any
such school without first obtaining the written approval of the principal
of such school or other person designated by the principal to issue such
written approval; provided, however, that this subsection shall not
apply to college students who borrow money or things of value from
other college students or adults.
F. Destruction of school property. No person shall damage, destroy or
deface any public private or parochial school building or the grounds,
outbuildings, fences, trees or other appurtenances or fixtures belonging
thereto.
G. Definitions. For the purposes of this section.
SCHOOL — Any pre-elementary (grades K-6), secondary (grades 7-12)
school, any college or combination thereof.
PRINCIPAL — Any principal of any elementary or secondary school or
the chief administrative officer of any elementary or secondary school
or college.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person within the Township to maliciously
use a telephone, telephone service, cable service or any electronic
device with intent to terrorize, frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass,
molest, annoy or disturb the peace of any other person as hereinafter
provided:
§ 67-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-15
1:87
§ 67-16. Opening fire and emergency exits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or cause to be opened any door
or either or both of a set of double doors when a sign ("Fire and Emergency
Exit Only") is posted on said door or doors or in close proximity thereto.
§ 67-17. Throwing objects at vehicles.
No person shall throw or drop any object at or in the path of any vehicle
which is traveling, parked or standing in any public place within the
Township.
§ 67-18. Throwing snowballs, stones or wood.
No person shall in any public place within the Township throw or hurl
at or towards any building, window, public or private streetlamp or at or
towards any person, animal or thing any ball of snow mass of snow packed
together, piece of ice, stone, piece or block of wood or any solid substance
whatsoever.
(1) Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property of
another in the course of a telephone conversation or by use of an
electronic device.
(2) Falsely and deliberately reporting by telephone or telegraph
message, telephone service or electronic device that any person
has been injured, has suddenly taken ill, has suffered death or has
been victim of a crime or the victim of an accident.
(3) Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between
a telephone and another telephone or, once connection is made, not
to carry on any conversation.
(4) Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between
a telephone and other equipment provided for the transmission of
messages by telephone, thereby interfering with any
communication service.
(5) Using any vulgar, indecent, obscene or offensive language or
suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of telephone
conversation or by the use of any electronic device.
B. An electronic device shall include but not be limited to a computer,
telephone, cellular phone, facsimile machine, satellite phone, text
messaging device, e-mail, paging device, voice mail, answering
machine or any device used for communication by any means.
C. This section prohibits the aforementioned conduct whenever such
communication is commenced or received within the Township.
§ 67-15 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 67-19
1:88
§ 67-19. Noxious substances.
No person shall knowingly deposit on the land or in a building or upon
a vehicle of another without the consent of the owner or in any public
place any stink bomb, tear gas or other device, irritant or offensive smelling
substance with the intent to interfere with another's use of the land,
building or vehicle, nor shall any person possess a noxious substance as
hereinbefore defined or manufacturer, send or transport any noxious
substance within the Township.18
§ 67-20. Nude swimming.
No person shall swim or bathe in the nude in any public place or in any
place within view of the public.
§ 67-21. False alarms to police, firemen and ambulances.
It shall be unlawful for any person, by telephone or otherwise, to summon
the Department of Public Safety, the Fire Department or any public or
private ambulance to go to any address where the service called for is not
needed.19
§ 67-22. Interference with police. [Amended 9-18-2003]
It shall be unlawful for any person to resist lawful arrest or interfere, either
directly or indirectly, with an officer making an arrest or to refuse to assist
an officer upon being commanded by said officer to give assistance or to
refuse to disperse upon the command of an officer or to obstruct, resist,
hinder or oppose any officer in the discharge or apparent discharge of his
duties, or to knowingly and willfully give false information to an officer in
the discharge or apparent discharge of his duties.20
§ 67-23. Obstructing and disobeying firemen in line of duty.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the Township to knowingly and
willfully hinder, obstruct or interfere with any fireman in the performance
of his duties or who shall, while in the vicinity of any fire, willfully disobey
and/or disregard any reasonable order, rule or regulation of the officer
commanding any Fire Department at such fire.
§ 67-24. (Reserved)21
§ 67-25. Larceny. [Amended 9-18-2003]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the offense of larceny, by
stealing, of the property of another, any money, goods, or chattels or
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 90, Hazardous Waste Cleanup.
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 49, Alarm Systems.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 32, Public Safety, Department of.
21.Editor's Note: Former § 67-24, Suspicious persons, as amended, was repealed 9-18-2003.
§ 67-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-25
1:89
§ 67-26. Purchasing, receiving or concealing stolen property;
presumptions. [Amended 9-18-2003]
§ 67-27. Checks without sufficient funds.
any bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of
exchange or other bill, draft, order or certificate or any book of
accounts for or concerning money or goods due or to become due
or to be delivered or any deed or writing containing a conveyance of
land, or any other valuable contract in force or any receipt, release or
defeasance of any writ, process or public record, if the property stolen
shall be of the value of less than $200.
B. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall
be subject to a fine of three times the value of the property stolen, not to
exceed $500, and/or a maximum imprisonment of 93 days.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, receive or aid in the
concealment of any stolen, embezzled or converted property, if the
property purchased, received or concealed shall be of the value less
than $200. Any person being a dealer in or collector of any merchandise
or personal property or the agent, employee or representative of a
dealer or collector who fails to make reasonable inquiry that the person
selling or delivering any stolen, embezzled or converted property to him
has a legal right to do so or who buys or receives any such property
which has a registration, serial or other identifying number altered or
obliterated on any external surface thereof shall be presumed to have
bought or received such property knowing it to have been stolen,
embezzled or converted; provided, however, that this presumption may
be rebutted by proof.
B. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall
be subject to a fine of three times the value of the property purchased,
received or concealed, not to exceed $500, and/or a maximum
imprisonment of 93 days.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person with intent to defraud or make or
draw or utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment or
money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other
depository, knowing at the time of such making, drawing, uttering or
delivering that the maker or drawer has not sufficient funds in or credit
with such bank or order upon presentation.
B. As against the maker or drawer thereof, the making, drawing, uttering
or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by
the drawee when presented in the usual course of business, shall be
prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of
insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository,
provided that such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee
thereof the amount due thereon, together with all costs and protest
§ 67-25 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 67-27
1:90
§ 67-28. Drawing check upon bank without any bank account.
[Amended 9-18-2003]
It shall be unlawful for any person, with the intent to defraud to make or
draw or utter any check, draft or order for the payment of money to apply on
an account or otherwise upon any bank or other depository who, at the time
or making, drawing, uttering or delivering such check, draft of order has no
account in or credit with such bank or other depository for the payment of
such check, draft of order upon presentation. Any person who shall violate
any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a maximum fine of
$500 and/or a maximum imprisonment of 93 days.
§ 67-29. Gambling and gambling devices.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any common
gambling house or gaming room or to permit on any premises owned,
occupied or controlled by him any apparatus or device used for gaming or
gambling or to use such apparatus or device or to assist any other person
to use same for gaming or gambling purposes. It shall be unlawful for any
person to have in his possession any policy or pool slips, tickets, checks or
any paper which is marked additionally with any kind of notation indicating
any form of gambling, and the possession of such writing or device shall
constitute, prima facie, evidence of intention to use same for gambling.
§ 67-30. Gaming prohibited.
No person or his agent or employee shall, directly or indirectly, take, receive
or accept from any person any money or valuable thing with the agreement,
understanding or allegation that any money or valuable thing will be paid or
delivered to any person where such payment or delivery is alleged to be or
will be contingent upon the result of any race, contest or game or upon the
happening of any race, contest or game or upon the happening of any event
not known by the parties to be certain.
§ 67-31. Assault and battery; threatening language. [Amended
9-18-2003;2-16-2017]
fees, within five days after receiving notice that such check, draft or
order has not been paid by the drawee.
C. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall
be subject to a maximum fine of $500 and/or a maximum imprisonment
of 93 days. [Added 9-18-2003]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person within the Township to attempt or
offer with force and violence to do a corporate hurt to another or to
assault and/or batter any other person or to cause, engage in or
provoke any disturbance or fight or brawl or to direct threatening
language or fighting words toward and person in any public or private
place. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section
§ 67-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-31
1:91
§ 67-32. Fighting.
No person in the Township shall fight another person except in boxing
exhibitions duly authorized and licensed under law.
§ 67-33. Air guns, sling shots or pellet guns.
§ 67-34. Firearms, longarms and dangerous weapons. [Amended
5-18-2017]
shall be subjected to a maximum fine of $500 and/or a maximum
imprisonment of 93 days.
B. An individual who assaults or assaults and batters his or her spouse or
former spouse, an individual with whom he or she has or has had a
dating relationship, an individual with whom he or she has had a child
in common, or a resident or former resident of his or her household is
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than
93 days or a fine of not more than $500, or both.
A. Use or possession by minors is prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person under the age of 18 years to use or have in his possession,
unless accompanied by his parent or guardian or other authorized
person, any air gun, sling shot or pellet gun. Any police officer shall
have the authority and it shall be his duty to confiscate such air gun,
sling shot or pellet gun found in the possession of any such person.
B. Duty of parents and guardians. It shall be unlawful for the parents or
guardian of any such person in his charge or custody to knowingly
permit any such minor to use or have in his possession, when not
properly accompanied, an air gun, sling shot or pellet gun.
C. Sales to minor prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person or his
agents or his employees to sell, offer for sale, give away or distribute an
air gun, sling shot or pellet gun to any person under the age of 18 years.
A. Definitions. As used in this section:
AMMUNITION — Any projectile or other device designed to be expelled
by any firearm, excluding nonexplosive projectiles or other devices over
six inches in length.
DANGEROUS WEAPON — Any firearm, dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto
or knife having a blade over three inches in length or any sharpedged
or pointed instrument or club or bludgeon or other dangerous or
deadly weapon or instrument carried with intent to use same unlawfully
against the person of another.
FIREARM — Any device or part of a device, by whatever name known,
which is designed to or may be readily converted to expel a projectile
or projectiles by the action of an explosive expansion of gas or air or
escape of gas or air, excluding, however:
§ 67-31 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 67-34
1:92
LONGARM — Any rifle, shotgun or firearm over 30 inches in overall
length.
Any device used exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges,
explosive rivets or similar industrial ammunition.
(1)
(2) Any device which expels a projectile by the action of a spring.
Any device used exclusively for signaling or safety and required
or recommended by the United States Coast Guard, the Interstate
Commerce Commission, the Federal Aviation Agency or the
appropriate state agencies governing marine, air or highway safety.
(3)
B. Exceptions. This section shall not apply to:
(1) Members of the armed forces or the National Guard and other
employees of the federal government and the states and their
political subdivisions who are required to carry firearms and
longarms as part of their official duties and who are engaged in the
performance of their official duties.
(2) Hunters during the hunting season designated by the laws of the
State of Michigan with valid hunting licenses and while in an area
where hunting is permitted; however, at all other times and in all
other places, such persons must have their firearms and longarms
unloaded and enclosed in a case.
(3) Persons while at a firearms or longarms showing or display
recognized by the Township; however, at all other times and in all
other places, such person must have his firearms or longarms
unloaded and enclosed in a case.
(4) Persons whose firearms or longarms are unloaded and enclosed in
a case.
(5) Firearm dealers licensed in accordance with the provisions of the
Federal Firearms Act of 1938 or applicable state or local law who
keep such firearms solely for purposes of display and sales and not
for personal use.
C. Prohibition to carry firearms or dangerous weapons. It shall be unlawful
for any person to carry a firearm or dangerous weapon on his person or
within or upon any vehicle, except as specifically provided for within
this chapter, concealed or otherwise in or upon the public streets,
alleys, public shopping centers or places of business frequented by the
public or public parks or on property of any school or college, whether
public, private or parochial, or locations of religious worship open to
the public or any other public place in the Township, unless the bearer
possesses a duly authorized unexpired Michigan license to carry a
concealed weapon. It shall also be unlawful for any person to carry a
machine gun or sawed-off shotgun or to have a silencer or any
instrument, attachment or appliance for causing the firing of any
firearm to be silent or intended to lessen or muffle the noise of the firing
§ 67-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-34
1:93
of any firearm, except as is otherwise permitted by law, or to have
a switchblade knife, bomb, blackjack, metallic knuckles, sand gloves,
sandbag, sand club, slingshot, billy club or metallic bars designed for
use as a club in his possession. This subsection shall not apply to the
extent open carry of a firearm is permitted under the laws of the State
of Michigan.
D. Prohibition to carry longarms. It shall be unlawful for any person to
carry a longarm, whether cased or uncased, on the public streets,
alleys, public shopping centers, places of business frequented by the
public, parks or on property of any school, college, whether public,
private or parochial, locations of religious worship open to the public,
or any other public place in the Township except under the provisions of
this chapter or to the extent open carry of a firearm is permitted under
the laws of the State of Michigan.
(1) Unloaded longarms may be transported from a place of purchase to
the residence of the purchaser if enclosed in a carton, container, or
closed gun case or wrapped completely in commercial wrapping
paper securely closed by tape or string while being so transported.
(2) Unloaded longarms may be transported by motor vehicle to and
from hunting and firearms practice or target shooting but must be
fully enclosed into a closed carton, container or gun case or carried
in the trunk of the vehicle.
(3) Unloaded longarms may be carried by persons 17 years of age or
older on foot to and from a regulated gun range, when the firearm
is fully enclosed in a closed carton, container or gun case. Persons
so involved shall proceed to and from the gun range without delay
by avoiding loitering on the public streets and all other public
places within the Township.
E. Aiming firearm or longarm. It shall be unlawful for any person within
the Township, without just cause, to intentionally, without malice, point
or aim any firearm or longarm at or toward any other person.
F. Discharging firearm or longarm. It shall be unlawful for any person to
discharge any firearm or other instrument producing a like effect and
noise within the Township, except in the lawful defense of his person or
property or as otherwise permitted by law. A person may utilize a
firearm for the protection of his or her livestock from a reasonable
threat of harm as long as the firing of the weapon is in a downward
trajectory and not in a manner that may cause damage to any property
or injury to any person.
G. Injury by discharge of firearm or longarm. It shall be unlawful for any
person within the Township to maim or injure any other person by the
discharge of any firearm or longarm unintentionally, without malice, at
any such person.
§ 67-34 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 67-34
1:94
§ 67-35. Nonsupport, abandonment or neglect of spouse and minor
children.
§ 67-36. Concealing runaway juveniles.
No person shall knowingly and willfully aid or abet a child under the age of
17 years to violate an order of the Probate Court or knowingly and willfully
conceal or harbor juvenile runaways who have taken flight from the custody
of the court, their parents or legal guardian.
§ 67-37. Curfew.
H. Possession or control of firearm while intoxicated. It shall be unlawful
for any person within the Township, while under the influence of an
intoxicating liquor or controlled substance, to carry, have in possession
or control, use in any manner or discharge any firearm or longarm.
I. A violation of this section shall result in the forfeiture of any weapon
used contrary to this section.
A. No person of sufficient ability shall refuse or neglect to support or
actually abandon his or her spouse and/or minor child or children.
B. No parent, guardian or other persons having the care or charge of a
minor child or children shall abuse or neglect, permit, allow or
encourage any child to commit any criminal act or to become
delinquent as defined by the Probate Code of this state nor shall such
person fail to send to school a child or children of school age during all
regular school days.
C. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ABUSED — Harm or threatened harm to a child's health or welfare
which occurs through nonaccidental, physical or mental injury, sexual
abuse or maltreatment.
CHILD — A person under 18 years of age.
NEGLECT — Harm to a child's health or welfare by a person
responsible for the child's health or welfare which occurs through
negligent treatment, including the failure to provide adequate food,
clothing, shelter or medical care.
A. Minors under 12 years of age. No person under 12 years of age shall
loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley or
park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless said person
is accompanied by a parent or guardian or some adult delegated by the
parent or guardian to accompany the child.
B. Minors under 17 years of age. No person under the age of 17 years of
age. No person under the age of 17 years shall loiter, idle or congregate
in or on any public street, highway, alley or park between the hours of
§ 67-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-37
1:95
§ 67-38. Possession or transportation of alcoholic liquor in motor
vehicles by underage persons.
No person under the age of 21 shall knowingly possess or transport in
a motor vehicle any alcoholic liquor unless said person is employed by a
licensee under state Law and is transporting or having the alcoholic liquor
in a motor vehicle under the person's control during regular working hours
and in the course of the person's employment. The motor vehicle which
is used in the violation of this section shall be impounded until claimed
in person by the owner of said vehicle and may be further impounded
following conviction for a period of not more than 30 days.22
§ 67-39. Misrepresenting age to obtain alcoholic liquor.
§ 67-40. Illegal acts involving motor vehicles.
No person shall intentionally and without authority from the owner start
or cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle or maliciously shift
or change the starting device or gears of a standing motor vehicle to
a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver
of said motor vehicle or intentionally cut, mark, scratch or damage the
chassis, running gear, body, sides, top, covering or upholstery of any motor
vehicle that is the property of another or intentionally cut, mark, mash,
destroy or damage such motor vehicle or any of the accessories, equipment,
12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., except where the minor is accompanied
by a parent or guardian or some adult over the age of 21 years
delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the minor child or
where the minor is upon an errand or other legitimate business directed
by his parent or guardian.
C. Aiding and abetting prohibited. No person of the age of 17 years or over
shall assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage any person under the
age of 17 years to violate the provisions of this section.
A. No person under the age of 21 years shall by documentary evidence
falsely represent himself to be 21 years of age or over for the purpose of
purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic liquor nor shall any
person under the age of 21 years give such false information regarding
his age to any person selling alcoholic liquor for the purpose of securing
a sale thereof to himself or any other person under the age of 21 years.
B. No person shall furnish false documentary evidence to any person
under 21 years of age to be used by any such person for the purpose of
obtaining alcoholic beverages.
C. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall
be subject to a maximum fine of $500 and/or a maximum imprisonment
of 93 days. [Added 9-18-2003]
22.Editor's Note: See Ch. 104, Liquor, Art. I, Host Liquor Regulations.
§ 67-37 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 67-40
1:96
appurtenances or attachments thereof or any spare or extra parts thereon
being or thereto attached without the permission of the owner thereof or
intentionally release the brake upon any standing motor vehicle with intent
to injure said machine or cause the same to be removed without the consent
of the owner, provided that this section shall not apply in case of moving or
starting of motor vehicles by the Department of Public Safety members in
case of emergencies in the vicinity of a fire.23
§ 67-41. Burning combustible accumulations.
No person shall burn or collect leaves, rubbish, paper, pasteboard, boxes,
store sweepings, chips, dry goods or boxes in the streets of the Township
for the purpose of burning the same.
§ 67-42. Fireworks. [Amended 6-15-2017]
A. Definitions. This section references the definitions found in Act 256 of
2011, the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act.24
ARTICLES PYROTECHNIC — Pyrotechnic devices for professional use
that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and
construction but not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight
limits for consumer fireworks but are not labeled as such, and that are
classified as UN0431 or UN0432 under 49 CFR 172.101.
CONSUMER FIREWORKS — Fireworks devices that are designed to
produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply
with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations
promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety
Commission under 16 CFR 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in
APA Standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks does not
include low-impact fireworks.
DISPLAY FIREWORKS — Large fireworks devices that are explosive
materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to
produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or
detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA
Standard 87-1, 4.1.
LOW-IMPACT FIREWORKS — Ground and handheld sparkling devices
as that phrase is defined under APA Standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to
3.1.1.8, and 3.5.
MINOR — An individual that is less than 18 years of age.
NOVELTIES — That term as defined under APA Standard 87-1, 3.2,
3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all of the following:
Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls, or
individual caps containing not more than .25 of a grain of explosive
(1)
23.Editor's Note: Original Section 42.420, Hitchhiking, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed 10-17-2002.
24.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 28.451 et seq.
§ 67-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-42
1:97
content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum
explosive content per cap.
Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy
guns in which toy caps as described in the Act, that are constructed
so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place
for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be
separated so as to form a missile by the explosion.
(2)
(3) Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding 1/8 inch in diameter.
Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes
with not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and if the
manufacturer's name and the quantity contained in each box are
printed on the box; and toy smoke devices.
(4)
B. Consumer fireworks (14g). Consumer fireworks are prohibited and
shall not be ignited, discharged or used except under the following
circumstances:
(1) Consumer fireworks may be ignited, discharged or used on the day
before, the day of, and the day after the following national holidays:
(a) New Year's Day (January 1).
(b) Martin Luther King, Jr. Day (third Monday in January).
(c) Washington's Birthday (third Monday in February).
(d) Memorial Day (last Monday in May).
(e) Independence Day (July 4).
(f) Labor Day (first Monday in September).
(g) Columbus Day (second Monday in October).
(h) Veterans Day (November 11).
(i) Thanksgiving Day (fourth Thursday in November).
(j) Christmas Day (December 25).
(2) Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged or used
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. on the day
before, the day of and the day after a national holiday, except New
Year's Day. On New Year's Day, they shall not be ignited, discharged
or used in the Township between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(3) Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged, or used on
public, school, church, or the private property of another person
without the express written permission from the person or entity
legally in possession and control of the property.
§ 67-42 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 67-42
1:98
(4) Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged or used by a
person under the influence of alcohol of a controlled substance.
(5) A minor shall not possess, use, discharge or ignite any consumer
fireworks.
C. Display fireworks (1.3g). Display fireworks shall be conducted in
accordance with PA 256.25 To conduct a fireworks display in Northville
Township, the applicant must complete the Bureau of Fire Services
(BFS) form BFS-417, application for fireworks other than consumer or
low-impact fireworks, and must be submitted to the Township Clerk a
minimum of 60 days prior to the event. A fire official may review the
application and investigate the site to make a recommendation to the
Board regarding the issuance of a permit. Applications must be
submitted in accordance with § 79-2 and include the following:
(1) Display fireworks applications require an application fee. Fees may
increase depending on weather, venue, number of attendees,
traffic, etc. The fee schedule is set by the Board of Trustees.
Applications must include the following:
(a) Provide proof of a valid federal explosives license/permit as
issued by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
Explosives.
(b) Provide proof of insurance for an amount not less than
required by the Northville Township Board of Trustees.
(c) Listing of the Charter Township of Northville as an additional
insured on the insurance policy.
(d) Submission of a scaled site drawing, including the shoot site
and distances to any structures, power lines, parking areas, or
spectator areas in compliance with NFPA 1123.
(e) The Fire Department shall conduct a site inspection and make
a recommendation to the Township Board.
(f) Once the applicant has met all of the above requirements, the
Northville Township Board of Trustees will approve or deny the
permit application.
D. Sky lanterns or other similar unmanned free-floating devices. Sky
lanterns or other similar unmanned free-floating devices are not
classified as fireworks and therefore are not regulated by the Michigan
Fireworks Safety Act.26 These devices require an open flame to propel
the device and have an uncontrolled and unpredictable flight path. In
the interest of public safety, these devices are prohibited at all times.
25.Editor's Note: See the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, MCLA § 28.451 et seq.
26.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 28.451 et seq.
§ 67-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-43
1:99
§ 67-43. Transportation and storage of fireworks.27 [Added
6-15-2017]
The transportation and storage of fireworks within the Charter Township of
Northville shall be in accordance with Act 256.28
§ 67-44. Possession or use of tobacco, vapor products or alternative
nicotine products by minors.29 [Added 5-16-2019]
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply:
CHEWING TOBACCO — Loose tobacco or a flat, compressed cake of
tobacco which is inserted into the mouth to be chewed or sucked.
TOBACCO SNUFF — Shredded, powdered or pulverized tobacco which
may be inhaled through the nostrils, chewed or placed against the
gums.
VAPOR PRODUCT or ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS — A
noncombustible product containing nicotine or not that employs a
heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic,
chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, that can
be used to produce vapor from nicotine or not in a solution or other
form. "Vapor product" includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and
a vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine in a solution or other
form than is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette,
electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product
or device. "Vapor product" does not include a product regulated as
a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration
("FDA") under Subchapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
Act, 21 U.S.C. §§ 351 to 360fff-7.
B. Possession or use in public place prohibited. A person under 18 years of
age shall not possess or smoke cigarettes or cigars, or possess or chew,
suck, or inhale chewing tobacco or tobacco snuff, or possess or use
tobacco in any other form, or possess or smoke vapor products or
alternative nicotine products on a public highway, street, alley, park, or
other lands used for public purposes, or in a public place of business or
amusement.
C. Penalty. A person who violates Subsection B of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine for each offense and/or jail of up to
30 days and costs. If the court determines it is appropriate, eligible
juveniles may be referred to a diversion program. Pursuant to a
probation order, the court may require a person who violates
Subsection B of this section to participate in a health promotion and
27.Editor's Note: Former § 67-43, Permit for use of fireworks; application; purpose of use; age
limitation, was repealed 6-15-2017.
28.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 28.451 et seq.
29.Editor's Note: Former § 67-44, Intrastate transportation of fireworks, was repealed
6-15-2017.
§ 67-43 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 67-44
1:100
§ 67-45. (Reserved)30
§ 67-46. Abandoned refrigerators.
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or
dwelling or in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or
discarded ice box, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has
an airtight door or lock which may not be released for opening from the
inside of said ice box, refrigerator or container without first removing the
said snap-lock or doors from said ice box, refrigerator or container.
§ 67-47. Possession and use of narcotics and dangerous substances.
risk reduction assessment program, if available. A probationer who
is ordered to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction
assessment program under this section is responsible for the cost of
participating in the program. In addition, a person who violates this
section is subject to the following:
(1) For the first violation, the court may order the person to do one of
the following:
(a) Perform not more than 16 hours of community service.
(b) Participate in a health promotion and risk reduction program,
as described in this subsection.
(2) For a second violation, in addition to participation in a health
promotion risk reduction program, the court may order the person
to perform not more than 32 hours of community service.
(3) For a third or subsequent violation, in addition to participation in a
health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may order
the person to perform not more than 48 hours of community
service.
(State law reference: Similar provisions, MCL 722.642.)
A. It is unlawful for any person to use or knowingly or intentionally to
possess lysergic acid diethlamide, peyote, mescaline,
dimethyltryptamine, psicolyn or marijuana (Cannabis sativa L.) or such
other substances as defined in Schedules 1-5 of Public Act 368 of 1978,
as amended (MCL 333.7336), of the State of Michigan, unless the
substance was obtained directly from or pursuant to a valid
prescription or order of practitioner ("practitioner" being defined as in
Subdivisions (a) and (b) of MCL 333.7109, as amended) while acting in
the course of his professional practice or except as otherwise
authorized by this section.
30.Editor's Note: Former § 67-45, Storage of fireworks by wholesalers, dealers and jobbers,
was repealed 6-15-2017.
§ 67-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-47
1:101
B. First offenders. When any person who has not previously been
convicted as set forth herein or under any statute of the United States
or state law or municipal ordinance relating to possession or use of the
substances as defined herein pleads guilty to or is found guilty of
violating this section, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt
and with the consent of the accused person, may defer further
proceedings and place the accused person on probation upon certain
terms and conditions, including therein such requirement that the
accused person attend courses of instruction or rehabilitation on the
medical, psychological and social effects of the misuse of drugs and/or
the substances defined herein. Upon violation of a term of condition,
the court may enter an adjudication of guilt and proceed as the court
determines. Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions, the court
shall discharge the person and dismiss the proceeding against him.
Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without
adjudication of guilt and is not a conviction for the purposes of
disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon the conviction of a
crime. There may be only one discharge and dismissal under this
subsection with respect to any person. The Department of Public Safety
shall retain a nonpublic record of an arrest and discharge or dismissal
under this subsection. This record shall be furnished to any court or
police agency upon request for the purpose of showing that a defendant
in a criminal action involving possession or use of the substances as
defined above has already once availed himself of the provisions of this
subsection.
C. Narcotic paraphernalia. It shall be unlawful for any person to have,
possess, sell, offer to sell, dispense or give away any pipe, device or
contrivance adapted for the use of smoking or inhaling marijuana
(Cannabis sativa L.), hashish or opium; provided, however, that such
pipe, device or contrivance has been used for the purpose of smoking or
inhaling marijuana, hashish or opium.
D. Hypodermic syringes, needles, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person
to have, possess, sell, offer to sell, dispense or give away any
hypodermic syringe, needle or any other instrument or implement for
the illegal use of narcotic or dangerous or hallucinatory drugs as
defined by state law, by subcutaneous injection or intracutaneous
injection or any other manner or method of introduction and which is
possessed, sold, offered, dispensed or given away for that purpose.
E. Loitering about places where drugs, etc., are illegally stored, kept or
used. It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing that the substances,
devices and/or other instruments enumerated and prescribed within
this section are being illegally sold, dispensed, furnished, given away,
stored kept or used, to loiter about, frequent or be present in such
building, apartment, automobile, beat or place of any description
wherein such illegal activity is being carried on, conducted or operated
or wherein such illegal substances, devices and/or instruments
§ 67-47 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 67-47
1:102
§ 67-48. Refusal to submit to fingerprinting.
No person who is required to have his fingerprints taken under MCL 28.243
1. shall refuse to allow or resist the taking of his fingerprints.
§ 67-49. Impersonation of police officer.
It shall be unlawful for any person not duly appointed and sworn as a
police officer for the Township to impersonate such officer or to wear, carry,
display or have in his possession a badge, identification card, business
card(s) or designated dress or insignia of such police officer.31
§ 67-50. Security guard service.
No person firm or security guard service shall wear or cause to be worn
any uniform or part of any uniform, badge, hat or insignia that resembles
or conveys an image of being a police officer or reserve police officer of
the Township without first obtaining written permission from the Director
of Public Safety.
§ 67-51. Rights to property used in illegal activities.
No person shall have any property right in or to any money, personal
property or paraphernalia whatsoever found by the court to have been used
in connection with the operation or carrying on of an illegal activity and
such property may be declared forfeiture.
§ 67-52. Discharge of firearms, bow and arrow and crossbows.32
[Amended 5-18-2017]
prescribed herein are being illegally kept or stored. (State law
reference: MCL 333.7401 et seq.)
A. The use or discharge of any and all firearms, bow and arrow or
crossbow within the Township is hereby prohibited.
B. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the use or discharge of any
firearms in the following circumstances:
(1) By any person or persons properly acting in lawful self-defense; or
(2) By or at the direction of any police, military or governmental
authority duly established under the laws of the Township, State of
Michigan or the United States; or
(3) By law enforcement officers in the discharge of their duties: or
(4) By an established and lawfully permitted educational program,
camp or school program or activity properly supervised with an
31.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 32, Public Safety, Department of, Art. II, Police Reserve
Officers, § 32-10.
32.Editor's Note: See also § 67-34 of this chapter.
§ 67-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 67-52
1:103
§ 67-53. False alarm of fire or need for police or ambulance
service.33
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or willfully:
§ 67-54. State law misdemeanor violations. [Amended 9-18-2003]
Every act prohibited by state law as a misdemeanor is hereby prohibited,
and whoever violates the provisions of this section within the Township
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by the same penalty provided by
state law, except that the penalty shall, in no case, exceed a fine of $500 or
imprisonment for 93 days, or both.
§ 67-55. Penalties.
application for a permit submitted to the Northville Township
Police Department, which will only be allowed at the place, time
and manner as may be approved; or
(5) Military functions, such as parades and funerals firing blank
charges; or
(6) By an authorized shooting or practice range for the exclusive use of
law enforcement officers of the Township, State of Michigan or
United States; or
(7) As permitted in § 67-34F of the Criminal Code.
C. A violation of this section shall result in the forfeiture of any weapon
used contrary to this section.
A. Communicate in any way at any gathering in any public place that a fire
exists when in fact a fire does not exist or to aid or abet in any such false
communication.
B. Ring any bell or operate any mechanical apparatus, electrical apparatus
or combination thereof or permit or cause the same to be operated or
activated for the purpose of communicating that a fire exists when in
fact a fire does not exist or to aid or abet in any such false
communication.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and willfully summon
by telephone or otherwise the Department of Public Safety or any
public or private ambulance to any person or property address where
the service called for is not needed or to aid or abet in such act of
communication.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to the penalties specified for a violation of the Township
Code.34
33.Editor's Note: See Ch. 49, Alarm Systems.
§ 67-52 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 67-55
1:104
Chapter 69
CRUISING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 67, § 67-37.
Noise — See Ch. 117.
Transportation of alcoholic liquor in motor
vehicles by underage persons — See Ch. 67,
§ 67-38.
Loitering - See Ch. 67, §§ 67-3M, 67-8, 67-13
and 67-47.
§ 69-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LICENSEE — Includes the owner or owners, lessees or operators of
premises wherein a business open to the general public is conducted.
PATRON — Includes any person who is seeking service at a business open
to the general public or any other person lawfully present either in such
business place or in the parking lot, public highway or alley adjacent
thereto, whether in or out of a motor vehicle.
§ 69-2. Horn blowing and loud noises prohibited.35
§ 69-3. Unlawful conduct.
B. Any minor, as defined in the State Probate Code, who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be dealt with by the Juvenile Division of
the Probate Court or as otherwise prescribed by state law.
A. It shall be unlawful for any patron of a business open to the general
public, while parking on or adjacent to the premises thereof, or for any
other person, while on the premises of such business, to race the motor
of any vehicle, to suddenly start or stop any motor vehicle or to make or
cause to be made any other loud or unseemly noise.
B. It shall also be unlawful for any patron of a business open to the general
public or any other person parked on the premises of such business to
blow or cause to be blown any horn at any time while so parked.
A. It shall be unlawful for any patron or other person on the premises of a
business open to the general public, whether in or out of a motor
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I, Amendments; Definitions; General
Penalty.
35.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 117, Noise.
§ 67-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-3
1:105
§ 69-4. Duty of licensee.
It shall be the duty of the licensee or owner to post on the premises in a
conspicuous location one or more signs, the lettering of which shall be at
least four inches in height bearing the following legend:
CRUISING AND GATHERING OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE UNLAWFUL
§ 69-5. Enforcement of parking restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle on any private
property or drive-in establishment without the express or implied consent,
authorization or approval of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent or
trustee of such property. A complaint for the violation of this section may
be made by the owner, holder occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of said
property and the Township Police Department shall enforce this section.
§ 69-6. Penalties. [Amended 9-18-2003]
vehicle, to drink any intoxicating liquor or to have in his possession any
open bottle, can or other receptacle containing alcoholic liquor.
B. It shall be unlawful for any number of persons to congregate for any
time whatsoever at any location on the premises of a business open to
the general public, other than in the building or in a legally parked
motor vehicle.
C. It shall also be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle onto the
premises of a drive-in restaurant and then from said premises without
parking such motor vehicle and seeking service, unless there is no
unoccupied parking space available on the premises.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties specified for a violation of the Township Code.36
B. Any minor, as defined in this state's probate code, who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be dealt with by the Juvenile Division of
the Probate Court or as otherwise prescribed by state law.
36.Editor's Note: See §§ 1-10, 1-14 and 1-16.
§ 69-3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 69-6
1:106
Chapter 72
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 58.
Grading and drainage — See Ch. 85.
Historic District — See Ch. 91.
Sewer and water — See Ch. 139.
Sewer use — See Ch. 142.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 152.
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 69-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-6
1:107

ARTICLE I
Introduction
§ 72-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Charter Township of Northville Design
and Construction Standards" and shall hereinafter be referred to as
"standards."
§ 72-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the minimum design and
construction standards for grading and surface drainage, parking lots and
driveways, bike paths, water supply systems, sanitary sewer systems, storm
sewer systems, stormwater detention/retention basins and other
engineering improvements for site plan and subdivision development plans.
§ 72-3. Procedures.
Procedures shall be in accordance with Chapter 152, Subdivision Control;
Chapter 170, Zoning, as amended; and the State of Michigan Land Division
Act being Public Act 288 of P.A. of 1967, as amended (MCL 560.101 et seq.).
§ 72-4. Certification.
All subdivision plans, site plans and utility plans submitted to the Township
for review shall bear the signature and seal of a civil engineer or land
surveyor currently registered to practice in the State of Michigan under
whose supervision the plans were prepared.
§ 72-5. Exception.
Exceptions to these standards may be permitted, provided that, in the
opinion of the Director, the substitute design is equal to or better than the
requirements established by these standards.
§ 72-6. Conflicts.
In the event that a difference of opinion shall arise between the Director
and his designee, the Director shall prevail in resolving the conflict.
§ 72-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-6
1:109

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 72-7. Definitions.
The words, phrases and abbreviations used in these standards shall have
the meanings set forth in this section and as set forth in Chapter 170,
Zoning, as amended, and Chapter 152, Subdivision Control, as amended.
AASHTO — American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials.
ANSI — American National Standards Institute.
ASTM — American Society for Testing Materials.
AWWA — American Water Works Association.
CODE — Applicable state building code.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Public Services of the
Charter Township of Northville or his designee.
DWSD — Detroit Water and Sewerage Department.
GLUMRB — Recommended Standards for Sewage Works (Ten States
Standards). Standards for use as a guide in the design and preparation of
plans and specifications of sewage works. Prepared by the Mississippi River
Board of State Sanitary Engineers.
MDEQ — Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
MDOT — Michigan Department of Transportation.
MUNICIPALITY — Charter Township of Northville.
NCPI — National Clay Pipe Institute.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Charter
Township of Northville.
PROPRIETOR — Owner and/or developer of a project being developed
within the Township.
TRAFFIC ENGINEER — The Traffic Engineer of the Charter Township of
Northville.
WCDPS — Wayne County Department of Public Services.
§ 72-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-7
1:111

ARTICLE III
Inspection and Material Testing
§ 72-8. Construction inspection.
The Director shall perform inspections from time to time to ensure the
health, safety and general welfare of the community, including, but not
limited to, the following:
§ 72-9. Other inspections.
In subdivision developments when the roadways are not under the
jurisdiction of the Township, inspection shall be conducted to insure the
health, safety and general welfare of the community on the following
operations:
§ 72-10. Material testing.
The proprietor of a project shall secure, at his expense, a geotechnical
engineering consultant registered to practice in the State of Michigan, to
provide testing for density of special backfill areas, pavement subgrade
subbase, concrete and asphalt pavement. The geotechnical engineering
consultant shall also provide written recommendations for special
construction methods required as a result of poor or unusual ground
A. General.
(1) The delivery and unloading of pipe and other appurtenances to
water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer systems.
(2) Project cleanup operations.
(3) Mass grading.
B. Roadway, drives, and parking lots.
(1) Preparation of subgrade and subbase.
(2) All paving operations including roadways, driveways, parking
areas, curbs and gutters, drive aprons, walks, etc.
C. Storm sewers, sanitary sewers and water mains.
(1) Installation of pipe, and all other appurtenance related to the
construction of the complete utility system, including excavation,
bedding, backfill, encasement, tunneling, boring, jacking, etc.
(2) Service connections for sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water.
A. Mass grading in existing or future right-of-way.
B. Preparation of the roadway subgrade and subbase.
C. Roadway paving operations.
§ 72-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-10
1:113
conditions. The geotechnical engineer shall also be responsible for
conducting the standard tests for concrete and asphalt pavement materials
and "in-place" construction.
§ 72-11. Preconstruction meeting.
After all approvals and permits have been secured from the Township and
all state and county agencies and prior to the start of construction, a
preconstruction meeting shall be held with the contractor and the Director
and, if the proprietor elects, his engineers and representatives of the
various public and privately owned utilities.
§ 72-12. Fees.
At the time of submittal of the detailed construction plans, all costs for
plan review shall be deposited with the Township. The fee shall be paid
before the Township Engineer shall review any part of the construction
drawings. Prior to the start of construction, all costs for inspection shall be
established by the Township. At no time shall construction proceed when
the proprietor's escrow account for inspection is in an amount less than the
estimated cost of inspection to complete all remaining site work.
§ 72-13. Construction record drawings.
See Article XII of these standards.
§ 72-10 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-13
1:114
ARTICLE IV
Design Standards for Grading and Surface Drainage
§ 72-14. General.
For all new subdivision and site plans within the Township, a grading plan
shall be submitted for review and approval.
§ 72-15. Drainage patterns.
§ 72-16. Minimum slopes.
Minimum ground slope for any part of the site shall be 2%, except that the
minimum ground slope away from any building shall be 5% for the first 10
feet away from the building.
§ 72-17. Maximum slope.
Generally, the maximum ground slope for any part of the side shall be
25% (one vertical to four horizontal). Slopes exceeding 33% (one vertical
to three horizontal) shall be protected with grouted concrete riprap, an
approved geotextile fabric, or retaining wall, or other approved soil erosion
preventative.
§ 72-18. Landscape berms.
The maximum side slope of landscape berms shall be 33% (one vertical to
three horizontal) with a four-foot-wide crest area.
§ 72-19. Grading, drainage and elevation requirements.
A. In general, each residential subdivision lot shall drain from the front of
the house to the road and from the rear of the house to the rear of the
lot. Rear to front surface drainage should be avoided and will be
permitted only under extreme conditions.
B. Drainage for each site or lot must be self-contained so that drainage
across adjacent sites is avoided, unless easements are provided for that
purpose.
C. Drainage for subdivision lots must be directed to either the side lot
lines, the rear lot lines, the front yard line, or a swale located a
minimum of 10 feet from the house.
A. The high point of the swale located 10 feet from a building shall be a
minimum of 0.5 foot below the proposed finished ground elevation of
the building.
B. Generally, the ground elevation at a building shall be elevated above the
center-line elevation of the road on which it fronts.
§ 72-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-19
1:115
§ 72-20. Plan requirements.
Plans shall be presented on sheets not exceeding 24 inches by 36 inches at
a scale not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet. Larger scales, such as one
inch equals 40 feet, may be required for clarity of presentation. Plans shall
also show at least, but not limited to, the following information:
C. Generally, surface drainage generated from areas larger than 0.3 acre
shall not drain across walkways at a point discharge. At no time shall
building or paved areas drain across walkways (except in single-family
detached-unit residential areas).
D. A minimum of 0.6 foot of vertical drop shall be provided from the front
(and side on corner lots) property line to the top of curb.
E. In no case shall the surface drainage be directed to the footing drains
and discharged by pump.
A. North arrow, legend and scale.
B. Proprietor's name.
C. Legal description with property lines bearings and dimensions.
D. Existing topography, including all natural and man-made features with
existing contour elevations at two-foot intervals extending 100 feet
beyond the site boundary.
E. All proposed and existing storm drainage facilities.
F. All existing utilities showing invert elevations and rim elevations at all
structures.
G. All proposed utilities showing the rim elevations of all structures.
H. Bench marks (USGS datum shall be used).
I. Center line of street stationing with center-line elevations at fifty-foot
intervals.
J. Top-of-curb elevations opposite each lot corner. All pavement grades
shall be shown to hundredths of a foot. Ground grades may be shown to
tenths of a foot.
K. Proposed ground elevation at each lot corner.
L. Proposed grade elevations with the use of contours in all nonpaved
areas.
M. Drainage flow arrows indicating the direction of surface water
drainage.
N. Elevation of high point, changes of grade, and low point of all swales
and ditches.
§ 72-19 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-20
1:116
O. Finish grade elevations for each building. If the finish grade for a house
is uniform on all sides, the finish grade elevation shall be placed inside a
rectangular box situated on the lot according to the required front and
side yard setback. Proposed finish building grades for site plan
developments shall be shown at all corner and other locations
requested by the Director.
P. Proposed elevations for sidewalks, top of curb and other locations as
may be required to establish drainage patterns.
§ 72-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-20
1:117

ARTICLE V
Design and Construction Standards for Parking Lot and Driveway
Pavements
§ 72-21. Definitions.
The following words and phrases used in this article shall have the following
meanings:
DRIVEWAY — An area which provides vehicular ingress, egress, access or
circulation to or from any public or private right-of-way for any building
structure, parking area or loading area.
DRIVEWAY APPROACH — All that area of the driveway which is located
within the existing road right-of-way or the future right-of-way as
determined by the WCDPS or any other agency having jurisdiction over the
roadway. In the absence of a road right-of-way, an easement of not less than
60 feet wide shall be assumed to be the road right-of-way.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space on the same lot with a building, or a
group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while
loading and unloading merchandise or materials.
MANEUVERING LANE — The area which provides adequate access to all
parking spaces.
PARKING LOT — All the area which includes parking spaces, loading space,
and maneuvering lanes.
PARKING SPACES — An area of adequate length and width for the parking
of vehicles. The area provided for each parking space shall be in accordance
with Chapter 170, Zoning.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE — The line which defines the boundary between
private property and that land under control of the public agency having
jurisdiction over the roadway. For the purpose of these standards, the
right-of-way line shall further be defined as the future right-of-way line as
determined by the WCDPS of any other agency having jurisdiction over the
roadway.
§ 72-22. Design and construction standards.
Where Chapter 170, Zoning, requires hard surfacing of parking lots and
driveways, the following minimum standards shall apply. These minimums
are based on adequate subgrade and drainage. Soil borings will be required
for each site, and additional thickness for the pavement or subbase may be
required. All construction practices shall be consistent with the 2003 MDOT
Standard Specifications for Construction (or most current) or as modified
by the WCDPS for locations within their jurisdiction.
A. Parking lot surfaces (commercial, industrial and multiple-family) shall
be as follows:
§ 72-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-22
1:119
(1) Asphalt surface: a thickness of three inches of bituminous
pavement placed in two one-and-one-half-inch lifts over eight
inches of crushed aggregate base compacted in place. Subgrade
shall be proof-rolled using an eight- to ten-ton roller or approved
mechanical compaction devise.
(2) Concrete surface. A thickness of seven inches of concrete
pavement placed over four inches of crushed aggregate base
compacted in place. Subgrade shall be proof-rolled using an eightto
ten-ton roller or approved mechanical compaction devise.
B. Parking lot layout. The parking lot layout shall conform to the
requirements of Chapter 170, Zoning.
C. Driveway surfaces (commercial, industrial and multiple-family) for all
vehicular access lanes, excluding driveways in parking lots which are
for the exclusive use of passenger cars, shall be as follows:
(1) Asphalt surface: a thickness of four inches of bituminous pavement
placed in two lifts (one-and-one-half-inch wearing course placed
over two-and-one-half-inch base course) over eight inches of
crushed aggregate base compacted in place. Subgrade shall be
proof-rolled using an eight- to ten-ton roller or approved
mechanical compaction devise.
(2) Concrete surface: a thickness of seven inches of concrete pavement
placed over four inches of crushed aggregate base compacted in
place. Subgrade shall be proof-rolled using an eight- to ten-ton
roller or approved mechanical compaction devise.
D. Curb and gutter. Concrete curb and gutter, where proposed, shall be
MDOT Detail C4, modified with a reverse slope gutter plan where
appropriate.
E. Pavement drainage.
(1) Minimum grades.
(a) Asphalt pavement: 1.00%.
(b) Concrete pavement: 0.60%.
(c) Concrete curb with gutter: 0.60%.
(2) Maximum grades.
(a) Driveways: 8.00%.
(b) Parking lot: 8.00%.
(c) Driveway approach: 2.00%.
(3) General.
§ 72-22 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-22
1:120
(a) The disposal of stormwater and the design of the storm sewer
system shall conform to the requirements as established by
these standards.
(b) The point of discharge of stormwater from a parking lot, or
other paved areas, onto a lawn or landscaped area is not
permitted. Sheet flow from parking lots or driveways will be
permitted only for the most extenuating of circumstances.
Construction cost is not an extenuating circumstance.
(c) The drainage of unrestricted water from paved areas to
adjacent property is not permitted without a written, executed,
and recorded drainage easement which runs with the land. The
required easement(s) must be recorded prior to the start of
construction of the site improvements.
(d) Stormwater disposal to a roadside ditch or any other drainage
system shall receive approval form the agency having
jurisdiction over the drainagecourse, prior to final site plan
approval.
F. Driveway approaches. All driveway approaches to be constructed or
reconstructed within a road right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the
county or state shall be constructed under a permit from that agency.
Evidence of the approval of the proposed construction shall be obtained
from such county or state agency prior to final site plan approval.
G. Specifications. All pavements and subbase material shall meet the
current requirements of the MDOT Standards and Specifications.
Bituminous surface courses shall be constructed of MDOT HMA 36A.
Base courses shall be MDOT HMA 13A. Aggregate subbase shall be
constructed of MDOT 21AA limestone. Concrete surface shall be MDOT
Grade P1.
H. Plan requirements. The following information shall be shown on all
plans proposing the construction of driveways and parking lots:
(1) Dimensions.
(a) Typical parking space.
(b) Maneuvering lanes and driveway width.
(c) Radii of driveways and all curves.
(d) Cross-sectional view of the pavement showing thickness of
surface and subbase material.
(2) Existing elevations.
(a) Contour elevations shown at a minimum of two-foot intervals.
(b) Center lines of ditches or swales at a minimum of fifty-foot
intervals.
§ 72-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-22
1:121
(c) Center line and edge of existing roads at a minimum of fiftyfoot
intervals.
(d) Top-of-casting and invert elevations of all existing drainage
structures.
(3) Proposed elevations.
(a) All radii points.
(b) All building corners (existing and proposed).
(c) Pavement elevation at all corners and at fifty-foot intervals
along the edge of the pavement.
(d) All high points and ridgelines. (Ridgeline and flow arrow must
be shown.)
(e) Invert at each drainage control point, including swales,
ditches, manholes, catch basins, detention/retention system,
etc.
(4) Proposed and existing drainage structures.
(a) Culverts showing length, diameter and type.
(b) Type of culvert end treatment.
(c) All existing and proposed drainage structures.
(5) Existing topography. The plan shall show all existing natural and
man-made features within 50 feet of the site boundaries but not
less than the minimum requirements of the site plan requirements
of Chapter 170, Zoning.
§ 72-22 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-22
1:122
ARTICLE VI
Design and Construction Standards for Sidewalks
§ 72-23. Design standards.
§ 72-24. Standards for materials, equipment and construction
methods.
A. Location. The locations of the sidewalks shall be as established by
Chapter 170, Zoning, and Chapter 152, Subdivision Control.
B. General.
(1) In general, sidewalks should be located within the public right-ofway
one foot from property lines. Where not in public rights-of-way,
a ten-foot-wide permanent easement shall be provided to the
Township.
(2) Five-foot-wide sidewalks shall be constructed with concrete.
(3) Eight-foot-wide sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete or
asphalt.
(4) All sidewalks shall be designed to provide eight feet of vertical
clearance.
(5) Barrier-free ramps shall be constructed at all curb crossings per
MDOT Standard Plans and Specifications and Wayne County
requirements.
(6) Longitudinal grades shall generally follow the existing topography
with a maximum grade of 5%. Where road grades exceed 5%, the
longitudinal grade of the sidewalk shall be permitted to be greater
than 5%, but cannot exceed the road grade.
(7) Transverse grades shall be provided to accommodate adequate
surface drainage and be a maximum of 2%.
A. All construction practices shall be consistent with the 2003 MDOT
Standard Specifications for Construction (or most current) or as
modified by the WCDPS for locations within their jurisdiction.
B. Existing vegetation and topsoil shall be removed prior to placement of
the surface. Subgrade shall be proof-rolled using an eight- to ten-ton
roller or approved mechanical compaction device. Any unstable areas
shall be undercut at the direction of the Director and filled with coarse
aggregate. The subgrade shall be treated with an herbicide, application
rate to be determined based on existing soils per manufacturer's
recommendations. Any embankment required shall be constructed of
granular material, compacted to 95% maximum unit weight.
C. Material and construction standards for concrete sidewalks.
§ 72-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-24
1:123
(1) All sidewalks shall be four-inch-thick MDOT Grade P1 concrete,
except where crossing concrete drive approaches, where they shall
meet the drive approach standards of six inches or eight inches of
MDOT Grade P1 concrete. The concrete shall be placed on a
minimum four-inch-thick base of MDOT Class II granular material.
Subgrade shall be proof-rolled for acceptance. In general it shall be
free of organic material.
(2) The base material and adjacent concrete shall be wet down prior to
placement of concrete to prevent water loss through the base and
to form a better bond between old and new concrete. If a
construction joint is required, the existing concrete surface is to be
cleaned with compressed air to expose the aggregate in the
concrete.
(3) The concrete sidewalk shall be finished in a neat and workmanlike
manner, with a light, broom finish.
(4) Water shall not be added to the concrete surface ("blessing" the
concrete) to aid in the finishing.
(5) Control joints shall be placed at five-foot intervals and may be
tooled or sawed. The method of forming joints and spacing shall be
approved by the Director prior to construction.
(6) One-inch-thick expansion joints shall be placed between the
sidewalk and back of abutting curb or gutter.
(7) One-half-inch-thick expansion joints shall be placed between the
juncture of two sidewalks, at the juncture of a sidewalk and a drive
approach, and between the sidewalk and buildings or other rigid
structures.
(8) After finishing operations have been completed and immediately
after the free water has left the surface, the surfaces shall be
completely coated and sealed with a uniform layer of white
membrane curing compound. The contractor shall restore all
disturbed areas to better than or equal to their existing condition
within two working days.
(9) Any sidewalk which is marked by graffiti, cracks other than at the
joints, or otherwise damaged before it has been accepted by the
Public Services Director shall be replaced at the contractor's
expense.
D. General material and construction standards for asphalt sidewalks.
(1) Asphalt sidewalks shall be three inches of asphalt (two inches
MDOT 13A leveling and one inch MDOT 36A wearing) placed in
two lifts, on a six-inch base of MDOT 22A or 21AA crushed
limestone. Subgrade shall be proof-rolled for acceptance. In
general it shall be free of organic material.
§ 72-24 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-24
1:124
(2) Asphalt penetration values shall be 200-250 for sidewalks.
(3) Bituminous surfaces shall be cut with a tool (sawcut). Cutting
bituminous surfaces for removal shall leave a clean, straight,
vertical edge without disturbance to the adjacent pavement.
(4) Before placing the bond coat the existing pavement surface,
including joints, cracks and edges, shall be thoroughly cleaned to a
minimum depth of one inch with compressed air, vac-all type
equipment, or other approved mechanical or hand methods, to
remove all dirt, debris, and all foreign material.
§ 72-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-24
1:125

ARTICLE VII
Water Mains and Appurtenances Design and Construction
Standards
§ 72-25. Water mains.
A. Location.
(1) The general location of the water mains shall conform to the
Township's water supply distribution system Master Utility Plan.
Minor location changes may be considered acceptable, provided
that the Director has determined that the intent of the master plan
has been met.
(2) Generally, water mains shall be installed within a public right-ofway
line or in easements reserved for such use. All easements shall
be a minimum of 20 feet wide. All easements and water mains shall
be dedicated to the authority having jurisdiction over the system. A
barrel-to-barrel horizontal separation of at least 10 feet shall be
maintained between water main and sewers.
(3) All water mains shall be installed from property line to property
line of all new developments along all abutting roads, streets and at
other locations where the Director has determined that future
extension will be necessary.
(4) A minimum horizontal distance of 10 feet shall be provided from
any building wall line or footing line to the center line of the water
main.
(5) Water mains shall be located outside of paved areas whenever
possible.
(6) Interconnected water mains.
(a) All water mains exceeding a maximum length of 600 feet shall
have a minimum of two connections to a source of supply.
(b) The maximum length may be exceeded, provided that future
service will eliminate the dead end. Future service will be as
defined in the Township's Water Distribution Master Plan.
B. Size.
(1) Water main sizes shall conform to the Township's Water Supply
Distribution System Master Utility Plan.
(2) Unless specified otherwise in the above-mentioned Master Utility
Plan, feeder mains 12 inches or larger in diameter shall be
provided on 1/4 section line roads, county primary roads, collector
streets, and elsewhere as design dictates.
(3) Water mains for new development.
§ 72-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-25
1:127
(a) All water mains for new development shall have the following
minimum sizes:
Type of Development
Minimum Size
(inches)
Residential 8
Commercial/office 12
Industrial 12
(b) Water mains must be sized to provide fire flows of at least
1,500 gpm in single-family detached residential zoning; 2,500
gpm in apartment, cluster residential zoning and similar areas;
and at least 4,000 gpm in office, industrial and shopping center
zoning which shall be determined by the Director. A minimum
of 20 psi residual pressure shall be maintained throughout the
entire system during these flows.
(4) The minimum pipe size for all fire hydrant leads shall be six inches.
Maximum length for all six-inch water mains is 50 feet. No service
connection shall be made to a fire hydrant lead.
C. Easements.
(1) All water mains, fire hydrants, valves, service valve boxes and other
appurtenances shall be located within a twenty-foot-wide
easement, centered on the water main, and dedicated to the
Township.
(2) Easements for possible extensions shall be provided to the property
lines at locations designated by the engineer.
(3) Easements shall be extended to a point 10 feet beyond all hydrant
leads.
(4) All easements shall be granted to the Township prior to the
issuance of a final occupancy permit.
D. Soil conditions.
(1) When required by the Director, exploratory borings shall be
provided by the developer. Boring locations shall be indicated on
the plans. Boring logs and soil analysis shall be submitted to the
Township.
(2) Water main design, relative to pipe bedding and locations, shall
reflect the proper selection of materials and construction method
compatible with the field conditions. Areas which show
unsatisfactory ground material for pipe bearing or possible
chemical deterioration due to soils shall be avoided, or the pipe
shall be suitably installed on adequately designed bedding and/or
in protective wrap or coating.
§ 72-25 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-25
1:128
E. Materials.
(1) Pipe and fittings. Pipe for open cut applications shall be ductile
iron. Pipe for directional drill applications shall be ductile iron,
HDPE, or PVC. No secondhand material or salvaged material shall
be permitted.
(a) Ductile iron.
[1] Ductile-iron pipe water main shall meet all the
requirements of the latest revision of the AWWA/ANSI
C151/A21.51. Pipe shall be furnished in eighteen-foot or
twenty-foot lengths, unless otherwise required. Pipe shall
be double cement-lined and seal coated with an approved
bituminous seal coating accordance with AWWA/ANSI
C104/A21.4. A manufacturer's certificate shall be provided
to the Township, certifying that all pipe delivered meets all
specification requirements. The pipe shall meet the
thickness class requirements shown in the table below:
Size
(inches) Class
6 350
8 350
10 350
12 350
14 300
16 300
18 250
20 250
24 250
[2] Push-on joints shall meet all requirements of AWWA/ANSI
C111/A21.11. Push-on joints shall consist of a ductile-iron
bell provided with a recess to receive a circular molder
rubber gasket to effect the joint seal. A rubber gasket and
sufficient lubricant to assemble the joint shall be furnished
with each joint. The lubricant shall have no deleterious
effect upon the color, taste or odor of potable water and
shall not be corrosive to either the pipe or gasket. Pipe
furnished with push-on type joints shall be equal in
strength and leak tightness to pipe furnished with
mechanical joints as specified when installed under
identical conditions and shall meet all other requirements
of these specifications. In addition to the above
requirements, the gasket and lubricant shall conform to
the latest revision of AWWA/ANSI C111/A21.11.
§ 72-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-25
1:129
[3] Bolts and nuts for buried service shall be made of
noncorrosive, high-strength, low-alloy steel having the
characteristics specified in AAWWA/ANSI C111/A21.11.
Bolts and nuts shall also be Cor-Blue T-Bolts with a
ceramic-filled, baked-on carbon resin.
[4] Flanged joints shall conform to ANSI B16.1 Class 125.
[5] Ductile-iron or cast-iron fittings shall meet all the
requirements of the latest revision AWWA/ANSI C110/
A21.10 for full body fittings and AWWA/ANSI C153/A21.53
for compact fittings (three inches through 16 inches) for a
minimum working pressure of 250 psi and be of the
mechanical joint type. Plugs, where shown on the plans,
shall be solid mechanical joint plug type.
[6] All ductile-iron pipe and fittings shall be poly-wrap
encased. The polyethylene encasement to be used with
ductile-iron pipe and fittings shall be manufactured in
accordance with the specifications and requirements of
AWWA/ANSI C105/A21.5. Encasement shall be a linear
low-density polyethylene film with a minimum thickness of
8 mils. The polyethylene encasement shall be installed in
accordance with the specifications and requirements of
AWWA 600. Overlap and taping requirements shall be per
manufacturer specifications.
[7] Ductile-iron pipe for directional drill applications shall
utilize one of the following approved pipe joints: American
Snap-lok Flex-Ring, Clow Super Lock or U.S. Pipe TR Flex.
(b) HDPE.
[1] HDPE pipe and fittings shall be high-density polyethylene
plastic pipe, DR-9, DIPS, manufactured in accordance with
the specifications and requirements of ANSI/AWWA C906
for use with potable water. All pipes shall have a blue strip
to indicate use with potable water.
[2] Materials used for the manufacturing of HDPE pipe and
fittings shall be extra-high molecular weight, high-density
PE 4710 polyethylene resin meeting the ASTM D3350
minimum cell classification of PE 345464C. The properties
of the HDPE material shall be certified by the supplier.
[3] HDPE fittings shall be in accordance with ASTM D3261
(butt fused) and shall be manufactured by injection
molding, a combination of extrusion and machining, or
fabrication from HDPE pipe conforming to this
specification and by the manufacturer of the pipe. The
fittings shall be fully pressure rated and provide a working
pressure equal to that of the pipe with an included 2:1
§ 72-25 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-25
1:130
safety factor. The fittings shall be manufactured from the
same base resin type and cell classification as the pipe
itself. The fittings shall be homogeneous throughout and
free from cracks, holes, foreign inclusions, voids, or other
injurious defects.
[4] Mechanical fittings including flanged joints, restrained
mechanical joints used with polyethylene pipe shall be
specifically designed for restrained mechanical joints, or
tested and found to be acceptable for use with
polyethylene pipe by the fitting manufacturer.
[5] HDPE pipe shall only be used in directional bore
applications.
(c) PVC, C900 or C905.
[1] Fusible PVC plastic material for pipe shall conform to
AWWA C900 or C905, DR-14 (C900) OR DR21 (C905),
DIPS, ASTM D1784, and cell classification 12454.
Compound formulation shall be in accordance with PPI
TR-2/2006. Fusible PVC shall be manufactured in fortyfoot
nominal lengths and shall be blue in color.
[2] Pipe shall be manufactured with 100% virgin resin. Pipe
shall also have 0% recycled plastics content and shall not
consist of any rework compound, even that obtained from
the manufacturer's own production using the same
formulation.
[3] Acceptable ductile iron mechanical fitting for use with
fusible PVC pipe shall include standard ductile iron fittings
conforming to AWWA/ANSI C110/A21.10 or AWWA/ANSI
C153/A21.53 and AWWA/ANSI C111/A21.11. Restrained
connections to fusible PVC pipe may be made using a
restraint gland product for C-900 or C-905 DIPS sizing to
be Mega-lug, Series 2000PV by EBAA Iron or approved
equal.
[4] Sleeve-type mechanical couplings shall be manufactured
for use with PVC pipe, shall be restrained or by acceptable
sleeve-type mechanical joint coupling for a restrained type
coupling for transition between PVC, C-900/C-905 pipe
and ductile-iron pipe shall be EBAA Iron Series 3800 or
approved equal for applicable size of pipe as shown on
plans.
[5] PVC pipe shall only be used in directional bore
applications.
[6] Pipe shall be marked per AWWA C900 or AWWA C905 as
specified on the plans and shall include, as a minimum:
§ 72-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-25
1:131
§ 72-26. Valves.
[a] Nominal size.
[b] PVC.
[c] Dimension Ratio, Standard Dimension Ratio or
Schedule - DR-14 (C900) OR DR-18 (C905), DIPS.
[d] AWWA pressure class or rating.
[e] AWWA Standard designation number.
[f] Extrusion production-record code.
[g] Trademark or trade name.
[h] Cell Classification 12454 and/or PVC material code
1120 may also be included.
A. General.
(1) A tapping sleeve, valve and well shall be provided at every
connection to existing water mains unless otherwise approved by
the Director. All such connections shall be provided so as not to
disrupt the existing water services.
(2) Gate valves shall be used on mains less than 16 inches in diameter.
Butterfly valves shall be used on mains greater than 16 inches in
diameter.
(3) In general, valves shall be arranged so that no single line failure
will require more than 800 feet of main to be out of service, and on
feeder mains, valves shall be spaced not more than 1/4 mile apart.
Valves shall be so arranged that any section can be isolated by
closing not more than four valves. The isolated section shall not
include service to more than:
(a) Twenty detached single-family dwelling units.
(b) Thirty multiple units (apartments, condominium units, duplex
units, etc.).
(c) Two fire hydrants.
(d) A full-size valve in a gate well shall be provided at every dead
end where required by the Director for future extension.
B. Pressure-reducing valves.
(1) Installation of pressure-reducing valves may be required where two
or more pressure districts are to be interconnected. Pressurereducing
valves shall be furnished and installed within a concrete
vault.
§ 72-25 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-26
1:132
(2) A line gate valve shall be installed both upstream and downstream
of each pressure-reducing valve to permit isolation of the pressurereducing
valve for maintenance or repair. A bypass line of
equivalent size pipe at the water main and an additional bypass
gate valve and well shall be provided.
C. Materials. All valves installed under this specification shall conform to
the applicable requirements of AWWA C500 and C504 standards
governing construction materials and workmanship. Each valve shall
carry the name or trademark of the manufacturer. All valves shall have
operating nuts that turn clockwise to open.
(1) Gate valves. Gate valves shall be resilient seated and shall have a
cast or ductile iron body and bonnet. Valves shall have a minimum
non-shock W.O.G. working of 200 psi. The wedge shall be ductile
iron or cast iron encased in a bonded-in-place styrene butadiene
elastomer covering to form resilient seating surfaces. Stems shall
be bronze of non-rising design with double O-ring packing. Joints
shall be mechanical joint type. Resilient seated gate valves shall be
Series 2500 as manufactured by American Flow Control, or equal.
(2) Butterfly valves. Butterfly valves shall have a cast-iron body, neck
and top piece with a minimum non-shock W.O.G. working pressure
of 150 psi. Seats shall be Hycarbuna "N" providing leakproof
shutoff with the disc and acting as a body liner to prevent
corrosion. Disc shall be ni-resist cast iron with a 304 stainless steel
shaft rotating in permanently lubricated bearings. Stem seal shall
be Hycarbuna "N." Joints shall be flanged. Flanged to mechanical
joint adapters shall be provided for each valve. Butterfly valves
shall be Groundhog as manufactured by Pratt Valve Company, or
equal.
(3) Tapping valves. Tapping valves shall meet the specifications for
gate valves except that the valve shall have a flange compatible
with the tapping sleeve.
(4) Tapping sleeves. Tapping sleeves shall be full length of heavy-duty
stainless steel construction designed for use with the type of pipe
to be tapped. Tapping sleeve body shall be 18-8 Type 304 stainless
steel. Bolts shall be 304 stainless steel. Gaskets shall be full
circumferential SBR compounded for water service. Tapping sleeve
shall contain a test plug to assure seal prior to tapping. Tapping
sleeve shall be JCM Industries type 432; Romac Industries, Type
SST; or equal.
(5) Valve boxes. Valve boxes shall be of cast-iron construction. They
shall be of three-piece, screw-type adjustment design. All valve
boxes shall be of three-piece, screw-type adjustment design. All
valve boxes shall be installed flush with the top of the proposed site
grade. Cover shall be designed to be removed easily to provide
§ 72-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-26
1:133
§ 72-27. Gate wells.
access to the valve. Valve boxes shall be EJIW 8560 with number 6
base, or equal.
(6) Corporation stops. Corporation stops used for insertion into mains
shall be Mueller Type B-25000, Ford FB600 or McDonald 4701B.
All stops shall have bronze cast bodies, keys, stem washers and
nuts. Inlet threads shall conform to the latest revision of AWWA
C800. The outlet connection shall be able to receive the flared end
of the copper service pipe.
(7) Post indicator valves. Post indicator valves shall meet the
specifications for gate valves.
(8) Post indicator posts. Post indicator posts shall be manufactured of
cast iron and adjustable. The indicator window shall be mounted at
a height of 30 inches above grade. Those portions of the post above
grade shall have two coats of red enamel. The indicator window
shall be masked during paint application to keep window clear. All
unpainted surfaces shall have two coats of coal tar pitch varnish.
Post indicators shall be Mueller Model A-20806.
A. General.
(1) Riser sections shall be precast reinforced concrete sized as follows:
Size to Well (I.D.)
Nominal I.D. of Water
Main
(inches)
Straight
Through Tee/Tap
10 and under 5 feet 0 inches 6 feet 0 inches
12 6 feet 0 inches 6 feet 0 inches
16 6 feet 0 inches 7 feet 0 inches
18 and over 7 feet 0 inches 7 feet 0 inches
(2) A gate well shall be provided for valves six inches and larger
(excluding hydrant valves and PIVs).
(3) Brick for grade adjustment of gate wells shall meet the
requirements for "medium brick" of the Standard Specifications for
Concrete Sewer Brick, ASTM Serial Designation C139, or the latest
revision thereof.
(4) Mortar for masonry of plastering outside of gate wells shall be
made of made of one part of Portland cement to two parts of sand.
Mortar materials and mixing shall correspond, in general, to those
for concrete.
§ 72-26 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-27
1:134
§ 72-28. Fire hydrants and appurtenances.
(5) Water pipe to gate well connections shall be through 1) a flexible
boot which shall be securely clamped into a core-drilled port. Pipe
ports shall be core-drilled at the point of manufacture and shall be
accurately located within 1/2-inch of the proposed water main
center line (Kor-N-Seal); or 2) a self-adjusting mechanical pipe to
manhole seal which provides a resilient flexible and infiltrationproof
joint (Res-seal); or 3) a flexible rubber wedge firmly rammed
into a rubber gasket which is cast into the manhole (Press Wedge
II), or equal. All pipe-to-manhole connections shall be installed per
the manufacturer's specifications.
(6) Extension stems and stem guides shall be provided in each gate
well wherein the valve operating nut is more than five feet below
the top of the gate well cover. Extension stems shall extend to
within five feet of the top-of-cover elevation.
(7) A one-inch corporation stop shall be installed in the water main on
each side of the line valve in each gate well a bronze double-strap
tapping saddle (service clamp) shall be installed on taps to
concrete pipe.
B. Materials.
(1) Gate wells shall be constructed of reinforced concrete conforming
to the latest revision of ASTM Specifications for Precast Reinforced
Concrete Manhole Sections, Serial Designation C478 with rubber
gasket joints. The bottom section shall be furnished with an
integral concrete base.
(2) Gate well steps shall be reinforced polypropylete plastic coated
steel. They shall be M.A. Industries, Inc. PS-I-PF, or equal.
(3) Frames and covers shall be cast iron conforming to the Standard
Specifications Casting Serial Designation A48, or the latest revision
thereof, and shall be 1040 Type A as manufactured by East Jordan
Iron Works, or equal. They shall have machined-bearing surfaces
and suitable notches for convenient removal of the cover. Covers
shall have the letters "NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP WATER" cast
integrally with the cover. All frames and covers shall be coated at
the place of manufacturer with coal tar pitch varnish or other
approved asphaltum coating.
A. Location.
(1) Fire hydrants in subdivisions composed of detached single-family
dwelling units shall have a maximum spacing of 500 feet.
(2) Fire hydrants in all multiple, commercial, office, and industrial
developments shall have a maximum spacing of 500 feet and shall
further be subject to the following requirements:
§ 72-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-28
1:135
(a) In general, no part of a building shall be more than 300 feet
from a fire hydrant as measured by the unobstructed hose
length.
(b) Hydrants shall be located for double coverage in multiple
housing developments, but in no case shall they be located less
then 40 feet from a single-family residence or 50 feet from any
other structure.
(c) Spacing of hydrants around commercial and/or manufacturing
establishments shall be considered as individual cases and
shall be determined by the Director.
(d) All hydrant spacing shall be subject to review and approval by
the Township's Fire Department.
(3) Fire hydrants shall be located at street intersections where
feasible. In subdivisions, hydrants shall generally be located on the
extended side yard property lines.
(4) A hydrant shall be installed at the end of every dead-end main.
(5) In general, hydrants shall be located in the road right-of-way not
more than 10 feet or less than three feet from back of curb.
(6) Fire hydrants in parking areas shall be protected by four steel
guard posts or a six-inch-high curb.
(7) All hydrants shall be constructed with a companion gate valve and
box.
B. Materials.
(1) Hydrants shall be EJIW 5BR-250 or AFC Model No. WB-67-250 with
breakaway traffic flange and mechanical joint connections.
(a) Fire hydrants shall comply with the latest revision of AWWA
Standard, C502. Hydrants shall be compression type to open
with the pressure. They shall have a valve opening of 5 1/4
inches and six-inch mechanical joint inlet. Hydrants shall have
two pumper connections of four inches with Detroit Fire
Department Standard Thread.
(b) Fire hydrants shall have an inside barrel dimension of not less
than 8 1/2 inches I.D. from top to bottom. The one-and-oneeighth-
inch pentagon operating nut shall open
counterclockwise.
(c) All nozzles shall be on a removable head with a flange so that
they may be rotated by changing the position of the flange.
(d) Hydrants shall be fully bronze mounted, including the top of
the operating stem where it passes through the double O-ring
seal in the bronze packing gland. The forged operating stem in
§ 72-28 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-28
1:136
§ 72-29. General.
the base and the valve seat shall also be of bronze. The molded
valve shall be of composition rubber, and the cast-iron valve
clamps shall be packed with O-ring seals and held right to the
stem by a threaded bronze locknut, anchored with set screws.
(e) Hydrant shall be designed for 150 psi working pressure and
tested to 300 psi. Those portions of the hydrant above grade
shall have two coats of red enamel. All unpainted surfaces shall
have two coats of coal tar pitch varnish.
(f) Depth of bury is six feet six inches from the bottom of the
connection pipe to the grade line on the hydrant.
(g) Drain hole shall be plugged.
(h) Each hydrant shall be equipped with one integral stortz
connection on the right nozzle when facing the hydrant. The
Stortz connection shall be a five-inch connector and shall be
manufactured by Harrington, Inc. per HIHS trademark.
(2) Valve boxes shall be of cast-iron construction. They shall be of
three-piece, screw-type adjustment design. All valve boxes shall be
installed flush with the top of the proposed site grade. Covers shall
be designed to be removed easily to provide access to the valve.
Valve boxes shall be EJIW 8560 with number 6 base, or equal.
A. Special crossings. Ductile-iron pipe, Class 54, shall be used for water
mains as follows:
(1) Railroad crossings: within an encasement pipe specified by the
railroad for the entire width of the right-of-way, plus 20 feet. Details
shall include encasement pipe thickness and diameter, water main
bedding, and complete pressure grout of the encased water main.
(2) Stream crossing. Ball joint river pipe shall be used unless otherwise
approved by the Township.
(3) Road crossings: beneath and 10 feet beyond the edges of the
pavement of traveled road.
(4) Filled areas: throughout the full length and extending 10 feet
beyond each end of the fill area into undisturbed soil.
B. Water service.
(1) The basis of design for size shall be considered using a flow rate of
20 gpm per residential dwelling unit. The basis of size other than
for residential use shall be determined by the developer's engineer
and submitted for approval by the Township prior to submittal of
final plans. Minimum size of service shall be one inch. Service
connections to the main must be made by the Township. Service
§ 72-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-29
1:137
shutoff valves must be located within a dedicated easement or road
right-of-way.
(2) Water leads shall be not more than 100 feet in length for multiple
type uses; the following minimum sizes shall apply:
Number of
Units per Building
Water Service Size
(inches)
4 1 1/2
12 1 1/2
16 2
24 2
32 3
(3) Service leads shall not be connected to hydrant leads or fire lines.
C. Service connection materials.
(1) Copper service pipe. Service pipe two inches and smaller shall be
copper, conform to the requirements of the Standard Specifications
for Seamless Copper Water Tube, ASTM Designation B88, Type K
annealed. Connections in copper service pipe, if necessary, shall be
made with copper-to-copper union fittings, Mueller No. H-15404,
or approved equal.
(2) Curb stops. One-inch curb stops used for service connections shall
be Ford B22-444 ball valve, McDonald 6100, Mueller B-25204, or
approved equal. Curb stops 1 1/2 inches shall be Ford B22-666,
McDonald 6100, or approved equal. Two-inch curb stops shall be
Ford B44-777, McDonald 6100, or approved equal. All parts shall
be cast from bronze. They shall have an inverted key stop. Both
inlet and outlet connections shall be able to receive the flared end
of the copper service pipe.
(3) Curb boxes. Curb boxes shall be Extension Type "Arch Pattern"
curb boxes, Mueller No. H-10306 or approved equal for one-inch
curb stop and Mueller No. H-10310 or approved equal for one-andone-
half-inch and two-inch curb stops. Cast-iron lids shall have the
word "WATER" plainly cast on top and shall have a threaded brass
plug removable for the inserting of shutoff rod. Bases shall be six
feet six inches long extended and shall telescope to not more than
five feet six inches. The shutoff rods shall be no longer than two
feet.
(4) Saddles. Taps larger than one inch in existing six-inch mains and
larger than 1 1/2 inches in eight-inch mains shall be made with
saddles. Saddles shall be Smith Blair No. 323, or approved equal.
D. Tracer wire.
§ 72-29 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-29
1:138
(1) Tracer wire. Tracer wire shall be installed along the top of all water
mains. For directional drilling, the tracer wire shall be installed at
the same time as the pipe. For open cut construction, the tracer
wire shall be installed at a height of not more than six inches above
the main line pipe or service leads. Wire shall be extended to all
hydrants, blowoffs, dead ends, service leads and post indicator
valves. Tracer wire shall be brought to grade, leaving enough
excess material to avoid loss or damage to the wire during
construction and subsequent activities. Wire shall be trimmed to
finish grade following completion of the landscaping.
(2) Offsets. When tracer wire is to be run along short offsets (less than
20 feet), a loop of wire shall be utilized to loop to the end of the
offset, bring the loop to grade and terminate it in an approved
manner. For service leads and offsets of more than 20 feet in
length, or installed by directional drilling method, a splice may be
utilized to make the connection at the main. The tracer wire shall
then be installed and terminated in an approved manner.
(3) Terminations. Tracer wire terminations shall be made by one of the
following methods:
(a) Tracer wire shall be terminated at hydrants by tying off the
wire at the head flange, leaving excess material for future
trimming following landscape activities.
(b) Terminations at valve/curb boxes, post indicators, valves and
blowoffs shall be made with two wraps of wire at grade around
the box or pipe, leaving excess material for future trimming
following landscaping.
(c) Gate well terminations shall be made by running the tracer
wire through the pipe opening in the wall, down to and across
the floor to the steps, up the wall and secure to the top step
leaving the stub accessible at the casting. Wire shall be run
through the gate well such that it does not create a hazard.
(d) Terminations at existing water mains without tracer wire shall
be made at the nearest hydrant or gate well as outlined above.
If no hydrant or gate well is available, an upper section of valve
box shall be installed with the tracer wire stubbed up inside.
(4) Materials.
(a) Tracer wire to be used on open cut pipe shall be AWG No. 12
single-strand copper with blue 30 mil HDPE insulation.
Connections shall be made using 3M DBR-09964 wire
connectors, or equal.
(b) Tracer wire to be used on directional drill pipe shall be AWG
No. 6 stainless steel braded with blue 30 mil HDPE insulation.
§ 72-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-29
1:139
§ 72-30. Plan requirements.
All construction plans shall be submitted to the Township for water main
approval and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
Connections shall be made per the manufacturer's
recommendations.
A. Certification. The plans and specifications shall be prepared under the
supervision of a civil engineer registered in the State of Michigan. The
title sheet of the plans shall contain the signature and seal of that
engineer.
B. Plan contents. Plans shall consist of a title sheet showing a plan view of
the complete job, split plan and profile sheets, and standard detail
sheets. Sheet sizes shall be 24 inches by 36 inches.
(1) Title sheet. A title sheet, or the first sheet of a set of plans, shall
identify:
(a) Project title.
(b) Location map with North arrow and scale, drawn at a scale not
greater than one inch equals 100 feet nor smaller than one
inch equals 2,000 feet. Locations of proposed sewers and
relationship of general project area to the surrounding area
shall be shown.
(c) Overall layout of the water system with valve and hydrant
numbers.
(d) Sheet index.
(e) Symbol legend.
(f) List of quantities.
(g) Name, address, phone number and e-mail of proprietor.
(h) Name, address, phone number and e-mail of designer.
(i) Plan completion date and all revision dates.
(j) A statement that the work shall conform to the Township's
current standards and specifications.
(2) Plan and profile sheets.
(a) Scale of plan portion of sheets shall be one inch equals 50 feet,
or larger, with scale of profile portion of sheet one foot equals
five feet vertical or proportionally larger.
(b) Plan portion of sheet shall include at least:
§ 72-29 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-30
1:140
[1] Two bench marks shall be shown on each plan sheet. Plans
shall be prepared based on the Michigan South State
Plane Coordinates, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD
1983) for the x and y coordinate system and based on the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) for the
z coordinate system.
[2] Existing topography extending 50 feet past the site
boundaries, including all existing and proposed
improvements. Elevation contours shall be at a minimum
of two-foot intervals.
[3] Street names, street and easement width, subdivision
names, lot numbers and lot dimensions.
[4] Location, length, size of each section of proposed water
main between valves.
[5] Locations of all hydrants, fittings and other water
appurtenances and special structures.
[6] Service line location and diameter to all buildings other
than single-family detached dwellings.
[7] Finish grades of all hydrants, gate well rims, and other
water structures. Hydrants and gate wells shall be
consecutively numbered on the plans.
[8] "Miss Dig" note.
[9] Limits of special backfill requirements.
(c) For all water mains 12 inches in diameter and larger, a profile
view must be submitted with the plan. The profile sheet shall
contain at least the following information:
[1] Size, length, type and class of pipe.
[2] Top-of-pipe elevations and locations of all horizontal and
vertical deflection points.
[3] Limits of special backfill requirements.
[4] Profiled elevations over center line of proposed sewer of
existing and proposed ground, and pavement surfaces.
The existing profile shall be obtained from actual field
survey data.
[5] All crossings with other utilities (existing or proposed)
with elevations of the top or bottom of the pipe, as
appropriate, and shall have "Warning" notes for all gas
main crossings in profile.
§ 72-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-30
1:141
§ 72-31. Construction standards.
All water mains and appurtenances proposed within the Township shall be
constructed in accordance with the standards and specification contained
herein:
[6] Finish grade elevations for all gate well castings and fire
hydrants.
(3) Detail sheets. Provide Township standard detail sheets consisting
of specifications and drawings. Wayne County details shall also be
provided, where applicable.
A. Utility crossings. A minimum of 18 inches of clearance shall be provided
between the water main and any existing underground utility, unless
otherwise required by the Director. Whenever a main is installed under
any existing utility line such as gas, buried electric power, telephone
line, sewer or water, provisions shall be made to properly support or
distribute any concentrated load to avoid settlement and possible
failure of either main. Such provisions shall consist of concrete bedding
of the main, complete concrete encasement, or some other method
approved by the Director. In addition, water mains passing under
sewers shall be protected by providing:
(1) A vertical separation of at least 18 inches between the bottom of
the sewer and the top of the water main.
(2) Adequate structural support for the sewer to prevent excessive
deflection of joints and settlement of the sewer about the water
main, i.e., a concrete saddle under the pipe with a span length
extending to undisturbed earth bearing.
B. Thrust blocks.
(1) Thrust blocks shall be installed at all bends of 11 1/4° or greater,
dead ends, trees and hydrants. Thrust by the safe bearing load on
the soil. Thrust and safe bearing loads for soils are shown in Tables
1 and 2 below:
Table 1
Horizontal Thrust
(pounds)
Main Size
(inches)
Tee-Dead-
End 90° Bend 45° Bend
22 1/2°
Bend
6 4,250 6,000 3,250 1,660
8 7,540 10,670 5,770 2,940
12 16,970 23,990 12,980 6,620
16 30,160 42,650 23,090 11,770
§ 72-30 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-31
1:142
Table 1
Horizontal Thrust
(pounds)
Main Size
(inches)
Tee-Dead-
End 90° Bend 45° Bend
22 1/2°
Bend
20 47,120 66,650 36,070 18,390
24 67,860 98,000 51,940 26,480
36 152,680 215,920 116,860 59,580
Table 2
Safe Bearing Loads Against Horizontal Thrust
Type of Soil
Safe Bearing Load
(pounds per square foot)
Muck, peat, etc. 0
Soft clay 1,000
Sand 2,000
Sand and gravel cemented 3,000
Sand and gravel cemented with
clay
4,000
Hard compacted clay 5,000
(2) In muck or peat, all thrust shall be resisted by pile supports driven
to solid foundations or by removal of muck or peat and replacement
with ballast of sufficient stability to resist thrusts. In all cases,
thrust block size and method of thrusting must be approved by the
Director before placement.
C. Minimum cover. Minimum cover over mains shall be six feet zero inches
or six feet zero inches below the existing/proposed road pavement,
whichever is lower. When installed parallel to a ditch, mains shall have
cover of five feet six inches minimum, as measured from the center line
of the ditch.
D. Backfill. Backfill material may be native or Class II granular material, as
approved by the Director. Where water main is constructed in pavement
areas or where the main is within a one-on-one influence of pavement,
compaction testing shall be performed by an independent testing
laboratory. Testing shall be performed at intervals of one test per layer
per 75 feet of trench or as determined necessary by the Director.
E. Gate wells.
§ 72-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-31
1:143
(1) A minimum of six inches and a maximum of 15 inches height of
brick shall be placed on the cone section of all precast structures.
(2) All brick, block, mortar and concrete work shall be properly cured
and protected from freezing for a minimum of 48 hours. When the
temperature is 49° F. and falling, brick mortar and concrete shall
be heated to a minimum temperature of 60° F.
(3) The joint between precast riser sections and the base of the
structure shall be set in a full bed of mortar on both the inside and
the outside.
(4) All precast section lift holes shall be pointed and plugged, inside
and the outside, with mortar.
F. Hydrants.
(1) Hydrant leads shall have a minimum of 6.0 feet of cover in all areas,
including crossings through ditch sections.
(2) Lucas tee shall not be used.
(3) Hydrants shall be carefully plumbed, braced and backfilled so they
remain plumb.
(4) All grade, facing, and vertical alignment adjustment of hydrants
shall be completed prior to pressure testing and charging of the
hydrants.
(5) All hydrants shall be cleaned and painted with a rust inhibitive, oil
base paint such as "Rustoleum" or approved equal to the
Township's color code prior to acceptance.
(6) The lubricant reservoirs in all hydrants having such construction
shall be filled with a lubricant acceptable to the MDEQ and
recommended by hydrant manufacturer.
(7) Backfilling around fire hydrants shall be carefully tamped sand in
six-inch layers from the center line of the lead main to a height one
foot below finished grade.
(8) Immediately after installation and until the time of acceptance, a
burlap sack or equivalent material shall be placed over the hydrant
nozzles.
(9) Fire hydrant nozzles shall be aligned as required by the Fire
Marshal.
G. Acceptance tests.
(1) Conduct of and sequence for tests.
(a) All tests shall be conducted under the supervision of the
Director. All water mains, branches and valves shall be poly-
§ 72-31 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-31
1:144
pigged for cleaning, disinfected and pressure tested for
leakage. A copy of all test results shall be furnished to the
Director. The contractor shall furnish all material and labor to
provide for an acceptable full-size blowoff to flush the poly-pig
out of the main at the far end of the project not connected to
the existing system.
(b) The sequence for acceptance testing is as follows:
[1] Connect to system on one end.
[2] Flushing with poly-pig.
[3] Chlorination.
[4] Flushing.
[5] Bacteriological testing.
[6] Pressure testing.
[7] Connect to system at all other locations.
(2) Flushing.
(a) The first flush of the water main shall be done with the use of a
"poly-pig." The connection location and number of poly-pigs
required to flush a project will be determined by the Director
prior to the installation of the water main. The pig shall be a
B-1 poly-pig manufactured by Pipeline Pigging Products or
approved equal. The poly-pig shall be constructed of flexible
open-cell polyurethane foam with a polyurethane elastomer
coating on the rear. The installation and location of all polypigs
must be witnessed by the on-site construction observer.
All poly-pigs must be new and can be used once.
(b) Mains shall be flushed with clean potable water until the water
runs clear.
(3) Chlorination.
(a) All new mains and pipe or any existing mains contaminated by
the contractor shall be chlorinated to a minimum residual
chlorine concentration of 50 parts per million with commercial
liquid chlorine solution or approved equal.
(b) The chlorinated water shall be allowed to stand in the mains
for 24 hours. At the end of the twenty-four-hour period, the
chlorinated water at all parts of the mains shall show a free
available chlorine residual of not less than 25 parts per million.
If less than 25 parts per million residual is shown at the end of
the first twenty-four-hour period, additional chlorine shall be
added until a residual of not less than 25 parts per million at all
parts of the system is shown after a subsequent twenty-four-
§ 72-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-31
1:145
hour period. The chlorinated water shall then be removed
from the mains and the mains flushed with potable water for
bacteriological testing.
(4) Bacteriological testing.
(a) The contractor shall schedule bacteriological sample of the
water in the mains for analysis at two different times. The
bacteriological sampling will be performed by an independent
laboratory hired by the contractor. The first samples will be
taken 24 hours after the mains have been satisfactorily
chlorinated, flushed and filled with potable water. The second
sample will be taken after satisfactory pressure testing, if
pressure testing follows chlorination, or at a minimum 48
hours subsequent to taking the first samples.
(b) The contractor shall provide a sufficient number of corporation
stops and copper tubing for taking samplers. Samples shall not
be collected from hoses or fire hydrants.
(5) Pressure testing.
(a) Testing against valves will not be permitted except for the
valve at the one connection made for poly-pigging the water
main.
(b) Before applying the specified test pressure, all air shall be
expelled from the pipe. If hydrants are not available at high
points, the contractor shall make the necessary taps to release
the air and insert plugs after the test has been completed, or
install corporation stops, and leave them in place after testing.
(c) Preliminary pressure testing of the mains shall be done by the
contractor to ascertain if there are any breaks.
(d) Temporary connections (jumpers) between existing water
mains and the newly constructed system for testing purposes
shall include a reduced zone backflow preventer (Watts 900,
Febco 825Y, or approved equal) to prevent backflow and
possible contamination of the public water.
(e) The contractor shall pressure-test sections of water main as
sections of 2,000 feet or less unless otherwise authorized by
the Director.
(f) When permitted to test lengths in excess of 2,000 feet, only the
allowable leakage from 2,000 feet will be permitted.
(g) All ductile-iron and PVC C-900/C-905 water mains shall be
subject to a hydrostatic pressure of 150 psi based on the
elevation of the lowest point in the system. The main shall be
maintained under the test pressure for a minimum continuous
period of two hours by pumping potable water into the line at
§ 72-31 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-31
1:146
frequent intervals. The volume of water so added shall be
measured and considered to represent the leakage from the
main. No pipeline installed will be accepted until the leakage
measured over a one-hour period is less than 0.092 gallon per
inch diameter of the pipe per 1,000 feet. All visible leaks must
be corrected.
(h) In the event that the leakage exceeds the specified amount, the
main shall be carefully inspected for leaks and repaired as
necessary. Any cracked or defective pipe, fittings, valves or
hydrants discovered shall be removed and replaced with sound
material and the test repeated to the satisfaction of the
engineer.
(i) All HDPE water main shall be pressure tested after the line and
all fittings and valves have been installed and before being put
into service. Mechanical joint or flange joint connections may
be left exposed for visual leak inspection. Pressure testing shall
be conducted in accordance with this specification, the
standard specification/detail drawings, and the manufacturer's
recommended procedure.
(6) Documents required prior to final acceptance. Prior to the
acceptance of a water system by the Township, the following
documents shall be submitted:
(a) Bill of sale conveying the water system and all appurtenances
to the Township.
(b) Construction record drawings in accordance with Article XII of
these standards.
(c) Maintenance bond in the amount of 25% of the cost of
construction extending for a term of one year after conveyance
to and acceptance of the water system by the Township.
(d) A final waiver of lien from the contractor(s) and
subcontractor(s) who constructed the water system and the
suppliers of materials used in the construction of the water
system and a sworn statement from the proprietor of the
development that all financial obligations of every nature in
connection with the water system and its appurtenances have
been paid, and that there are no outstanding bills, liens,
judgments, etc., against the water system.
(e) Water main easements (if required). Easements shall be
submitted on the current Northville Township easement form
with exhibits prepared on sheets 8 1/2 inches by 14 inches. The
exhibits shall include a drawing of the location of the main
relative to the property boundary and a written legal
description.
§ 72-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-31
1:147

ARTICLE VIII
Design and Construction Standards for Sanitary Sewer Systems
§ 72-32. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BRANCH SEWER — A sewer which receives sewage from a relatively small
area, through two or more laterals, and discharges to a main sewer.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest piping of the wastewater
drainage system of a building which receives the sanitary sewage from
soil pipes, waste pipes, and other drainage pipes inside the perimeter
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, which begins
approximately five feet outside the building wall.
BUILDING LEAD — That portion of the building sewer extending from the
public sewer main to the right-of-way line or easement.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain, at a point
adjacent to the building foundation, to the building lead.
LATERAL SEWER — A sewer which discharges into a branch or other sewer
and has only building sewers tributary to it.
MAIN SEWER OR TRUNK SEWER — A sewer which receives sewage from
a relatively large area, through one or more branches.
PUBLIC SEWERS — All sanitary sewers which are designed to provide
service to more than one parcel of land or more than one building shall be
dedicated to Northville Township and shall be a public sewer.
§ 72-33. Design considerations.
A. Location of sanitary sewers.
(1) In streets. Sanitary sewers shall generally be located on opposite
sides of streets from water mains, on the south side or the west side
of a street.
(2) In easements. Easements for sanitary sewers shall have a minimum
width of 20 feet centered upon the sewer. Such easements shall be
granted to the Township with restrictions against use or occupation
of building structures and by other utilities in any manner which
would restrict sewer maintenance or repair operations.
(a) Easements for possible extensions of the sanitary sewer shall
be provided to the property lines or subdivision boundary line,
at locations designated by the Wayne County Department of
Public Services and/or by the Director.
(b) Sewers shall preferably be constructed outside of paved
parking areas, streets and drives.
§ 72-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-33
1:149
B. Sewer capacity.
(1) Tributary area. Sanitary sewers shall be designed to serve all
naturally tributary areas at full development. Topography, the
master sanitary sewer plan, current zoning, and the Township's
master land use plans shall be considered when determining the
required capacity.
(2) Populations. For design purposes, population shall be based on a
minimum of 3.2 persons per detached single-family home and 2.5
persons for each multiple-family dwelling unit. Submissions for
review shall include a tabulation of occupancy (usage) types and
the conversion of these into terms of equivalent single-family units.
The unit factors as established by the Township shall be used to
convert the different usage types to equivalent single-family units.
(3) Sewage quantities for pipe design.
(a) For service areas with design populations of 500 or less, sewer
design capacity shall be 400 gallons per capita per day, as
specified under the Ten State Standards of GLUMRB.
(b) For service areas with design populations greater than 500 but
less than 28,400, sewer design capacity shall be based on the
following formula:
Where:
Q = Design capacity in gallons per capita per day.
P = Design population expressed in thousands.
(c) For service areas with design populations exceeding 28,400,
sewer design capacity shall be 250 gallons per capita per day.
C. Minimum pipe size. Minimum pipe size for sanitary sewers shall be
eight inches diameter.
D. Hydraulics.
(1) Calculations. Kutter's or Manning's formula, with n = 0.013 for
concrete or n = 0.009 for PVC, shall be used.
(2) Minimum and maximum velocities. Minimum design velocity shall
be two feet per second. The maximum design velocity shall be 10
feet per second with pipe flowing full. The minimum slope of the
sewer between the last two manholes at the upper end of any
lateral shall be 1.0%. Whenever additional slopes are available,
minimum grades of 1% shall be utilized on lateral sewer lines.
(3) Allowable pipe slopes.
§ 72-33 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-33
1:150
Pipe Diameter
(inches)
Minimum Slope
(feet per 100 feet)
Maximum Slope
(feet per 100 feet)
6 1.000 10.00
8 0.400 10.00
10 0.280 7.00
12 0.220 5.30
15 0.150 3.90
18 0.120 2.90
21 0.100 2.32
24 0.080 1.92
27 0.067 1.64
30 0.058 1.44
36 0.046 1.12
(4) Allowances for changes in pipe direction. Maximum flow velocity
for full pipe flow shall be maintained by a 0.10-foot difference in
invert elevations between the inlet and outlet pipes whenever the
direction change exceeds 30°.
(5) Allowance for pipe size changes. At manholes where a change in
the pipe size occurs, the grades for the pipe shall be established by
matching 0.8 of the diameters of each pipe above inverts.
(6) Depth of sewers.
(a) Minimum depth. Unless specifically otherwise approved by the
Director, no sanitary sewer shall have less than four feet of
cover over the top of the pipe. In general, sanitary sewers shall
have a minimum of 10 feet of cover below finished road surface
grade. The minimum depth of force mains shall be six feet (to
top of pipe).
(b) Depth below building grade. Unless otherwise approved by the
Director, the top of any sanitary sewer shall be at least 10 feet
below finished building grade elevation of each fronting
property which the sewer is designed to serve.
E. Pipe material for sewer shall be polyvinyl chloride (PVC), reinforced
concrete or ductile iron as specified below.
(1) PVC pipe.
(a) PVC pipe eight inches through 15 inches in diameter shall
meet or exceed all of the requirements of the current ASTM
D-3034 for heavy wall SDR-26 polyvinyl chloride sewer pipe
and fittings. PVC pipe of 18 inches in diameter shall meet or
§ 72-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-33
1:151
exceed all requirements of the current ASTM F-679 for heavy
wall SDR-26 polyvinyl chloride sewer pipe and fittings.
(b) PVC pipe shall be jointed with ring gasketed bell ends. Jointing
materials shall be applied to the bell end of the pipe at the
point of manufacture in such a manner that a tight uniform
joint will be achieved and such that when the joint is made up
in the field, the joint material will not roll or tear from the pipe.
A proper joint lubricant shall be furnished by the pipe
manufacturer.
(c) PVC corrugated pipe with a smooth interior eight inches
through 10 inches shall meet or exceed all of the requirements
of the current ASTM F-949 for heavy wall A-2026 polyvinyl
chloride sewer pipe and fittings.
(2) Reinforced concrete sewer pipe.
(a) Reinforced concrete sewer pipe shall conform to the
requirements of ASTM C76, Class IV.
(b) Joints shall conform to the requirements of ASTM C443, "Joints
for Circular Concrete Sewer and Culvert Pipe, Using Rubber
Gaskets," with the exception that gasket material shall be
synthetic rubber only. Joints in concrete pipe having a diameter
of 30 inches or larger shall be pointed on the inside with
mortar, after backfilling has been completed. A proper
lubricant shall be supplied by the manufacturer.
(c) Concrete pipe can be used for sewer 15 inches in diameter and
greater.
(3) Ductile-iron pipe.
(a) Ductile-iron pipe shall be Pressure Class 250 with double
cement lining and shall meet current requirements of ANSI
A21.50, with cement lining. Ductile iron pipe and fittings shall
also be poly-wrap encased per the requirements noted in
Article VII (water system) of this chapter.
(b) The Township requires an interior pipe coating when ductileiron
pipe is used (Protecto 401 or approved equal) as
recommended by the manufacturer to defer potentially
corrosive action from the sewage. Because the depth of the
sewer will be significant when ductile-iron pipe is used, this
requirement is mandatory.
(c) Mechanical type joints, when specified, shall conform to the
current ANSI A21.11, "Rubber Gasket Joints and Cast Iron
Pressure Pipe and Pipe and Fittings." Bolts and nuts shall be
Cor-Blue T-Bolts with a ceramic-filled, baked-on fluorocarbon
resin.
§ 72-33 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-33
1:152
(d) Push-on type joints, when specified, shall conform to the
current ANSI A21.11 and shall be "Tyton," "Super Bell-Tite," or
approved equal.
(4) Force mains (sanitary sewer pressure pipe). All open cut force
mains shall conform to the ductile-iron pipe requirements for
gravity sewers. Pressure testing of force mains shall follow the
pressure test requirements for water mains of similar material.
Tracer wire shall be installed along all force mains. Tracer wire
shall meet the material requirements of tracer wire for water main
and be green in color.
(5) Directional drill materials for force mains and gravity sewers.
(a) HDPE (for directional drill applications only).
[1] Sanitary sewer pipe and fittings shall be high-density
polyethylene plastic pipe, DR11, IPS, manufactured in
accordance with the specifications and requirements of
AWWA C906.
[2] Materials used for the manufacturing of polyethylene pipe
and fittings shall be extra-high molecular weight, highdensity
PE 4710 polyethylene resin meeting the ASTM
D3350 minimum cell classification of PE 345464C. The cell
classification properties of the material shall be certified
by the supplier.
[3] Polyethylene material shall have a minimum hydrostatic
design basis (HDB) of 1,600 psi at 73.4° F. when tested in
accordance with ASTM D2837.
[4] HDPE fittings shall be in accordance with ASTM D3261
(butt fused) and shall be manufactured by injection
molding, a combination of extrusion and machining, or
fabrication from HDPE pipe conforming to this
specification and by the manufacturer of the pipe. The
fittings shall be fully pressure rated and provide a working
pressure equal to that of the pipe with an included 2:1
safety factor. The fittings shall be manufactured from the
same base resin type and cell classification as the pipe
itself. The fittings shall be homogeneous throughout and
free from cracks, holes, foreign inclusions, voids, or other
injurious defects.
[5] The HDPE pipe shall contain no recycled compound except
that generated in the manufacturer's own plant. The
physical appearance of the pipe having deformities such as
concentrated ridges, discoloration, excessive spot
roughness, pitting, varying wall thickness, etc., shall
constitute sufficient basis for rejection. The HDPE pipe
shall be homogenous throughout, free from visible cracks,
§ 72-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-33
1:153
foreign inclusions and other defects that may affect the
wall integrity.
[6] A certificate of "compliance with specification" shall be
furnished for all materials to be supplied.
(b) PVC, C900 or C905.
[1] Fusible PVC plastic material for pipe shall conform to
AWWA C900 or C905, DR-18 (C900) OR DR25 (C905), IPS,
ASTM D2241. Compound formulation shall be in
accordance with PPI TR-2/2006.
[2] Pipe shall be manufactured with 100% virgin resin. Pipe
shall also have 0% recycled plastics content and shall not
consist of any rework compound, even that obtained from
the manufacturer's own production using the same
formulation.
[3] Fusible PVC pipe shall be extruded with plain ends. The
ends shall be square to the pipe and free of any bevel or
chamfer. There shall be no bell or gasket of any kind
incorporated into the pipe.
[4] Fusible PVC pipe shall be manufactured in forty-foot
nominal lengths.
[5] Fusible PVC pipe shall be green in color.
[6] Pipe shall be marked per AWWA C900 or AWWA C905 as
specified on the plans and shall include, as a minimum:
[a] Nominal size.
[b] PVC.
[c] Dimension Ratio, Standard Dimension Ratio or
Schedule - DR-18 (C900) OR DR-25 (C905), IPS.
[d] AWWA pressure class or rating - Pressure Class 150.
[e] AWWA standard designation number.
[f] Extrusion production-record code.
[g] Trademark or trade name.
[h] Cell Classification 12454 and/or PVC material code
1120 may also be included.
(6) Pipe markings. All sanitary sewer pipe shall have the class and date
of manufacture marked on each length by the manufacturer. In
addition, the lot number shall similarly be marked on all reinforced
concrete pipe.
§ 72-33 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-33
1:154
(7) Pipe fittings.
(a) Fittings shall be of the same material as the pipe, and in no
case shall the walls be thinner than that of the pipe furnished.
(b) Wye and tee fittings for PVC pipe shall be reviewed by the
Director before purchasing.
(c) The dry fit of all fittings must be snug. If the fit is such that it is
loose, the pipe or fittings will be rejected as faulty and of
improper size.
F. Building leads.
(1) Inclusion with sewer construction. Unless otherwise approved by
the Director, construction of building leads from the public sewer
to a point five feet inside the property line or five feet outside the
sewer easement for each fronting parcel which the sewer is
designed to serve shall be included with the construction of each
sanitary sewer.
(2) Where the construction of building leads to the property line is not
required, a wye branch with riser is required. Said wye and riser
shall be provided with a watertight stopper or plug with type of
joint used for the sewer pipe and shall be installed for every lot or
building site which the sewer is designed to serve. Solvent weld
caps are not permitted for ABS and PVC service leads.
(3) Size and length. Minimum size for building sewer and building lead
shall be six inches nominal internal diameter. Generally the
maximum length of building sewer and building lead shall be 100
feet as measured from the main sewer to the building. Cleanouts
shall be installed at maximum intervals of 75 feet.
(4) Minimum slope. Minimum slope for building leads shall be 1/8 inch
per foot (1.00%).
(5) Allowable types of pipe and pipe joints.
(a) Six inches nominal diameter pipe. Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
solid wall pipe shall conform to the requirements of ASTM for
such pipe and shall be not less than Heavy Wall SDR 23.5.
(b) Larger size pipe. Larger size building leads shall be
constructed of materials permitted in these standards for
sanitary sewers.
(c) Joints for wyes, tees and stoppers. Joint for wyes and stoppers
shall be of the same type as the joint used for the sanitary
sewer pipe, except as otherwise noted.
G. Manholes.
§ 72-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-33
1:155
(1) Manhole locations. Manholes shall be constructed at every change
in sewer grade, alignment and pipe size and at the end of each
sewer line. Maximum distance between manholes shall be 400 feet.
(2) Drop manholes. Whenever an inlet sewer pipe enters a manhole at
an invert elevation 24 inches or more above the invert elevation of
the outlet sewer pipe, a drop manhole shall be constructed. Drops
between six inches and 24 inches will not be permitted.
(3) Stubs. Stubs or blind drop connections with watertight plugs shall
be provided where future connections to a manhole are
anticipated.
(4) Materials. Manholes shall be constructed of precast reinforced
concrete sections conforming to ASTM C478. Joints between
precast sections shall be modified tongue-and-groove type using Oring
synthetic rubber gaskets.
(a) All manholes shall contain a bottom precast section of flexible
joints and shall consist of a base integrally cast with a riser
section. The base shall be a minimum of eight inches thick and
contain reinforcement in the riser section.
(b) Manholes with precast flow channels are not permitted.
Concrete channels must be poured from the upstream invert(s)
to the downstream invert with a smooth, consistent grade.
(c) The joint between the pipe and a section of a precast flexible
joint manhole shall be a mechanically compressed joint, such
as the Res-Seal, Link-Seal, Press Wedge II, or Kor-N-Seal, Press
Wedge II, or Kor-N-Seal flexible rubber manhole joint. The joint
shall be capable of meeting infiltration requirements and shall
permit a deflection of at least six degrees in all directions as
measured from the center line of the pipe. Resilient
connections between manhole and pipe shall conform to ASTM
C443 and ASTM C923, except that only synthetic rubber
gaskets shall be permitted. Natural rubber will not be
acceptable.
(d) Manholes and grade rings shall conform to the current ASTM
specifications for precast reinforced concrete manhole
sections, serial designation C478. Manhole section joints shall
be of the O-ring type. Dome sections shall be straight side type.
(e) Cone section shall be eccentrically constructed precast
reinforced concrete.
(f) Mortar for plastering manholes shall be made of one part
portland cement and two parts fine aggregate.
(g) A galvanized capped test pipe of 1/2 inch in diameter shall be
installed through the manhole wall and extend two inches into
§ 72-33 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-33
1:156
the manhole at an elevation equal to the top of the lowest
sewer pipe.
(h) Manhole frames and covers shall weigh not less than 350
pounds. Each frame and cover shall have machined bearing
surfaces and shall have machined bearing surfaces and shall
be suitably notched for convenient removal of the cover. Each
cover shall be marked "NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP SANITARY
SEWER" in raised letters spaced in from the periphery of the
cover.
(i) All manhole frames and covers shall be coated by the
manufacturer with coal tar pitch varnish or other asphaltum
coating reviewed by the Director.
(j) Covers and frames shall be watertight boltdown rubber gasket
type manhole cover, equal to East Jordan 1040-PT.
(k) Manhole steps shall be reinforced polypropylene plastic
coated. They shall be M.A. Industries, Inc. PS-I-PF.
(5) Manhole connections.
(a) Sewer pipe to manhole connections shall be through:
[1] A flexible rubber boot which shall be securely clamped into
a core-drilled pipe port. Pipe ports shall be securely
clamped into a core drilled at the point of manhole
manufacturer and shall be accurately located within 1/2
inch of proposed sewer center line; or
[2] A self-adjusting mechanical pipe to manhole seal which
provides a resilient flexible and infiltration-proof joint
(Res-Seal); or
[3] A flexible rubber wedge firmly rammed into a rubber
gasket which is cast into the manhole (Press Wedge II) or
equal.
(b) Neoprene rubber for the manhole boot shall meet ASTM
Specifications C443 and shall have a minimum thickness of 3/8
inch. Pipe clamp bands shall be of corrosion-resistant steel.
(c) The void between the flexible boot to the sewer pipe shall be
filled with Greatstuff Pro expandable foam as manufactured by
Dow Chemical, or approved equal.
H. Special structures and appurtenances.
(1) General requirements. Where special appurtenances or structures
are required in the sanitary sewer system, preliminary plans shall
be submitted for review and comment.
§ 72-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-33
1:157
§ 72-34. Plan requirements.
All construction plans shall be submitted to the Township for sanitary sewer
approval and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
(2) Inverted siphons. Inverted siphon design shall provide at least two
independent parallel pipes, with minimum diameter of six inches
each, sized to provide a minimum velocity of three feet per second
for the average flow condition.
(3) Pumping stations. Sewage pumping stations shall be wet well
mounted, duplex as manufactured by Smith & Loveless, Inc. or
approved equal. Pumping station design shall conform to the
requirements of the Director or his designee.
A. Certification. The plans and specification shall be prepared under the
supervision of a civil engineer registered in the State of Michigan. The
title sheet of the plans shall contain the signature and seal of that
engineer.
B. Plan contents. Plans shall consist of a title sheet showing a plan view of
the complete job, split plan and profile sheets, and standard detail
sheets. Sheet sizes shall be 24 inches by 36 inches.
(1) Title sheet. A title sheet, or the first sheet of a set of plans, shall
identify:
(a) Project title.
(b) Location map with North arrow and scale, drawn at a scale not
greater than one inch equals 100 feet nor smaller than one
inch equals 2,000 feet. Locations of proposed sewers and
relationship of general project area to the surrounding area
shall be shown.
(c) Overall layout of the sewer system with manhole numbers.
(d) Sheet index.
(e) Symbol legend.
(f) List of quantities.
(g) Name, address, phone number and e-mail of proprietor.
(h) Name, address, phone number and e-mail of designer.
(i) Plan completion date and all revision dates.
(j) A statement that the work shall conform to the Township's
current standards and specifications.
(k) Provide calculations to identify the average day and peak hour
sewage flow.
§ 72-33 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-34
1:158
(2) Plan and profile sheets.
(a) Scale of plan portion of sheet shall be one inch equals 50 feet,
or larger, with scale of profile portion of sheet one foot equals
five feet vertical or proportionally larger.
(b) Plan portion of sheet shall include, at least:
[1] Two bench marks shall be shown on each plan sheet. Plans
shall be prepared based on the Michigan South State
Plane Coordinates, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD
1983) for the x and y coordinate system, and based on the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) for the
z coordinate system.
[2] Existing topography extending 50 feet past the site
boundaries, including all existing and proposed
improvements. Elevation contours shall be at a minimum
of two-foot intervals.
[3] Street names, street and easement width, subdivision
names, lot numbers and lot dimensions.
[4] Location, length, size of each section of proposed sewer
between manholes.
[5] Locations of all manholes and other sewer appurtenances
and special structures.
[6] All proposed building leads and wyes. Length, size, end of
lead invert elevations, and length of riser shall be shown.
[7] Dimensions to manholes and sewers from property lines,
right-of-way lines or buildings.
[8] "Miss Dig" note.
[9] Limits of special backfill requirements.
(c) Profile portion of sheet shall appear below the corresponding
plan portion, generally projected vertically, and shall show, at
least, the following:
[1] Size, slope, length, type and class of pipe.
[2] Invert of each pipe and top-of-casting elevations at each
manhole.
[3] Limits of special backfill requirements.
[4] Profiled elevations over center line of proposed sewer of
existing and proposed ground, and pavement surfaces.
The existing profile shall be obtained from actual field
survey data.
§ 72-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-34
1:159
§ 72-35. Construction standards.
All sanitary sewers proposed within the Township shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards and specifications contained herein or, when
by reference, the code.
[5] All crossings with other utilities (existing or proposed)
with elevations of the top or bottom of the pipe, as
appropriate, and shall have "Warning" notes for all gas
main crossings in profile.
[6] Location, by station, or coordinate, of every proposed
manhole with manhole number, top-of-casting elevation,
and manhole type.
[7] Location by station, or coordinate, of all building sewers,
and wye branches.
(3) Detail sheets. Provide Township standard detail sheets consisting
of specifications and drawings. Wayne County details shall also be
provided, where applicable.
A. Wyes, riser and building leads.
(1) All wye branches in the sewer pipe shall have manufactured joints.
All pipes containing wye branches shall be installed with the main
sewer. Wyes for vacant property shall be installed opposite the
center of the frontage unless otherwise indicated. The final location
of the wye shall be determined by the Director or his designee at
the time of construction. All wyes that are installed with building
leads shall end with an approved stopper.
(2) The ends of leads shall terminate with an approved stopper set five
feet inside the property line or five feet outside the easement line.
The ends shall be marked with a hardwood stake two inches by two
inches placed vertically from the pipe invert to the ground service.
B. Connections.
(1) A channel shall be constructed within the existing manhole or other
structure, at which the connection is to be made to direct the flow
to the existing outlet. Any portion of the existing structure which
would interfere with such construction shall be removed.
(2) When connections are made with sewers in service, no part of the
work shall be built under water. A flume or dam must be installed
and pumping maintained until completed. All the new work shall be
kept dry until completed. All the new work shall be kept dry until
completed and until all concrete or mortar has sufficiently cured.
(3) The contractor shall install a watertight bulkhead to prevent water,
sand, silt, etc., from entering the existing sewer system. The
§ 72-34 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-35
1:160
bulkhead shall be left in place until the sewer has been tested and
approved by the Director and other entities having jurisdiction.
(4) Wherever existing manhole structures are to be tapped, holes shall
be drilled at four inches center to center around the periphery of
any proposed pipe opening to create a plane of weakness before
breaking out the section. The pipe (stub or saddle) to be placed
between the pipe and the inside wall of the manhole filled cement
mortar and trawled smooth. Voids outside the pipe barrel shall be
sealed with an approved nonshrinking grout. A concrete collar shall
then be poured 12 inches thick around the pipe, and extended a
minimum 12 inches beyond the outside wall of the manhole. The
concrete collar shall bear on undisturbed earth of fully compacted
backfill.
(5) Whenever a pipe is to be tapped, a saddle-type wye connection
shall be used. The opening in the existing pipe wall shall be cut
with a masonry circular saw. A concrete collar four inches thick
shall then be poured around the existing pipe extending 12 inches
on either side of the connection.
C. Manholes. Construction methods shall conform to the requirements of
these specifications and Section 5.14.03 of MDOT 1984 Standard
Specifications for Construction with the following stipulations and
exceptions:
(1) Pipe shall not extend into a manhole beyond the inside face of the
manhole wall.
(2) Concrete placed inside precast flexible joint manholes to form the
channel through the manhole shall not be placed between the pipe
and the opening in the manhole base section so as to interfere in
any way with the flexibility of the joint.
(3) A minimum of three inches and a maximum of 15 inches of
adjustment rings with gaskets shall be placed on the cone section
of all manholes.
(4) Manhole assembly shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendation. The bell and spigot surfaces shall be wiped clean.
The surfaces shall be wiped clean. The surfaces (bell, spigot,
synthetic rubber O-ring gasket) shall then be coated with a
lubricating material.
(5) All lift holes and joints within precast manholes shall be plugged
and mortared.
(6) All manholes shall be supported on a firm stable foundation.
(7) Channels shall be constructed by a single concrete pour. Concrete
shall be MDOT 30M or 30P. No brick or block will be allowed as
filler.
§ 72-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-35
1:161
D. Casting adjustments.
(1) Adjustments to manhole castings shall be accomplished prior to
final acceptance by using precast concrete adjustment rings bolted
to the connection of the manhole with synthetic rubber O-ring
gaskets compressed between each adjacent ring.
(2) Manhole castings located within pavement areas shall be adjusted
a maximum of 15 inches using four cadmium-coated five-eighthsinch-
diameter threaded studs with adjustment support nuts for
setting frame to correct grade as detailed on the plan. The void
between casting and top of cone section shall be completely filled
with stiff MDOT 30m or 30P concrete mix having less than three
inches slump. A Cadilloc brand rubber wrap for watertightness
shall be applied to the exterior of the adjustment after the concrete
has taken its initial set, and is resistant to damage, unless
otherwise specified by the Director.
E. Acceptance tests. All tests shall be conducted under the supervision of
the Director. No acceptance tests, excluding compaction testing, shall
be conducted until the entire sewer system is constructed and has been
installed for not less than 30 days. All PVC lines shall be tested for
deflection. Sewer pipe 24 inches and smaller shall be air tested. Sewer
pipe larger than 24 inches shall be tested by either infiltration or
exfiltration and shall be tested in lengths of 1,600 feet or less. A copy of
all test results shall be furnished to the Director.
(1) Compaction test.
(a) Where sanitary sewer is constructed in pavement areas, or
where the sewer is within a one-on-one influence of pavement,
compaction testing shall be performed by an independent
testing laboratory.
(b) Testing shall be performed at intervals of one test per layer per
75 feet of trench or as determined necessary by the Director.
(2) Test for leakage; air test.
(a) After a manhole-to-manhole section of line has been backfilled
and cleaned, it shall be plugged at each manhole with
pneumatic plugs. The design of the pneumatic plugs shall be
such that they will hold against the line test pressure without
requiring external blocking or bracing.
(b) There shall be three hose connections to the pneumatic plug.
The second hose shall be used for continuously reading the air
pressure rise in the sealed line. The third hose shall be used
only for introducing low-pressure air into the sealed line.
(c) There shall be a 0-30 psig gauge for reading the internal
pressure of the line being tested. Calibrations from the 1-10
§ 72-35 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-35
1:162
psig range shall be in tenths of pounds (not ounces), and this
0-10 portion shall cover 90% of the complete dial range.
(d) Low-pressure air shall be introduced into the sealed line until
the internal air pressure reaches 4.0 psig greater than the
average back pressure of any groundwater pressure that may
be over the pipe. At least the stabilization period the third hose
shall be disconnected.
(e) The portion of line being tested shall be accepted if the portion
under test meets the following conditions:
[1] DI and RCP pipes.
[a] The time requirement for the pressure to decrease
from 3.5 psig to 2.5 psig (greater than the average
back pressure of any groundwater that may be over
the pipe) shall not be less than the time given in the
following table:
Pipe Size
(inches)
Minutes Holding Time
(seconds/100 feet of pipe)
4 18
6 42
8 72
10 90
12 108
15 126
18 144
21 180
24 216
[b] Immediately prior to the performance of the line
acceptance test, the groundwater level shall be
determined by removing the pipe cap, blowing air
through the pipe nipple into the ground so as to clear
it, and then connecting a clear plastic tube to the pipe
nipple. The hose shall be held vertically and a
measurement of the height in feet of water shall be
taken after the water stops rising in this plastic tube.
The height in feet shall be divided by 2.3 to establish
the pounds of pressure that will be added to all
readings. For example, if the height of water is 11 1/2
feet, then the added pressure will be five psig. This
makes the 3.5 psig to be 8.5 psig and the 2.5 psig to be
7.5 psig. The one-pound allowable drop and the timing
remains the same.
§ 72-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-35
1:163
[2] PVC pipe.
[a] The time requirement for the pressure to decrease
from 3.5 psig to 3.0 psig (greater than the average
back pressure of any groundwater that may be over
the pipe) shall be calculated as shown in the following
table, where "L" equals the length of sewer to be
tested in feet; however, in no instance shall the
holding time be less than the minimum values shown
in the following table:
Pipe Size
(inches)
Holding Time
(seconds)
Minimum
Holding
(seconds)
4 0.190XL 113
6 0.427XL 170
8 0.760XL 227
10 1.187XL 283
12 1.709XL 340
15 2.671XL 425
18 3.846XL 512
[b] If any section of the sewer fails to meet this
requirement, the contractor shall perform a television
inspection of the faulty section and repair or replace
all defective materials and/or workmanship to the
satisfaction of Director. The test procedure shall be
repeated until the results are acceptable.
(3) Television inspection.
(a) All sanitary sewers shall be television inspected with test
results approved by the Director prior to placing the sewer into
service.
(b) All courses not true to line or grade shall be dug up, relayed
and re-televised. Television inspection for all sanitary sewers
eight inches in diameter and above shall be provided by the
contractor.
(4) Deflection testing for PVC pipe.
(a) All completed installation shall at no point have out-of-round
pipe deflections greater than 5%. The Director shall have the
option of requiring deflectometer or go-no gauging tests run
prior to acceptance on pipe lines where high deflections are
suspected. Pipe with deflections greater than 5% will be
considered unacceptable and shall be relayed by the
contractor.
§ 72-35 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-35
1:164
(b) Deflection of PVC pipe shall be tested by pulling a wooden pig
or equivalent through the pipe. The pig shall be constructed in
accordance with the following table of maximum outside
diameters and shall be submitted to the Director for review
before testing in initiated.
Pipe I.D.
(inches)
Pig O.D.
(inches)
6 5.45
8 7.28
10 9.08
12 10.78
15 13.20
18 16.12
(c) The pig shall be drawn through the pipe from manhole to
manhole. Any portion of pipe through which the pig passes
freely shall be deemed to have passed the deflection test.
Sections of pipe through which the pig does not pass shall be
located, uncovered and the pipe zone bedding improved and
backfilled by the contractor. The pipe shall be retested before
acceptance is granted.
(d) In the event the line does not pass the infiltration test as stated
above, the test shall be repeated after suitable repairs have
been completed.
F. Documents required prior to final acceptance. Prior to the acceptance
of a sanitary sewer by the Township, the following documents shall be
submitted:
(1) Bill of sale conveying the sanitary sewer and all appurtenances to
the Township.
(2) Construction record drawings in accordance with Article XII of
these standards.
(3) Maintenance bond in the amount of 25% of the cost of construction
extending for a term of one year after conveyance to and
acceptance of the sanitary sewer by the Township.
(4) A final waiver of lien from the contractor(s) and subcontractor(s)
who constructed the sanitary sewer, and the suppliers of materials
used in the construction of the sanitary sewers, and a sworn
statement from the proprietor of the development that all financial
obligations of every nature in connection with the sanitary sewer
and its appurtenances have been paid and that there are no
outstanding bills, liens, judgments, etc., against the sewer system.
§ 72-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-35
1:165
(5) Sanitary sewer easements (if required). Easements shall be
submitted on the current Northville Township easement form with
exhibits prepared on 8 1/2 inches by 14 inches sheets. The exhibits
shall include a drawing of the location of the sewer relative to the
property boundary and a written legal description.
§ 72-35 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-35
1:166
ARTICLE IX
Design and Construction Standards for Storm Sewers
§ 72-36. Storm sewer piping.
A. Location.
(1) Within street right-of-way. The sewer shall generally be located on
the same side of the road as the sanitary sewer.
(2) Within easements. Sewer easements shall generally be centered on
the sewer and have a minimum width of 20 feet. Permanent
structures which will restrict the maintenance of the sewer shall
not be located within the easement area. Sewers to be located
within easements which are established at the time land is platted
shall be located and sized in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 152, Subdivision Control, and/or the Plat Act. Easements
for possible extensions shall be provided as required by the
Director.
(3) General. Sewer shall be constructed no closer than 10 feet to any
building structure.
B. Size. The minimum pipe diameter size for all storm sewers shall be 12
inches.
C. Sewer capacity.
(1) Tributary drainage areas. The sewers shall be designed to
accommodate off-site tributary drainage. The upstream topography
with existing and proposed developments and conformance with
the Master Utility Plan shall be considered.
(2) Hydrologic consideration.
(a) The sewers shall be designed for a ten-year storm by means of
the rational method formula: Q = CIA, where "Q" is the peak
rate of runoff in cubic feet per second, "A" is the area in acres,
"C" is the runoff coefficient for the drainage area and "I" is the
average rainfall intensity in inches per hour for a given time of
concentration. The rainfall intensity and runoff coefficients
shall be determined in accordance with the Wayne County
Storm Water Management Program.
(3) Hydraulics.
(a) Allowable pipe/slopes (n = 0.013). Generally, all catch basin
and inlet leads shall be laid on a slope not less than 1%.
§ 72-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-36
1:167
Pipe Diameter
(inches)
Minimum Slope
(feet per 100
feet)
Maximum Slope
(feet per 100 feet)
12 0.32 3.9
15 0.24 2.8
18 0.18 2.1
21 0.14 1.7
24 0.12 1.4
27 0.10 1.2
30 0.09 1.05
36 0.067 0.80
42 0.054 0.65
48 0.045 054
54 0.038 0.46
60 0.034 0.40
(b) Design velocities. Minimum design velocity shall be 2 1/2 feet
per second with pipe flowing full. Maximum design velocity
shall be eight feet per second.
(c) Calculations. Manning's formulas shall be used for hydraulic
calculations.
[1] Allowances for changes in pipe size. The hydraulic
gradient shall generally be maintained by matching the
0.80 diameter depth above invert for pipe size increases.
[2] Allowance for direction changes. A drop of 0.10 foot shall
be provided in the downstream sewer invert for direction
changes in excess of 30° to compensate for the hydraulic
head losses.
(d) Hydraulic grade line. The hydraulic grade line must be
calculated based on ten-year storm flows, starting with the
crown elevation at the outlet. The hydraulic grade lines of
closed conduits must meet both of the following requirements:
[1] The hydraulic grade line must not be higher than 2.5 feet
below the rim elevation at any upstream manhole location.
However, exceptions may be granted in special
circumstances such as for managing stormwater in and
around truck docks.
[2] The rim elevation at any manhole location along the closed
conduit upstream of a detention system must be at least
§ 72-36 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-36
1:168
§ 72-37. Future connections.
A stub with a watertight bulkhead of brick and mortar shall be provided at
all manholes and catch basins where future connections are anticipated.
§ 72-38. Minimum depth of sewers.
A minimum cover of three feet shall be provided for all storm sewer pipe,
unless otherwise approved by the Director.
§ 72-39. Plunge pools.
Whenever differences in manhole pipe invert elevations exceed two feet, a
plunge pool (sump) two feet in depth shall be provided to prevent channel
erosion.
§ 72-40. Manhole locations.
Manholes shall be provided at every change of pipe size, change in grade,
change in direction, or at all junction points. The maximum distance
between manholes, catch basin, and inlets may not exceed 300 feet plus 100
additional feet for every 12 inches of diameter for closed conduits over 36
inches in diameter.
§ 72-41. Catch basin and inlet locations.
The following design criteria shall be used when establishing catch basin
and inlet locations:
§ 72-42. Ditches.
one foot above the design water level of the detention
system.
A. Low points in gutters and in swales and ditches, where applicable.
B. Upstream curb return, if more than 200 feet downstream of high point
in gutter or of intercepting structure.
C. Inlets shall only be allowed in pavement areas, and, then only as a highend
structure and when followed by a catch basin within 50 feet of inlet.
D. Generally, the flows to be accommodated shall not exceed the intake
capacity of the cover. Catch basin cover capacities shall be determined
by assuming a value of 0.011 cfs per square inch of opening.
E. Catch basin and inlet leads may be tapped directly into storm sewer
pipes larger than 42 inches.
F. Catch basins shall be located within 50 feet of all ditch inflow devices.
A. Maximum side slope: 25% (one on four).
§ 72-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-42
1:169
§ 72-43. Open drains.
§ 72-44. Materials.
B. Minimum center-line slope: 1.00%.
C. Maximum center-line slope:
(1) Seeded ditch: 3.00%.
(2) Sodded ditch: 5.00%.
D. All ditch center-line slopes exceeding 5.00% shall be paved to the
hydraulic grade line for a ten-year storm.
A. Open drains will be permitted only upon special approval from the
Director, in accordance with the code.
B. Slope protection may be required at locations designated by the
Director in accordance with minimum code requirements.
A. Pipe.
(1) Storm sewer pipe shall be reinforced concrete or ductile iron.
(a) Reinforced concrete pipe and manhole tees shall conform to
the latest revision of ASTM C76, with the class designation as
follows:
Cover Over Pipe Class of Concrete Pipe
Less than 18 feet IV
18.1 feet and deeper V
(b) Pipe located in any pavement areas shall be not less than Class
IV.
(2) Ductile iron (pipe) shall meet current requirements of ANSI.50.
(3) All pipe shall have class, lot number and date of manufacture
marked on each length by the manufacturer.
(4) Concrete pipe under paved areas shall have premium joints in all
pipe from structure to structure.
B. Sewer joints. Sewer joints for reinforced concrete pipe shall be tongueand-
groove joints secured with rubber gaskets, mastic, or concrete
mortar.
(1) All storm sewer under paved areas shall have synthetic rubber
gasket joints from structure to structure conforming to ASTM C
361. Natural rubber gaskets are not allowed.
(2) Joints for storm sewer with diameters 30 inches or greater shall
have concrete mortar applied on the inside.
§ 72-42 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-44
1:170
(3) Mastic material for joints shall be of DeWitts No. 10, or approved
equal.
C. Structures. Storm structures shall be constructed of precast concrete
pipe, brick or block.
(1) Precast concrete. Reinforced concrete structures and grade rings
shall conform to the current ASTM Specifications for Precast
Reinforced Concrete Manhole Sections, Serial Designation C478.
Manhole section joints shall be made with mortar. Dome sections
shall be straight side type.
D. Brick and block.
(1) Brick for brick and mortar structures shall conform to the current
ASTM Specification C135. Mortar for plastering drainage
structures shall be made of one part portland cement and two parts
of fine aggregate.
(2) The block shall not exceed 18 inches in length or eight inches in
depth (height). No block shall be less than six inches in width
(thickness). All blocks in one structure shall be of the same height
dimension. The blocks shall be designed for length so that only fulllength
or half-length blocks are required to lay the circular wall of
any one course.
(3) Blocks intended for use in the cones or tops of manholes and catch
basins shall have such shape as may be required to from the
structure as shown on the plans with inside and outside joint not to
exceed 1/4 inch in thickness.
E. Castings.
(1) Castings shall conform to the latest revision of the ASTM
Specification A48, Gray Iron Castings, and be coated by the
manufacturer with coal tar pitch, varnish or other asphaltum
coating reviewed by the Director.
(2) Frames and covers shall be as follows:
(a) For use on drainage structures in paved areas: East Jordan
Frame 5105 with Type M1 grate, or equal.
(b) For use in curb and gutter line: East Jordan Frame 7045 with
Type M1 grate, or equal.
(c) For use on drainage structures in grassed areas: East Jordan
Frame 1040 with Type 02 Beehive Grate, or equal.
(d) For use on drainage structure manholes: East Jordan 1040 with
Type B perforated cover, or equal.
F. Headwalls. Headwalls shall be constructed of concrete in accordance
with the latest revision of MDOT specifications.
§ 72-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-44
1:171
§ 72-45. Footing drain sewers.
Sewers for footing drains shall be provided in all subdivision developments.
All lots shall be provided with a house lead connecting to the storm sewers,
or a sewer constructed for the sole purpose of collecting waters discharged
from footing drains. Connection to a storm sewer within the road right-ofway
is not permitted.
G. Manhole steps.
(1) In precast manhole, manhole steps shall be reinforced
polypropylene plastic coated steel. They shall be M.A. Industries,
Inc. PS-I-PF, or equal.
(2) In brick or block construction, manhole steps shall be MA
Industries, Inc. PS-1B, or equal.
A. Footing drain collector sewer.
(1) Minimum pipe diameter shall be eight inches with a cleanout
provided at the upstream end with a manhole or catch basin at all
changes in size and/or any change in horizontal or vertical
alignment.
(2) The following pipe types are allowed:
(a) Nonreinforced concrete pipe ASTM C14XM.
(b) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) ASTM D-3034, SDR 26.
(c) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) ASTM F-949, A-2026.
(3) Surface water drainage will not be permitted to enter into the
footing drain collector pipe.
(4) Minimum slope shall be 0.50%.
B. House lead.
(1) Minimum size shall be three inches diameter laid at a minimum
1.00% slope.
(2) House lead shall be Schedule 40 PVC.
C. Cleanout structures.
(1) Cleanout structures shall be installed at the end of all footing drain
collector sewers.
(2) Cleanouts shall be two-foot-diameter concrete block or precast
concrete structures.
(3) Casting shall be East Jordan Iron Works 1040 with Type B covers.
§ 72-44 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-46
1:172
§ 72-46. Plan requirements.
All construction plans shall be submitted to the Township for storm sewer
approval and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information:
A. Certification. The plans and specification shall be prepared under the
supervision of a civil engineer registered in the State of Michigan. The
title sheet of the plans shall contain the signature and seal of that
engineer.
B. Plan contents. Plans shall consist of a title sheet showing a plan view of
the complete job, split plan and profile sheets, design calculation
sheets, and standard detail sheets. Sheet sizes shall be 24 inches by 36
inches.
(1) Title sheet. A title sheet, or the first sheet of a set of plans, shall
identify:
(a) Project title.
(b) Location map with North arrow and scale, drawn at a scale not
greater than one inch equals 100 feet nor smaller than one
inch equals 2,000 feet. Locations of proposed sewers and
relationship of general project area to the surrounding area
shall be shown.
(c) Overall layout of the sewer system with manhole, catch basin
or other structure numbers.
(d) Sheet index.
(e) Symbol legend.
(f) List of quantities.
(g) Name, address, phone number and e-mail of proprietor.
(h) Name, address, phone number and e-mail of designer.
(i) Plan completion date and all revision dates.
(j) A statement that the work shall conform to the Township's
current standards and specifications.
(2) Plan and profile sheets.
(a) Scale of plan portion of sheet shall be one inch equals 50 feet,
or larger, with scale of profile portion of sheet one foot equals
five feet vertical or proportionally larger.
(b) Plan portion of sheets shall include, at least:
[1] Two bench marks shall be shown on each plan sheet. Plans
shall be prepared based on the Michigan South State
Plane Coordinates, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD
§ 72-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-46
1:173
1983) for the x and y coordinate system, and based on the
North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) for the
z coordinate system.
[2] Existing topography extending 50 feet past the site
boundaries, including all existing and proposed
improvements. Elevation contours shall be at a minimum
of two-foot intervals.
[3] Street names, street and easement width, subdivision
names, lot numbers and lot dimensions.
[4] Location, length, and size of each section of proposed
sewer between structures.
[5] Locations of all structures.
[6] All proposed connections.
[7] Dimensions to manholes and sewers from property lines,
right-of-way lines or buildings.
[8] "Miss Dig" note.
[9] Limits of special backfill requirements.
(c) Profile portion of sheets shall appear below the corresponding
plan portion, generally projected vertically, and shall show at
least the following:
[1] Size, slope, length, type and class of pipe.
[2] Invert of each pipe and top-of-casting elevations at each
structure.
[3] Limits of special backfill requirements.
[4] Profiled elevations over center line of proposed sewer of
existing and proposed ground, and pavement surfaces.
The existing profile shall be obtained from actual field
survey data.
[5] All crossings with other utilities (existing or proposed)
with elevations of the top or bottom of the pipe, as
appropriate, and shall have "Warning" notes for all gas
main crossings in profile.
[6] Location, by station, or coordinate, of every proposed
structure with structure number, top-of-casting elevation,
and structure type.
[7] Location of any proposed connections.
(3) Calculation sheets. Identify engineering data to support the size,
slope and hydraulic grade line for the storm sewers.
§ 72-46 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-46
1:174
§ 72-47. Construction standards.
All storm sewer construction within the Township shall be in accordance
with these standards and specifications:
(4) Detail sheets. Provide the Township standard detail sheets
consisting of specifications and drawings. Wayne County details
shall also be provided, where applicable.
A. Manholes, catch basins and inlets.
(1) Pipe shall not extend into a manhole beyond the inside face of the
manhole wall.
(2) All manholes shall be the eccentric cone type.
(3) Brick and radial block shall be laid in a full bed of mortar and shall
be plastered on the outside with as least 1/2 inch of mortar to
completely seal the structure. Plastering shall be performed in
conjunction with the laying of brick or block.
(4) All materials shall conform to the requirements of Article XI of
these standards.
(5) All precast sections shall be set in full bed of mortar.
(6) A minimum of three courses and a maximum of five courses of brick
shall be placed on the cone section of all precast concrete and
concrete block structures.
(7) All brick, block, mortar and concrete work shall be properly cured
and protected from freezing for a minimum of 48 hours. When the
temperature is 40° F. and falling, brick, block, mortar, and concrete
shall be heated to a minimum temperature of 60° F.
(8) After the concrete and/or plaster has set up sufficiently, the area
around the structure shall be backfilled with sand.
B. Acceptance inspection. All sewer systems shall be subjected to a final
inspection prior to acceptance of the system by the Township, or the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, including a compaction test.
(1) Where storm sewer is constructed in pavement areas or where the
sewer is within a one-on-one influence of pavement, compaction
testing shall be performed by an independent testing laboratory.
(2) Testing shall be performed at intervals or one test per layer per 75
feet of trench or as determined necessary by the Director.
§ 72-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-47
1:175

ARTICLE X
Design Standards for Stormwater Detention and Retention
Facilities
§ 72-48. Standards.
All construction standards shall conform to the requirements of Wayne
County Storm Water Management Program.
§ 72-49. through § 72-51. (Reserved)
§ 72-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-49
1:177

ARTICLE XI
General Requirements
§ 72-52. Erosion, grading and staking.
§ 72-53. Excavation.
The contractor shall do all the excavation required for the construction of
the project, including clearing of the site for the work, and the removal and
disposal of all materials necessary for construction.
A. Soil erosion. All soil erosion control devices shall be installed in
accordance with the sequence of construction shown on the approved
soil erosion control plan.
B. Grading. The entire site for all new developments shall be graded to
within six inches of the finish grade prior to the construction of any
permanent improvements.
C. Materials. No secondhand or salvage materials will be allowed without
prior approval by the Director.
D. Staking requirements. Staking and layout shall be performed by a
registered land surveyor or registered civil engineer. The following are
the minimum requirements for staking:
(1) Sanitary sewer, storm sewer and water main.
(a) Records (cut sheet) shall be provided to the contractor and
inspector prior to construction.
(b) Stakes for alignment and grades shall be set at fifty-foot
intervals and at all deflection points and changes in slope.
(c) Top of casting grades shall be provided at all structures.
(d) Two witness stakes shall be provided at all hydrants, road
catch basins and for other structures where more-precise
locations are required.
(2) Grading. Stakes may be set at one-hundred-foot intervals for
enough grading. Stakes for finish grading must be placed at fiftyfoot
intervals and at all high and low points.
(3) Road and drives. Stakes for alignment and grades shall be placed
on both sides of the road or drive at fifty-foot intervals and at all
points of curvature. Radii stakes must be placed. A radius point
stake shall be placed and protected at each curve.
A. Excavated materials may be temporarily stored along the trench, unless
otherwise noted, in a manner that will not cause damage to trees,
shrubs, fences or other property, nor that will endanger the bank
stability of the trench by imposing too great a load thereon.
§ 72-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-53
1:179
§ 72-54. Pipe bedding.
Pipe bedding defined. "Pipe bedding" is defined as that material placed from
a minimum of four inches below the pipe to the spring line of the pipe. It
shall consist of stone or sand, and noted on the bedding detail. The bedding
shall be removed under the bell so that the pipe barrel will be uniformly
supported for its full length.
§ 72-55. Concrete cradle.
Concrete cradle shall be constructed using MDOT Grade P1 concrete. The
cradle shall extend up on the sides of the pipe to a horizontal plane located
a minimum of 1/4 the outside diameter of the pipe above the bottom of the
B. Excavations shall be adequately braced and/or sheeted to prevent
caving or squeezing of the soil, or disturbing existing utilities or
pavement, and shall be completely dewatered prior to construction of
the sewer.
C. The subgrade shall be accurately prepared to line and grade so that the
pipe, when laid, shall have uniform bearing upon the approved backfill,
throughout its length.
D. The trench shall be backfilled closely behind the pipelaying. Unless
otherwise directed or permitted by the Director, the backfilling shall
follow at least two lengths behind pipelaying and shall be completed to
the top of the trench not more than 10 lengths behind pipelaying.
E. Pavement cutting, maintenance and reinstatement shall be done in a
manner satisfactory to the WCDPS and the Director.
F. Excavations which are to be left open overnight shall be completely
enclosed with suitable fencing and have adequately lighted barricades,
unless approved otherwise by the Director.
A. The bedding material shall be placed and compacted uniformly on both
sides of the pipe to prevent lateral movement. Mechanical methods of
tamping shall be used when it is possible to do so without damaging the
pipe. Bedding shall be placed in layers of six inches or less, as
necessary to obtain thorough compaction around the pipe.
B. In the event density testing becomes necessary to resolve a question of
the sufficiency of compaction of bedding material, the minimum
acceptable density shall be 95% of maximum density, as determined by
the AASHTO T180 method.
C. Sand shall conform to granular material Class II, as defined in MDOT
8.02.05.
D. Unless otherwise authorized by the Director, all excavations shall be
backfilled at least to a point one foot above the pipe immediately after
installation.
§ 72-53 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-55
1:180
pipe. The pipe shall be anchored to prevent floating during the concrete
pour.
§ 72-56. Laying of pipe.
A. Handling material.
(1) Care shall be taken to prevent the coating of cast- or ductile-iron
pipe from being damaged. Pipe, valves, hydrants and fittings strung
along the route shall be placed so that they will not be submerged.
Dropping of material directly from a truck or platform is prohibited.
(2) All pipe and castings shall be carefully examined for defects before
being placed. If the Director finds any materials to be defective,
said materials shall be removed from the site by the contractor.
B. Cleaning pipe and fittings.
(1) All lumps, blisters and excess coal tar coating shall be removed
from both the bell and spigot ends of each length of pipe and each
fitting. The outside of each spigot and the inside of each bell shall
be wiped clean dry and free from oil or grease immediately prior to
installation. The inside of the pipe shall be free of dirt and debris.
(2) Any damage to exterior pipe coating shall be repaired with an
approved coating before the pipe is laid.
C. Laying pipe.
(1) Pipelaying operations shall follow immediately behind the
excavation.
(2) Pipe shall be laid upstream from the lower end of sewer with bell
ends upgrade. The use of brick, lumps of clay, wood, etc., to level
the pipe will not be permitted. Under no circumstances shall pipe
be dropped directly into the trench.
(3) All pipe shall be laid to line and grade as called for on the plans.
The trench shall be excavated to provide equal clearance on both
sides of the pipe. After the pipe is set, care shall be taken in
backfilling so as not to disturb its line or grade. As work
progresses, the interior of the pipe shall be thoroughly cleaned. At
all times, the open ends of the pipe shall be covered to prevent
foreign matter from entering.
(4) When the trench contains water, the exposed end of the pipe shall
be closed with a watertight plug. If water is in the trench, the seal
shall remain in place until the trench is pumped completely dry.
D. Width of trench.
§ 72-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-56
1:181
§ 72-57. Backfilling.
(1) If the maximum trench widths noted on the plans are exceeded, the
contractor shall construct a concrete cradle, or other type of
approved bedding, to provide support for the additional load.
(2) When sand bedding is used, the maximum trench widths shall be
used to permit compaction of the bedding around the pipe.
(3) If stone bedding is used, a minimum of six inches of clearance shall
be provided on each side of the pipe.
A. General requirements. All backfill material shall be free from cinders,
refuse, vegetation or organic matter, boulders, rocks, or stones, frozen
earth, or other material which, in the opinion of the Director, is
unsuitable.
(1) Backfilling to grade shall not fall more than 100 feet behind
pipelaying unless otherwise permitted by the Director. In locations
where compaction of the backfill to a specific density is not
required by these standards, or on the plans, backfill shall be
machine-placed to ninety-percent maximum unit density. Excavated
material, other than blue clay and organic material, shall be
compacted in lifts of not over 12 inches loose measure.
(2) Settlement occurring in trenches within one year after acceptance
of the work shall be filled, regraded and restored with sod or
topsoil, seed and mulch by the contractor upon request by the
Township.
(3) The trench backfill under existing and proposed streets, alleys,
sidewalks, drives and parking areas shall be of granular material
MDOT Class II placed in layers not exceeding 12 inches in depth
and thoroughly compacted. This backfill shall include the area
located under the pavement to a point to the outside of shoulders or
three feet from back of curb and thence down on a ratio of one-toone
slope, unless otherwise required by the governing agency
having jurisdiction over the area affected. The minimum acceptable
density shall be 95% of maximum density as determined by the
AASHTO T180 modified method. The maximum thickness of each
layer shall generally be no greater than 12 inches and in all cases
shall be of such thickness that the equipment used will provide
density for the full depth of the backfill. In all cases, this fill shall be
constructed to elevation determined by the proposed surface
grade.
(4) For sidewalks, the sand backfill shall be constructed to the original
sidewalk grade and maintained until the sidewalk is replaced.
B. Backfilling in freezing weather. No frozen material shall be buried
below the final elevation of ground. At no time shall frozen materials be
§ 72-56 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-57
1:182
§ 72-58. Construction in unstable soil.
§ 72-59. Construction in fill sections.
Unstable or unsuitable material shall be removed. The embankment shall be
of suitable material with one vertical on two horizontal fill slopes and shall
be placed in one-foot layers to the proposed top of pipe, and compacted top
95% of maximum density as determined by the AASHTO T180 method. The
embankment shall be 12 feet wide plus four times the diameter of the pipe.
§ 72-60. Pipe clearance in rocks.
Rocks, boulders, and stones over two inches in diameter shall be removed
to provide a clearance of at least six inches from any part of the pipe or
appurtenances.
§ 72-61. Trenching near trees.
When trees are to be saved, the following rules apply:
permitted for use as backfill, under pavement structures, or public
roads.
C. Backfilling around structures. All backfill placed within three feet of all
structures shall be granular material MDOT Class II placed in one-foot
layers, and compacted, after the structure and/or exterior masonry
plaster has set up sufficiently to resist damage. Backfilling shall be
performed in a manner that will not cause unequal pressure on the
structure.
A. Pipe and pipe appurtenances must be supported on a firm foundation.
The trench bottom shall remain stable during pipelaying and all
subsequent operations.
B. When unstable trench bottoms (wet clays, sands, etc.) are encountered,
it will be necessary to excavate below design depth to stable,
noncompressible ground and backfill to grade with approved select
materials (slag, crushed stone, gravel, etc.) 1/4 inch to 3/4 inch in size.
C. Where organic materials (peat, marl, muck, etc.) exist at the trench
bottom, it shall be necessary to remove such material down to stable
soils and backfill to grade with the aforementioned select materials.
Where the material below plan grade is unstable to such a depth that it
cannot be removed and replaced with an approved material, the
contractor shall construct supports as directed by the Director.
A. Trees two inches in diameter or less may be removed, temporarily
planted, and then replanted to the final location.
B. Trenches shall be no closer than:
(1) Four feet from all trees eight inches in diameter and smaller.
§ 72-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-61
1:183
§ 72-62. Bored and jacked casings.
(2) One-half foot per inch of the diameter of the tree. (Example: A
fourteen-inch-diameter tree will require a seven-foot distance
between the edge of the trench and the trunk of the tree.
A. Requirement. Steel casings shall be bored and jacked in any areas
which, in the opinion of the Director, are considered to be detrimentally
affected by open-cut construction. The open cutting of public paved
roadways will not be permitted.
B. Materials.
(1) Casing pipe. Steel casing pipe shall be electric-fusion welded pipe,
conforming to the requirements of ASTM A-39, Grade B, with
minimum wall thickness indicated below, or as required by the
WCDPS where it has road jurisdiction. Pipe ends shall be prepared
for field welding of circumferential joints.
Nominal Size
(inches)
Nominal Outside
Diameter
(inches)
Wall Thickness
(inches)
6 6.625 0.188
8 8.625 0.188
10 10.750 0.188
12 12.750 0.188
14 14.000 0.250
16 16.000 0.250
18 18.000 0.250
20 20.000 0.250
24 24.000 0.250
30 30.000 0.312
36 36.000 0.312
42 42.000 0.438
48 48.000 0.500
54 54.000 0.563
(2) Carrier pipe. Pipe materials shall conform to that specified in the
applicable sections of these standards.
(3) Pipe skids. Necessary skidding materials required to protect the
pipe during installation shall be approved by the Director and
furnished by the contractor.
C. Installation.
§ 72-61 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-62
1:184
§ 72-63. Brick, mortar and mortar materials.
(1) Casing pipe. Casing pipe shall be installed in a continuous auguring
(or mining) and jacking operation with the casing pipe installation
following directly behind the face of the excavation. Water shall not
be introduced during the boring-jacking operation.
(2) Grouting. The annular space between the outside surface of carrier
pipe and the inside surface of casing pipe shall be pressure-grouted
with approved materials. The diameter of the casing pipe shall be
of sufficient size to ensure proper placement of the pipe to plan line
and grade and to allow the proper installation of pressure-grouted
material. The ends of the casing pipe shall be closed with a
masonry bulkhead at least eight inches thick.
(3) Minimum boring distances. All work shall be performed from
boring and jacking pits adequately sheeted to prevent damage to
the roadway, railway, etc. The minimum distance from the edge of
the pavement to the trench or boring and jacking pit for dualhighway
and interstate routes shall be 30 feet. For curb or
guardrail section, railway track, or two-lane highway, the minimum
distance will vary from shoulder point to the toe of slope as shown
on the plans or directed by the Director.
A. Clay brick shall conform to the requirements for Grade NA Brick, ASTM
Designation: C32. Brick shall conform to one of the following sizes, and
all brick for any structure shall be the same nominal size:
Depth
(inches)
Width
(inches)
Length
(inches)
2 1/4 2 3/4 8
2 1/2 3 3/4 8
B. Concrete brick shall conform to the requirements for Grade P-1 brick
ASTM Designation: C55.
C. Mortar shall consist of one part of masonry cement, or two parts of
mortar sand, measured by volume. The cement and sand shall be mixed
dry to a uniform color in a suitable box of batch mixer and then mixed
thoroughly with water, which shall be added gradually until the
required consistency is obtained.
D. Masonry cement shall conform to the requirements of the Standard
Specifications for portland cement, ASTM Designation: C150, Type I or
II.
E. Portland cement for mortar shall conform to the requirements of the
Standard Specifications for portland cement, ASTM Designation: C150,
Type I or II.
§ 72-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-63
1:185
F. Hydrated lime shall conform to the requirements of the Standard
Specifications for Normal Finishing Hydrated Lime, ASTM Designation:
C6.
G. Masonry sand shall conform to the requirements of Michigan
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications.
H. Concrete shall conform to the current requirements of Michigan
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications.
I. Water for mortar, for concrete and for testing and flushing mains shall
be potable water.
J. All block, mortar, and concrete work shall be properly cured and
protected from freezing for a minimum of 48 hours. When the
temperature is 40° F. and falling, block mortar and concrete shall be
heated to a minimum temperature of 60° F.
§ 72-63 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-63
1:186
ARTICLE XII
Construction Record Reproducible Drawings
§ 72-64. Scope.
Prior to the Township's approval of a final subdivision plat or the acceptance
or approval of any public utility, or other improvements, acceptable
construction record drawings must be submitted to the Director.
§ 72-65. General requirements.
§ 72-66. Plan requirements.
Construction record drawings shall contain all the information shown on the
approved construction drawings with the addition of, but not limited to, the
following as-built information:
A. Initially, two sets of construction record prints shall be submitted for
review to the Director. After the construction record prints have been
approved, one complete set drawn on reproducible Mylar (minimum of
three mils thick) shall be submitted, including detail sheets.
B. Construction record plans shall be prepared based on the Michigan
South State Plane Coordinates, North American Datum of 1983 (NAD
1983) for the x and y coordinate system, and based on the North
American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88) for the z coordinate
system.
C. In addition, an electronic copy of each drawing shall be submitted in
accordance with the following standards:
(1) One file shall be in AutoCAD*.dwg format aligned to the Michigan
South NAD 1983 - feet coordinate system.
(2) One file shall be pdf format.
D. All construction record information shall be clearly identified as such.
E. All location changes in excess of five inches horizontal or 0.05 foot
vertical shall be "lined out" and redrawn.
A. Sanitary sewers and storm sewers.
(1) GPS locations for each manhole and all force main bends.
(2) Length of sewer as measured between manholes shown on both
plan and profile sheets.
(3) Length of manhole stubs.
(4) Manhole, inlet, and catch basin cover as-built elevations.
(5) Construction record invert elevations of pipes within each
structure.
§ 72-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-66
1:187
§ 72-67. Certification.
All construction record plans shall contain a statement by an engineer
or land surveyor, who is currently registered in the State of Michigan,
certifying the drawings to be construction record. All plans shall be sealed
and signed by the certifying registered engineer or surveyor.
(6) Construction record percent of grade between manholes.
(7) Any changes to the total quantities shall be shown.
B. Retention and detention ponds.
(1) Construction record dimensions and sufficient additional
information to calculate final volume. Certification of final
computed volume of the pond as measured from high-water
elevation to the invert of the outlet pipe shall also be provided.
(2) Construction record location and all dimensions of the overflow
structure, and other physical improvements, including fence and
gate sizes and locations.
(3) The following construction record elevations:
(a) Overflow spillway.
(b) Inlet and outlet pipe inverts.
(c) Outlet structure cover.
(d) Spillway elevations at fifty-foot intervals.
(e) Outlet and inlet ditch elevations at fifty-foot intervals.
(f) Top- and bottom-of-bank elevations at fifty-foot maximum
intervals.
C. Water mains.
(1) Construction record location of all water mains with respect to
property lines.
(2) Rim elevations on gate wells.
(3) Top-of-pipe elevations at gate wells.
(4) Fire hydrant duty line elevations.
(5) Distances between gate wells, fittings, and fire hydrants.
(6) GPS locations for all water system structures.
(7) Type of materials used.
§ 72-66 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-67
1:188
ARTICLE XIII
Miscellaneous
§ 72-68. Insurance.
Prior to issuance of a permit for construction of any subdivision,
professional, commercial, industrial, etc., project on-site or off-site
improvements, the contractor shall procure and maintain, during the term
of the project, public liability and property damage insurance with an
insurance company licensed to conduct business in the State of Michigan.
§ 72-69. Bonds.
Prior to acceptance of improvements by the Township, a one-year
maintenance bond, in an amount set by and acceptable to the Township
Board, shall be posted by the proprietor.
§ 72-70. Variance.
§ 72-71. Conflicts with other legislation.
These standards are not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any
manner interfere with existing regulations or laws of the Township, nor to
conflict with any statutes of the State of Michigan or Wayne County, except
that these standards shall prevail in cases where these standards impose
a greater restriction than is provided by the said existing statutes, laws or
regulations.
A. The Northville Township Board may recommend a variance from the
Master Utility Plan and these standards when, in its opinion, undue
hardship may result from strict compliance. No variance shall be
recommended unless the Board finds:
(1) That the variance does not conflict with a requirement of Chapter
170, Zoning, or Chapter 152, Subdivision Control.
(2) That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting said
property such that the strict application of the provisions of these
standards would deprive the proprietor of the reasonable use of his
land.
(3) That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment
of a substantial property right of the proprietor.
(4) That the recommendation of the variance will not be detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in
which said property is situated.
B. Cost of construction or other financial concerns are not considered a
hardship for purposes of requesting a variance under this section.
§ 72-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-72
1:189
§ 72-72. Interpretation.
Provisions of these standards shall be held to be the minimum requirements
adopted for promotion and preservation of public health, safety and general
welfare of the Township. In the event the requirements of these
construction standards are not clear, are in conflict with other parts of
these standards, or are in conflict with county, state, or federal standards
or requirements, the Director shall resolve the conflict and advise the
proprietor of such decision.
§ 72-72 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 72-72
1:190
Chapter 77
(RESERVED)
Chapter 79
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Installation of fire alarm systems — See Ch.
49.
Building construction — See Ch. 58.
§ 79-1. Statutory authority
Pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 1951, No. 33, Section 5, as
amended, being § 41.805 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, the following
code adopted by reference and all of its provisions are incorporated in this
chapter by reference, except those portions which are amended by § 79-5 of
this chapter.
§ 79-2. Adoption of standards by reference. [Amended 3-17-2011;
6-15-2017]
A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the Clerk
of the Charter Township of Northville, being marked and designated as the
"2015 Edition of the International Fire Code and the Appendix Chapters,"
as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as
the Fire Code of the Charter Township of Northville in the State of Michigan
for the control of buildings, structures, and premises as herein provided;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of said Fire Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 79-5 of this chapter.
§ 79-3. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Fire Prevention Code of the Charter
Township of Northville."
§ 79-4. Availability of copies of code.
A complete copy of the code adopted by reference in this chapter shall be
kept in the office of the Clerk of the Charter Township of Northville and
shall be available for public inspection at that office during regular business
hours.
§ 72-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 79-5
1:191
§ 79-5. Amendments to code. [Amended 6-15-2017]
The following sections and subsections of the 2015 International Fire Code
are hereby amended or deleted as set forth and additional sections and
subsections are added as indicated hereafter. Subsequent section numbers
used in this section shall refer to like numbered sections of the International
Fire Code.
A. Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the
Charter Township of Northville and are hereafter referred to as the
"code."
B. Section 109.4 is amended to read as follows:
109.4. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the following
penalties:
1. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination
of responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different
fine is specified in connection with a particular section:
(a) First offense. The civil infraction for a first offense violation
shall be in the amount determined by the Charter Township
of Northville's fee schedule, established by the Board of
Trustees, plus costs and other sanctions for each offense.
(b) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a
repeat offense shall be in the amount determined by the
Charter Township of Northville's fee schedule, established
by the Board of Trustees, plus costs and other sanctions for
each offense.
2. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine,
costs, damages and expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be
authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to
enforce, or enjoin violation of, the chapter.
3. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon
which any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate
offense.
4. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for
by the Code of the Charter Township of Northville, any equitable
or other remedies available may be sought.
5. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs,
damages and expenses as provided by the law.
6. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense
of a criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a
civil infraction.
§ 79-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 79-5
1:192
§ 79-6. Affect on existing actions. [Amended 6-15-2017]
Nothing in this chapter or in the Fire Code hereby adopted shall be
constructed to affect any lawsuit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in
this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be
lost or impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 79-7. Affect on existing violations.
This chapter shall not affect violations of the Code of the Charter Township
of Northville or any other ordinance existing prior to the effective date of
this chapter, and such violation shall be governed and shall continue to be
separately punishable to the full extent of the law under the provisions of
such ordinance at the time the violation was committed.
Chapter 82
FLOODPLAIN REGULATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 58.
Design and construction standards — See Ch.
72.
Grading and drainage — See Ch. 85.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 152.
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 82-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to designate an enforcing agency to discharge
the responsibility of the Township of Northville, located in Wayne County,
and to designate regulated flood hazard areas under the provisions of
the State Construction Code Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as
amended.37
C. Section 307.1 is amended to read as follows:
307.1 General. Open burning and outdoor fires shall be conducted in
compliance with the written Outdoor Fire Guidelines of the Northville
Township Fire Department as established by the Fire Code Official.
Printed copies of the Outdoor Fire Guidelines are available to the
public at the Fire Department during regular business hours.
D. Remove IFC 2015 Sections 307.4, 307.4.1, 307.4.2 and 307.4.3.
37.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1501 et seq.
§ 79-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 82-2
1:193
§ 82-2. Agency designated.
Pursuant to the provision of the State Construction Code, in accordance
with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended,38
the Building Official(s) of the Township of Northville is hereby designated
as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the Township of
Northville under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, State of Michigan. The
Township of Northville assumes responsibility for the administration and
enforcement of said Act throughout the corporate limits of the community
adopting this chapter.
§ 82-3. Code appendix enforced.
Pursuant to the provisions of the State Construction Code, in accordance
with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended,
Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by the
enforcing agency within the Township of Northville.
§ 82-4. Designation of regulated flood-prone hazard areas.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) entitled "Wayne County, Michigan, Flood Insurance Study"
dated February 2, 2012, and the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) panel
numbers 26163C0020E, 26163C0028E, 26163C0036E, 26163C0037E,
26163C0038E, 2613C0039E and 26163C0045E dated February 2, 2012, are
adopted by reference for the purposes of administration of the Michigan
Construction Code, and declared to be part of Section 1612.3 of the
Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content of the "Flood Hazards"
section of Table R301.2(1)of the Michigan Residential Code.
§ 82-5. Repeals.
All ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby
repealed.
Chapter 85
GRADING AND DRAINAGE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer and water — See Ch. 139.
§ 85-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are to regulate building and driveway grades,
sump pump discharge, building downspouts and surface and ground
38.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.1508b.
§ 82-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 85-1
1:194
drainage with respect to property within the Township; to provide for the
administration of the requirements hereof; and to provide for the issuance
of permits as set forth herein; to comply with federal, state and local law
regarding the introduction of the drainage waters into sanitary sewers; to
protect and enhance the public health, safety, interest and general welfare.
§ 85-2. Permit required; plot plan and grading survey; letter of
credit or cash deposit.
A. An application for a permit shall be made to the Building Department
prior to the time when any new or enlarged or changed or altered use of
a structure or land or part thereof is intended to begin. No building or
structure shall be erected, altered or changed and no building or
structure shall be moved onto any parcel of land and no drainage
pattern of any land shall be changed by filling, cutting or grading in the
Township prior to the issuance of a permit therefor. The application for
such a permit shall be accompanied by a plot plan in triplicate, drawn to
a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet showing the exact
dimensions of the land and structures to which the permit is to apply.
B. The plot plan for any building or structure which is presented in
connection with a permit application, for a lot or parcel of land not part
of a subdivision in which grading patterns have been established, shall
have superimposed thereon, one foot or less contours of the area,
including not less than 100 feet outside the boundary of the plot, on
which the permit is being sought and shall include proposed grade of
building, the lot or parcel and the corners thereof and the point, area,
ditch or enclosure to which stormwater is to drain. Such contour map
and stormwater disposal system shall be reviewed by the Township
Building Official to determine that site drainage is proper and that the
downstream properties will not be damaged or inconvenienced. The
plot plan submitted shall be prepared and signed and sealed by a
professional engineer or registered land surveyor.
C. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, there shall be
submitted a grading survey, prepared and signed by a professional
engineer or registered land surveyor, attesting to the fact that the site
is graded in accordance with the drainage pattern approved at the time
of the issuance of the aforementioned permit.
D. In lieu of this land survey, an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit
or cash deposit in an amount set by the Township Building official may
be required to insure grading and submission of such survey at a later
date when a building, land or structure is otherwise suitable for
occupancy during that season of the year when weather conditions
make finished grading unfeasible. In such case, a temporary certificate
of occupancy may be issued by the Building Department and a date for
completion of grading shall be indicated on the temporary certificate of
occupancy or its related documents.
§ 85-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-2
1:195
§ 85-3. Regulation of sump pump discharge.
E. When a permit has been approved and the structure has been
constructed, the lot shall be filled, graded and maintained in conformity
with the grading pattern established on the plot plan submitted.
F. No person shall interfere with or obstruct the flow of surface water over
easements for public utilities or impede the flow of surface water across
private property in any manner except as set forth on the approved
grading and drainage plot plan.
G. If at time of final inspection it is found by the Building Official that the
proposed drainage does not work properly, the Building Official may
order other measures to resolve the problem, such as enlarged swales,
french drains or a change in landscaping, which problems are to be
covered by the developers.
A. All footage drain discharge shall be deposited into the storm sewers or
other stormwater drainage facility in accordance with the Plumbing
Code of the Township of Northville,39 or upon the surface of the ground
in those instances where no storm drain facility is available.
B. Where such footing drain discharge is deposited upon the surface of the
ground, the place of deposit shall be the yard which contains a drainage
easement without crossing another parcel of land. Discharge of such
water upon the surface of the ground shall be carried not less than four
feet from the foundation walls by means of splash blocks, which shall be
installed at the time of construction and shall not discharge on the
surface of the ground within the street right-of-way or within 20 feet
thereof.
C. Where footing drain discharge is ejected or carried to the drainage
system by means of a pump or lift and where it is not deposited on the
surface of the ground, there shall be a relief line installed whenever, in
the opinion of the Building Official and/or the Township Engineer, there
is a probability that the drainage system may become inoperative due to
freezing or surge charging. Such a system shall be protected against
backflow as required by the applicable sections of the Plumbing Code of
the Township.
D. Downspout piping shall be permanently affixed to the building wall and
shall provide for discharge onto a five-foot splash block or as otherwise
approved by the Building Official.
E. No approvals shall be given by the Township Building Department
unless the method being utilized shall provide a positive slope away
from the building foundation wall.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 58, Building Construction.
§ 85-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 85-4
1:196
§ 85-4. Residential driveway grading.
Any driveway which serves as a means of vehicular access to a residence
shall have an established slope not to exceed a grade of 7% throughout its
length and breadth; provided, however, that said slope may be increased to
a grade not to exceed 12% in those instances where the property owner files
with the Township Building Department a signed statement acknowledging
that the slope requested exceeds the required and recommended standards.
In special cases where natural topography or other unusual conditions of
the land make adherence to this requirement impractical, special approval
of slopes in excess of 12% grade may be granted by the Building Official
and/or the Township Engineer under such reasonable conditions as may be
determined to assure no adverse consequences to adjacent property or to
the public safety.
§ 85-5. Protection of sanitary sewer system.
No person shall permit the entry of any roof, ground, or surface water
into the sanitary sewer or direct any roof, ground or surface water in
such a manner that it enters the sanitary sewer system. Any building or
structure having or suspected of having a foot drain and/or sump pump
discharge line connection into the Township's sanitary sewer system may
be assessed a footing drain/sump connection (FSC) surcharge, which is a
penalty of $50 to be levied each bimonthly billing period, deemed necessary
to encourage property owners who are illegally connected into the sanitary
sewer system to disconnect and replumb their footing and drain system
in a lawful manner. Prior to instituting the FSC surcharge, the Township
will make reasonable efforts to ascertain the validity of a suspected
inappropriate connection source. The minimum procedures that shall be
followed in validating a suspected illegal connection are as follows:
A. Upon notice from the community or direction Township's own accord of
a suspected illegal connection into the sanitary sewer, the suspected
building, or structure, address, and date will be recorded and an
attempt made by the Township by telephone to contact the property
owner to schedule an in-house inspection of the sanitary sewer lead and
sump pump plumbing configuration within two weeks' time.
B. If, after two weeks, an inspection is not successfully scheduled via
telephone, a certified letter shall be sent to the property, requesting an
in-house inspection of the sanitary lead and sump pump plumbing
configuration or, in lieu of acceptance of a certified letter, the Township
may post the property with notice of request for inspection on the front
door or other prominent area on the property. The property owner shall
be allowed two weeks to reply and schedule and inspection by the
Township.
C. If, after two weeks, no in-house inspection is scheduled or allowed by
the property owner, a final notification, identified as a final notification,
shall be sent via certified mail, requesting an inspection of the sanitary
lead and sump pump plumbing configuration, or in lieu of acceptance of
§ 85-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 85-5
1:197
a certified letter, the Township may post the property with notice of
request for an inspection on the front door or other prominent area on
the property. The property owner shall be allowed two weeks to reply
to the final notification and schedule an inspection with the Township.
D. If the final notification is not responded to by the property owner within
the allotted two-week time period, the FSC surcharge shall be applied
to appropriate sanitary sewer account and notice given to the property
owner that the FSC surcharge has been applied to the property and will
be applied to their property until such time that the sanitary sewer lead
and sump pump discharge connection has been inspected by the
Township and it has been determined that an inappropriate connection
to the Township's sanitary sewer system does not exist within the
building or structure. All FSC surcharges assessed shall be made due
and within the normal utility building, in additional to the normal sewer
service fees. All unpaid FSC surcharges assessed shall be made due and
payable within the normal utility billing, in addition to normal sewer
service fees. All unpaid FSC surcharge costs assessed, and other
normal sewer services fees, shall be subject to late payment penalties
as well as any method of collection reserved by the Township consistent
with the collection of delinquent water and sewer service account
balances.
E. If, upon an actual in-house inspection by the Township, an appropriate
plumbing connection is present, the owner shall be notified, and the
FSC surcharge, if any has been applied toward the property, shall be
removed from future billings.
F. If upon inspection by the Township, an illegal and/or inappropriate
connection is noted, a notice of violation shall be written up and
provided to the property owner stating that the property owner has 15
days to cure the illegal connection. The FSC surcharge will be
implemented at the end of the fifteen-day period and shall continue
until the improper connection has been reinspected by the Township
and it has been determined that an improper connection to the sanitary
sewer system does not exist within the building or structure unless the
property was already being assessed and FSC surcharge in which case
it shall continue until the connection violation is cured and inspected to
the satisfaction of the Township.
G. All reports of any inspection and subsequent findings shall be recorded
by the Township and made available to the owner.
H. All in-house inspections made by the Township shall be made in the
presence of the homeowner, property resident, or any other person
designated by the property owner or property resident.
I. Any and all reinspection of a property shall be charged against the
customer, in accordance with the Township's approved fee schedule.
§ 85-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 85-6
1:198
§ 85-6. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the following
penalties:
Chapter 90
HAZARDOUS WASTE CLEANUP
GENERAL REFERENCES
Notification of discharge of hazardous waste
into YCUA — See Ch. 142, § 142-51.
Deposit of noxious substances — See Ch. 67,
§ 67-19.
§ 90-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the residents of the Charter Township of Northville, and further to
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is
specified in connection with a particular section:
(1) First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of not less than $150, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each offense.
(2) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $300, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of the
chapter.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
Code of the Charter Township of Northville, any equitable or other
remedies available may be sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses as provided by the law.
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
§ 85-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-1
1:199
enable the Charter Township of Northville to secure reimbursement of costs
and expenses from those responsible for the leaking, spilling or otherwise
allowing certain dangerous or hazardous substances or materials to escape
containment and to recover costs associated with incendiary fires.
§ 90-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DANGEROUS, HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES OR MATERIALS — Dangerous,
hazardous substances or materials are defined as any substance which is
spilled, leaked or otherwise released from a container, which is harmful to
the environment or human or animal life, health or safety, or is obnoxious
by reason of odor, or is a threat to the public health, safety or welfare,
and shall include but not be limited to such substances as chemicals and
gases, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products
or gases, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammable or corrosives.
Hazardous substances include:
EMERGENCY RESPONSE — The cleanup or removal of a released
hazardous substance or the taking of other actions as may be necessary to
prevent, minimize, or mitigate injury to the public health, safety or welfare,
or the environment.
EQUIPMENT OPERATION, MANPOWER COSTS — Include, but is not be
limited to, Township Fire, Police, Building and Water Departments, Mutual
Aid Departments, Western Wayne County Mutual Air Association,
Hazardous Materials Response Team, or any other agencies that may assist
in the emergency response.
EXPENSE OF AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE — Reasonable costs incurred
by the Charter Township of Northville in making an appropriate response to
the incident, including the costs of providing police, fire-fighting and rescue
services, Water and Sewer Department services, Building Department
services, and mutual aid provided through additional police and fire service,
including but not limited to the Western Wayne County Fire Department
Mutual Aid Association Hazardous Materials Response Team, at the scene
of the incident. It shall include, but not be limited to actual labor costs
of personnel, including worker compensation benefits, fringe benefits,
administration overhead, costs of equipment operation, costs of materials
A chemical or other material which is or may become injurious to the
public health, safety or welfare or the environment;
A.
Hazardous substance as defined in the Comprehensive Environmental
Response Compensation and Liability Act of 1980;
B.
Hazardous waste as defined in the Hazardous Waste Management Act
(MCL 324.11101 et seq.); and
C.
Petroleum as defined in the Leaking Underground Storage Act (MCL
324.21301a et seq.).
D.
§ 90-1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 90-2
1:200
obtained directly by the Township and the costs of any contract for labor
materials.
§ 90-3. Duty to remove and clean up.
It shall be the duty of any person or any other entity which causes or
controls leakage, spillage or any other dissemination of dangerous or
hazardous substances or materials to immediately remove such, and to
clean up the area of such spillage in such a manner that the area involved
is fully restored to its condition prior to such happening. The Northville
Township Fire Department, in conjunction with the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) and/or the Department of Natural Resources
(DNR), will inspect said site to make sure the cleanup is in compliance with
federal, state and local guidelines.
§ 90-4. Failure to remove and clean up.
If proper action is not taken under § 90-3, the Township shall have the right,
but not the obligation, to remove and clean up in accordance with § 90-3.
Any such person or entity which fails to comply with § 90-3 hereof shall
be liable to and shall pay the Township for its emergency response costs
and expenses, including the cost incurred by the Township to any party
which it engages, for the completed abatement, cleanup and restoration
of the affected area. Costs under this section shall not include actual
fire suppression services which are normally or usually provided by the
Township.
§ 90-5. Enforcement.
If any person or entity who causes or controls leakage, spillage or any other
dissemination of hazardous substances or materials fails to remove and
clean up as required by § 90-3, that person or entity will be responsible to
reimburse the Township for its emergency response expense. The Township
shall have the right to bring action in the appropriate court to collect such
costs if it deems such action necessary.
§ 90-6. Charges against person liable; collection of debt.
The expense of emergency response shall be a charge against the person
liable for any expenses listed in this chapter. The charge constitutes a debt
of that person and is collectible by the Charter Township of Northville in the
same manner as in the case of an obligation under contract, expressed or
implied.
§ 90-7. Liability.
No employee, officer, elected official, ranking fire or police officer shall be
liable for any costs or damages incurred as a result of the enforcement of
any provisions of this chapter.
§ 90-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 90-8
1:201
§ 90-8. Cost recovery for deliberately-set fires.
The Charter Township of Northville Fire Department shall have the ability
to recover all costs associated with the extinguishment and investigation
of fires which are determined to have been deliberately set. Costs shall
be assessed to the individual or individuals responsible for the fire(s). All
assessments shall be paid in full within 30 calendar days. The Township
shall also have the right to bring an action in the appropriate court to collect
costs if it deems such action necessary.
Chapter 91
HISTORIC DISTRICT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 58.
Design and construction standards — See Ch.
72.
Signs — See Ch. 145.
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 90-8 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 90-8
1:202
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 91-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Historic District Ordinance of the
Charter Township of Northville."
§ 91-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALTERATION — Work that changes the detail of a resource but does not
change its basic size or shape.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — The written approval of a permit
application for work that is appropriate and does not adversely affect a
resource.
COMMISSION — The Historic District Commission (HDC) for the Charter
Township of Northville, Michigan.
COMMITTEE — A Historic District Study Committee appointed by the
Township Board.
DEMOLITION — The razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a
resource and includes, but is not limited to, demolition by neglect.
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT — Neglect in maintaining, repairing, or
securing a resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the
resource or the loss of structural integrity of the resource.
DENIAL — The written rejection of a permit application for work that is
inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — A system designed to detect and annunciate the
presence of fire or byproducts of fire. Fire alarm system includes smoke
alarms.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area, or group of areas, not necessarily having
contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources
that are related by history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or
culture.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION — The identification, evaluation, establishment,
and protection of resources significant in history, architecture, archaeology,
engineering, or culture.
HISTORIC RESOURCE — A publicly or privately owned building, structure,
site, object, feature or open space that is significant in the history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering or culture of the Charter Township
of Northville, State of Michigan, or the United States.
§ 91-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-2
1:203
NOTICE TO PROCEED — The written permission to issue a permit for work
that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource pursuant to a
finding under § 399.205 (6) of PA 169 of 170, as amended.
OPEN SPACE — Undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal
or man-made landscaped area that provides a connective link or buffer
between other resources.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE — Keeping a resource unimpaired and in good
condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to
time, in its exterior condition. Ordinary maintenance does not change the
external appearance of the resource except through the elimination of the
usual and expected effects of weathering. Ordinary maintenance does not
constitute work for the purposes of this chapter.
PROPOSED HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area, or group of areas not
necessarily having boundaries, that has delineated boundaries and that is
under review by a committee or a standing committee for the purpose
of making a recommendation as to whether it should be established as a
Historic District or added to an established Historic District.
REPAIR — To restore a decayed or damaged resource to good or sound
condition by any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of
a resource constitutes work for the purposes of this chapter.
RESOURCE — One or more publicly or privately owned historic or
nonhistoric buildings, structures, sites, objects, features, or open spaces
located within a Historic District.
SMOKE ALARM — A single-station or multiple-station alarm responsive to
smoke and not connected to a system. As used in this subdivision, a "singlestation
alarm" means an assembly incorporation a detector, the control
equipment, and the alarm sounding device into a single unit, operated from
a power supply either in the unit or obtained at the point of installation.
"Multiple-station alarm" means two or more single-station alarms that are
capable of interconnection such that actuation of one alarm causes all
integrated separate audible alarms to operate.
WORK — Construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, or
demolition.
§ 91-3. Purpose.
Historic preservation is declared to be a public purpose, and it is hereby
determined to be in the best interest of the Township to regulate the
construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, and
demolition of resources in existing or proposed Historic Districts within
Northville Township. The purpose of this chapter shall be to do one or more
of the following:
A. Safeguard the heritage of the Township by preserving one or more
Historic Districts in the Township that reflect elements of its history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture.
§ 91-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 91-3
1:204
§ 91-4. Acceptance of grants and gifts.
The Township Board may accept state or federal grants for historic
preservation purposes, may participate in state and federal programs that
benefit historic preservation, and may accept public or private gifts for
historic preservation purposes. The Township Board may make the Historic
District Commission, a standing committee, or other agency its duly
appointed agent to accept and administer grants, gifts, and program
responsibilities.
§ 91-5. Appropriation of funds.
The Board of Trustees may, from time to time, appropriate reasonable
sums of money for the carrying out of the functions of the Historic District
Commission.
§ 91-6. Annual reports.
The Township Treasurer shall be custodian of funds of the Historic District
Commission and authorized expenditures shall be certified to the director of
finance by the secretary or other officer designated by the Historic District
Commission. The Historic District Commission shall annually report to the
Township Board on any money it shall receive or expend.
§ 91-7. Acquisition of historic resources by Township.
If all efforts by the Historic District Commission to preserve a resource
fail, or if it is determined by the Township Board that public ownership is
most suitable, the Township Board, if considered to be in the public interest,
may acquire the resource using public funds, public or private gifts, grants,
or proceeds from the issuance of revenue bonds. The acquisition shall be
based upon the recommendation of the Historic District Commission or
standing HDC committee. The Historic District Commission or standing
HDC committee is responsible for maintaining publicly owned resources
using its own funds, if not specifically designated for other purposes, or
public funds committed for that use by the Township Board. Upon
recommendation of the Historic District Commission or standing HDC
committee, the Township may sell resources acquired under this section
with protective easements in the property transfer documents, if
appropriate.
B. Stabilize and improve property values in each district and the
surrounding areas.
C. Foster civic beauty.
D. Strengthen the local economy.
E. Promote the use of Historic Districts for the education, pleasure, and
welfare of the citizens of the Township and state.
§ 91-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-8
1:205
§ 91-8. Appeal of decisions.
§ 91-9. Penalties.
A. An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Commission concerning a
permit application may file an appeal with the State Historic
Preservation Review Board. The appeal shall be filed within 60 calendar
days after the decision is furnished to the applicant. The appellant may
submit all or part of the appellant's evidence and arguments in written
form. The State Historic Preservation Review Board shall consider an
appeal at its first regularly scheduled meeting after receiving the
appeal. A permit applicant aggrieved by the decision of the State
Historic Preservation Review Board may appeal the decision to the
circuit court having jurisdiction over the Historic District Commission
whose decision was appealed to the State Historic Preservation Review
Board.
B. Any citizen or duly organized historic preservation organization in
Northville Township as well as resource property owners, jointly or
severally aggrieved by a decision of the Historic District Commission
may appeal the decision to the circuit court, except that a permit
applicant aggrieved by a decision rendered under this chapter may not
appeal to the court without first exhausting the right to appeal to the
State Historic Preservation Review Board.
A. A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization,
institution, or agency of government that violates this act is responsible
for a civil violation and may be fined not more than $5,000.
B. A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization,
institution, or agency of government that violates this act may be
ordered by the court to pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource
unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved, excavated
or demolished.
§ 91-8 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 91-9
1:206
ARTICLE II
Historic District Commission
§ 91-10. Creation.
To execute the purposes of this chapter, the Township Historic District
Commission is created.
§ 91-11. Membership.
§ 91-12. Officers, meeting dates, voting, conflicts of interest.
A. The Commission consists of seven to nine members who are residents
of the Township. The Commission shall be comprised of up to two
members of the Township Board of Trustees and Planning Commission,
and the remainder being citizens at large. [Amended 12-31-2018]
B. The term of office shall be three years and the terms shall be staggered.
Appointments shall be made by the supervisor, subject to the approval
of the Township Board. A member may be reappointed. Terms expire on
December 31. A vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by the
supervisor, subject to Township Board, approval within 60 days of the
vacancy. Members of the Commission serve without compensation, and
shall be removable for cause by the Township Board.
C. Members of the Commission shall have a demonstrated knowledge of,
or interest in, the historical heritage of the Township.
A. The Commission shall elect from its membership a chairperson, a vicechairperson
and secretary at the first meeting each year. The
chairperson shall preside over the Commission and have the right to
vote. The vice-chairperson shall preside in the absence of the
chairperson. The secretary shall keep an accurate record of the
proceedings of the Commission.
B. The Commission shall meet at least quarterly and at the call of the
chairperson or two members of the Commission.
C. A majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of its business. The Commission shall adopt rules for the
transaction of its business, which shall provide for the time and place of
holding meetings. All meetings of the Commission shall be public, and
any person shall be entitled to appear and be heard on any matter being
considered by the Commission.
D. The Commission shall keep a record, which shall be open to the public
for view, of its resolutions, proceedings, and actions. The concurring
affirmative vote of three members shall constitute approval of plans
before it for review, or for the adoption of any resolution, motion or
other action of the Commission.
§ 91-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-12
1:207
§ 91-13. Meetings to be public, notice of meetings, records,
adoption of rules of procedure and design review standards.
§ 91-14. Budget.
There shall be appropriated in the annual budget a sum of money for
historic preservation for or in connection with:
E. No member of the Commission shall vote on any matter that may
materially or apparently affect the property, income, or business
interest of that member.
A. The business that the Commission may perform shall be conducted at a
public meeting of the Commission held in compliance with Public Act
No. 267 of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.). Public notice of the time, date
and place of the meeting shall be given in the manner required by such
act. A meeting agenda shall be part of the notice and shall include a
listing of each permit application to be reviewed or considered by the
Commission.
B. The Commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings, and
actions. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or
retained by the Commission in the performance of an official function
shall be made available to the public in compliance with Public Act No.
442 of 1976(MCL 15.231 et seq.).
C. The Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall adopt
design review standards and guidelines for resource treatment to carry
out its duties under this chapter.
A. The preparation of surveys.
B. The preservation of historic resources or districts.
C. The acquisition by purchase or condemnation of property, structures,
easements or other rights. The Commission shall make
recommendations to the Township Board concerning such acquisitions.
D. Staff support.
E. Training for all staff and public officials responsible for the
implementation of this chapter, especially to provide technical
knowledge of the principles, practicality and cost of historic
preservation.
F. Programs of assistance to property owners, including but not limited to
education, consultation, research assistance and assistance in locating
contractors offering unique services required in historic preservation
work.
G. Programs to recognize property owners' historic preservation
achievements, including but not limited to the award of certificates or
plaques for display by property owners.
§ 91-12 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 91-14
1:208
§ 91-15. Powers and responsibilities.
Powers and responsibilities include:
H. Other activities taken in accordance with provisions of this chapter.
A. Review, advise, and recommend to the Township Board properties and
resources of historical and architectural value and significance, and
their relationship to the historical value of the surrounding area.
B. Review proposed zoning amendments or applications for zoning
variances that affect proposed or designated historic resources or
districts. The Planning Department shall send applications for zoning
amendments to the Historic District Commission for comment prior to
the date of the hearing by the Planning Commission. The planning
department shall send applications for zoning variances to the Historic
District Commission for comment prior to the date of the hearing by the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
C. To collect, arrange and preserve historic material, including books,
pamphlets, maps, charts, manuscripts, papers, artwork, and other
objects and materials relating to the history of the Township and
surrounding areas.
D. To procure and preserve narratives of the early pioneers, their exploits,
perils and achievements.
E. To collect, prepare and display objects indicative of the life, customs,
dress and resources of early residents of the Township and surrounding
areas.
§ 91-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-15
1:209

ARTICLE III
Historic District Study Committee
§ 91-16. Historic District Study Committee and Study Committee
report.
A. Before establishing a Historic District, the Township Board shall
appoint a Historic District Study Committee. A majority of the persons
appointed to the Study Committee shall have a clearly demonstrated
interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. The Study Committee
shall contain representation of at least one member appointed from one
or more duly organized local historic preservation organizations. The
Study Committee shall do all of the following:
(1) Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each
proposed Historic District following procedures established or
approved by the State Historic Preservation Office.
(2) Conduct basic research of each proposed Historic District and the
historic resources located within that district.
(3) Determine the total number of historic and nonhistoric resources
within a proposed Historic District and the percentage of historic
resources of that total. In evaluating the significance of historic
resources, the Commission shall be guided by the selection criteria
for evaluation issued by the United State Secretary of the Interior
for inclusion of resources in the National Register of Historic
Places, as set forth in 36 CFR part 60, and criteria established or
approved by the State Historic Preservation Office.
(4) Prepare a preliminary Historic District Study Committee report
that addresses, at a minimum, all of the following:
(a) The charge of the committee.
(b) The composition of the committee membership.
(c) The Historic District(s) studied.
(d) The boundaries for each proposed Historic District in writing
and on maps.
(e) The history of each proposed Historic District.
(f) The significance of each district as a whole, as well as a
sufficient number of its individual resources to fully represent
the variety of resources found within the district, relative to
the evaluation criteria.
(5) Transmit copies of the preliminary report for review and
recommendations to the Township Planning Commission, to the
Township Board, to the State Historic Preservation Office, The
§ 91-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-16
1:211
Michigan Historical Commission, and to the State Historic
Preservation Review board.
(6) Make copies of the preliminary report available to the public
pursuant to § 399.203(4) of Public Act of 169 of 1970, as amended.
B. Not less than 60 calendar days after the transmittal of the preliminary
report, the committee shall hold a public hearing in compliance with
Public Act No. 267 of 1976, as amended. Public notice of the time, date
and place of the hearing shall be given in the manner required by such
act. Written notice shall be mailed by first class mail not less than 14
calendar days before the hearing to the owners of properties within the
proposed Historic District, as listed on the most current tax rolls. The
report shall be made available to the public in compliance with Public
Act 442 of 1976, as amended.
C. After the date of the public hearing, the committee and the Township
Board shall have not more than one year, unless approved by the
Township Board, to take the following actions:
(1) The committee shall prepare and submit a final report with its
recommendations and the recommendations, if any, of the local
planning body to the Township Board as to the establishment of a
Historic District(s). If the recommendation is to establish a Historic
District(s), the final report shall include a draft of the proposed
ordinance(s).
(2) After receiving a final report that recommends the establishment of
a Historic District(s), the Township Board, at its discretion, may
introduce and pass or reject an ordinance(s). If the Township Board
passes an ordinance(s) establishing one or more Historic Districts,
the Township shall file a copy of the ordinance(s), including a legal
description of the property or properties located within the Historic
District(s) with the Register of Deeds. The Township Board shall
not pass an ordinance establishing a contiguous Historic District
less than 60 days after a majority of the property owners within the
proposed Historic District, as listed on the most current tax rolls,
have approved the establishment of the Historic District pursuant
to a written petition.
D. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by a
committee in the performance of an official function of the Historic
District Commission shall be made available to the public in compliance
with Public Act No. 442 of 976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.).
§ 91-16 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 91-16
1:212
ARTICLE IV
Modification of and Work Within Districts
§ 91-17. Establishing additional, modifying, or eliminating Historic
Districts.
§ 91-18. Delegation of minor classes of work.
The Commission may delegate the issuance of certificates of
appropriateness for specified minor classes of work to its staff, or to another
delegated authority. The Commission shall provide to its delegated authority
specific written standards for issuing certificates of appropriateness under
this subsection. The Commission shall review the certificates of
appropriateness issued by the delegate on at least a quarterly basis to
determine whether or not the delegated responsibilities should be
continued.
§ 91-19. Ordinary maintenance.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance
or repair of a resource within a Historic District or to prevent work on any
resource under a permit issued by the inspector of buildings or other duly
delegated authority before this chapter was enacted.
A. The Township Board may at any time establish by ordinance additional
Historic Districts, including proposed districts previously considered
and rejected, may modify boundaries of an existing Historic District, or
may eliminate an existing Historic District. Before establishing,
modifying, or eliminating a Historic District, a Historic District Study
Committee appointed by the Township Board shall follow the
procedures as stated in § 399.203 (1-3) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as
amended. To conduct these activities, the Township Board may retain
the initial committee, establish a standing committee, or establish a
committee to consider only specific proposed districts and then be
dissolved. The committee shall consider any previously written
committee reports pertinent to the proposed action.
B. In considering elimination of a Historic District, a committee shall
follow the procedures set forth in § 399.203 (1-3) of Public Act 169 of
1970, as amended, for the issuance of a preliminary report, holding a
public hearing, and issuing a final report but with the intent of showing
one or more of the following:
(1) The Historic District has lost those physical characteristics that
enabled the establishment of the district.
(2) The Historic District was not significant in the way previously
defined.
(3) The Historic District was established pursuant to defective
procedures.
§ 91-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-20
1:213
§ 91-20. Review by Commission.
The Commission shall review and act upon only exterior features of a
resource and shall not review and act upon interior arrangements unless
specifically authorized to do so by the Township Board or unless interior
work will cause visible change to the exterior of the resource. The
Commission shall not disapprove an application due to considerations not
prescribed in § 399.205(3) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as amended.
§ 91-21. Design review standards and guidelines.
§ 91-22. Permit applications.
A. In reviewing plans, the Commission shall follow the U.S. Secretary of
Interior's Standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating
historic buildings as set forth in 36 C.F.R., Part 67. Design review
standards and guidelines that address special design characteristics of
Historic Districts administered by the Commission may be followed if
they are equivalent in guidance to the Secretary of Interior's Standards
and guidelines and are established or approved by the State Historic
Preservation Office of the Michigan Historic Center.
B. In reviewing plans, the Commission shall also consider all of the
following:
(1) The historic or architectural value and significance of the resource
and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area.
(2) The relationship of any architectural features of the resource to the
rest of the resource and to the surrounding area.
(3) The general compatibility of the design, arrangement, texture, and
materials proposed to be used.
(4) Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the Commission finds
relevant.
(5) Whether the applicant has certified in the application that the
property where work will be undertaken has, or will have before
the proposed project completion date, a fire alarm system or a
smoke alarm complying with the requirements of the Stille-
DeRossette-Hale single state construction code act 1972 PA 230,
MCL 12.1505 to 125.1531.
A. A permit shall be obtained before any work affecting the exterior
appearance of a resource is performed within a Historic District. The
person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization,
institution, or agency of government proposing to do that work shall file
an application for a permit with the Building Department. Upon receipt
of a complete application, the Building Department shall immediately
refer the application, along with all required supporting materials that
make the application complete to the Commission. A permit shall not be
§ 91-20 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 91-22
1:214
§ 91-23. Denials.
If a permit application is denied, the decision shall be binding on the
inspector or other authority. A denial shall be accompanied by a written
explanation by the Commission of the reasons for denial and, if appropriate,
a notice that an application may be resubmitted for the Commission review
when the suggested changes have been made. The denial shall also include
the notification of the applicant's right to appeal to the State Historic
Preservation Review Board and to the circuit court.
§ 91-24. Notice to proceed.
Work within a Historic District shall be permitted through the issuance of
a notice to proceed by the Commission if any of the following conditions
prevail and if the proposed work can be demonstrated by a finding of the
Commission to be necessary to substantially improve or correct any of the
following conditions:
issued and proposed work shall not proceed until the Commission has
acted on the application by issuing a certificate of appropriateness or a
notice to proceed as prescribed in this chapter. The Commission shall
not issue a certificate of appropriateness unless the applicant certifies
in the application that the property where work will be undertaken, has,
or will have before the proposed project completion date, a fire alarm
system or a smoke alarm complying with the requirements of the Stille-
DeRossett-Hale single state construction code act, 1972 PA 230, MCL
125.1501 to 125.1531.
B. The Commission shall file certificates of appropriateness, notices to
proceed, and denials of applications for permits with the Building
Department. A permit shall not be issued until the Commission has
acted as prescribed by this chapter.
C. If an application is for work that will adversely affect the exterior of a
resource the Commission considers valuable to Northville Township,
the State of Michigan, or the nation, and the Commission determines
that the alteration or loss of that resource will adversely affect the
public purpose of the City, state, or nation, the Commission shall
attempt to establish with the owner of the resource an economically
feasible plan for the preservation of the resource.
D. The failure of the Commission to act on an application within 60
calendar days after the date a complete application is filed with the
Commission, unless an extension is agreed upon in writing by the
applicant and the Commission, shall be considered to constitute
approval.
E. The Township may charge a reasonable fee to process a permit
application.
§ 91-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-24
1:215
§ 91-25. Work without permit.
When work has been done upon a resource without a permit, and the
Commission finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of
appropriateness, the Commission may require an owner to restore the
resource to the condition that the resource was in before the inappropriate
work or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of
appropriateness. If the owner does not comply with the restoration or
modification requirement within a reasonable time, the Commission may
seek an order from the circuit court to require the owner to restore the
resource to its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies
for a certificate of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply or cannot
comply with the order of the court, the Commission or its agents may enter
the property and conduct work necessary to restore the resource to its
former condition or modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate
of appropriateness in accordance with the court's order. The costs of the
work done shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by Northville
Township as a special assessment against the property. When acting
pursuant to an order of the circuit court, the Commission or its agents may
enter a property for purposes of this section.
§ 91-26. Demolition by neglect.
Upon a finding by the Commission that a historic resource within a Historic
District or a proposed Historic District subject to its review and approval is
threatened with demolition by neglect, the Commission may do either of the
following:
A. The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or to the
structure's occupants.
B. The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program that will
be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant proposing
the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals,
financing, and environmental clearances.
C. Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to the owner
when a governmental action, an act of God, or other events beyond the
owner's control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to
eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the
resource for sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a
vacant site within the Historic District, have been attempted and
exhausted by the owner.
D. Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority of the
community.
A. Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions contributing
to demolition by neglect.
§ 91-24 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 91-26
1:216
§ 91-27. Review of work in proposed districts.
Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic,
architectural, archaeological, engineering, or cultural significance of a
proposed Historic District, the Township Board may, at its discretion, adopt
a resolution requiring that all applications for permits within the proposed
Historic District be referred to the Historic District Commission as
prescribed in § 91-24. The Historic District Commission shall review permit
applications with the same powers that would apply if the proposed Historic
District was an established Historic District. The review may continue in the
proposed Historic District for not more than one year, or until such time as
the Township Board approves or rejects the establishment of the Historic
District by ordinance, whichever comes first.
§ 91-28. Emergency moratorium.
If the Township Board determines that pending work will cause irreparable
harm to resources located within an established or proposed Historic
District, the Township Board may by resolution declare an emergency
moratorium on all such work for a period not to exceed six months. The
Township Board may extend the emergency moratorium for an additional
period not to exceed six months, upon finding that the threat of irreparable
harm to resources is still present. Any pending permit application
concerning a resource subject to an emergency moratorium may be
summarily denied.
B. If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time, the
Commission or its agents may enter the property and make such repairs
as necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. The costs of the work
shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by Northville
Township as a special assessment against the property. The
Commission or its agents may enter the property for purposes of this
section upon obtaining an order from the circuit court.
§ 91-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-28
1:217

ARTICLE V
Severability
§ 91-29. Severability.
If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision of this chapter
should be unenforceable, in whole or in part, such declaration shall only
effect the provision held to be unenforceable and shall not effect any other
part or provision; provided that if a court of competent jurisdiction declares
a penalty provision to exceed the authority of Northville Township, the
penalty shall be construed as the maximum penalty that is determined by
the court to be within the authority of Northville Township to impose.
§ 91-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-29
1:219

ARTICLE VI
Repeal of Conflicting Provisions and Effective Date
§ 91-30. Repeal of conflicting provisions and effective date.
This chapter shall take effect upon publication as required by law. All
ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict or inconsistent with provisions
of this chapter are hereby repealed; provided that any violation charged
before the effective date of this chapter under an ordinance provision
repealed by this chapter shall continue under the ordinance provision then
in effect.
§ 91-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 91-30
1:221
Chapter 93
HUNTING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms, longarms and dangerous
weapons — See Ch. 67.
§ 93-1. Hunting prohibited. [Amended 5-18-2017]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, whether residents of this
or any other state, to hunt with firearms, bow and arrow, crossbow or any
other weapon in or upon any lands or premises in the Township. A violation
of this section shall result in the forfeiture of any weapon used contrary to
this section.
§ 93-2. Penalties. [Amended 9-18-2003]
Chapter 101
LANDFILLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Untreated landfill leachate — See Ch. 142,
§ 142-39Y.
Leachate from a hazardous waste
landfill — See Ch. 142, § 142-39Z.
Solid waste — See Ch. 149.
Landfill permit — See Ch. 170, § 170-33.14.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties specified for a violation of the Township Code.40
B. Any minor, as defined in this state's probate code, who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be dealt with by the Juvenile Division of
the Probate Court or as otherwise prescribed by state law.
40.Editor's Note: See §§ 1-10, 1-14 and 1-16.
§ 91-30 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 93-2
1:222
ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
§ 101-1. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation shall conduct any landfilling operation in
any area of the Township without first obtaining from the Township Board
a permit. All applications for such permits shall be filed with the Township
Clerk and shall conform in all respects with the requirements of any
applicable regulations.
§ 101-2. Fees and charges.
The Township Board shall adopt by resolution a schedule of fees and
charges, as it deems advisable and necessary providing for the application
for, hearing on, issuance of permits and monitoring activities of authorized
landfills within the Township.
§ 101-3. Application procedures.
The Township Board shall refer all applications for landfills to the Township
Planning Commission for investigation and recommendation as to whether
or not a permit should be issued. Whenever such application is referred to
the Planning Commission, such Commission shall within 45 days complete
its investigation and transmit its reports and recommendation to the
Township Board. Such Commission shall have the right to require the
attendance of the applicant, his agents, servants and employees at any
hearing it may conduct in the conduct of its investigation.
§ 101-4. Grant or denial of permit.
After receiving the report and recommendation from the Planning
Commission, the Township Board shall at a subsequent regular or special
meeting grant or deny the permit and, in the event of denial, state its
reasons therefor in writing.
§ 101-5. Nuisances.
Any landfill operation maintained or conducted within the Township in
violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se and the
Township may institute proceedings in the Circuit Court for the purpose of
restraining any violation of the provisions of this chapter or any violation
of the specifications and regulations contained in any permit issued
hereunder.
§ 101-6. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal infraction, subject to the following penalties:
§ 101-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-6
1:223
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is
specified in connection with a particular section:
(1) First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of not less than $150, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each offense.
(2) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $300, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of, the
chapter.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
code of ordinances, any equitable or other remedies available may be
sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses as provided by the law.
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
§ 101-6 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 101-6
1:224
ARTICLE II
Regulations Governing Landfills
§ 101-7. Scope.
These regulations apply to all filling of land within the Township by the
depositing of materials originating off the premises on which the fill is
located. They cover the review of proposed fill sites, information to be
supplied with applications for landfill permits, fees for review or proposed
fill sites, information to be supplied with applications for landfill permits,
fees for review of applications and plans, inspection charges, deposits to
assure payment of inspection charges and compliance with regulations
or conditions of permits, landscaping, setbacks and certain design and
operating aspects supplemental to P.A. 641 and the solid waste regulations
of Wayne County.
§ 101-8. Intent.
It is intended to regulate the operation of landfills so that no landfill shall
be a nuisance nor cause any damage to surrounding property nor endanger
the health or safety of the community. It is the further intent that these
regulations shall apply to certain operating aspects of landfills not normally
covered by federal, state or County regulations.
§ 101-9. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Township Board of the Charter Township of Northville,
Wayne County, Michigan.
COUNTY PLAN — The plan for solid waste developed by the Charter County
of Wayne.
P.A. 347 — Public Act 347 of 1972, the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Act.
P.A. 641 — Public Act 641 or 1978, the Solid Waste Management Act.
§ 101-10. Application.
A. Preliminary application and determination.
(1) The owner of land upon whose premises it is proposed to construct
a landfill shall submit an application prepared in accordance with
the following requirements to the Township Board for
determination of the acceptability of proposed location. The
application shall include a legal description of the land owned by
the applicant within which the proposed fill site is located with a
statement of the type of ownership possessed the applicant, a scale
drawing showing the outline of the area on the ground, a
description of the type of landfill proposed, a statement of the
§ 101-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-10
1:225
intended use of the area after completion of fill and a landscaping
plan conforming to the conditions of this chapter. The Board will
thereupon examine the proposed site and determine whether it is
in compliance with this chapter.
(2) Should the applicant propose the actual construction and operation
of the landfill to be conducted by other persons, any permit which
the Board may subsequently issue will be issued to the landowner
and operator jointly and will embody the joint and several
obligations of each in accordance with these regulations.
B. Detailed information to be supplied by applicant. The applicant shall
submit to the Board the following information, which shall be prepared
and signed by a competent registered professional engineer:
(1) A map at a scale of 200 feet to one inch on which there shall be
shown:41
(a) The outline of the proposed fill area identified on a rectangular
coordinate system referred to the most convenient exterior
section line and section corner or quarter section corner.
(b) All boundaries of the property which are located closer than
600 feet from any part of the fill area.
(c) Areas from which cover material will be obtained.
(d) Existing surface elevations of fill area, borrow areas and
contiguous areas whose future utility will be directly
influenced by the fill and/or borrow, shown by accurate
contours at intervals not exceeding two feet. Elevations shall
be expressed, directly on U.S.C. and G.S. datum.
(e) Description of proposed access road from public highways to
the fill area.
(f) Drainage channels or other provisions to be made for draining
surface runoff from the fill area during construction and after
completion of fill.
(g) Location of employee facilities, maintenance buildings or other
such permanent structures or appurtenances.
(2) A similar map showing, by contours as previously specified, the
surface elevations and slopes which will be established when fill
and borrow operations are complete.
(3) A landscaping plan, together with renderings, views or cross
sections sufficient to show the proposed screening and landscaping
measures from each direction around the perimeter of the site.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 101-10 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 101-10
1:226
§ 101-11. Design.
Screening and landscaping shall be designed and placed in such a
manner to reasonably screen operations from view from adjacent
roads or residences when said operations are within 1,000 feet of
site property lines.
C. If the fill area is subsequently to be included in a plat of subdivision of
land contemplating erection of buildings for any purpose, the maps
required by Subsections A and B shall show the proposed subdivision
layout and the future locations of streets, buildings sites and utility
easements shall be clearly excluded from fill with any material other
than earth. Such subdivision layout need not be shown in final exact
detail dimensions; however, if significant latitude is retained for future
alteration of layout, the areas restricted to earth fill only shall be
expanded accordingly.
A. Earth fills.
(1) Where a landfill will consist of earth only, the design of fill shall
provide for the stripping of all areas where the total depth of fill will
be less than six feet, all trees, vegetation and other materials
whose consistency, shape or decomposition might cause significant
settlement shall be removed in advance of filling. Excepting in
locations where the future use of the area is such that settlement
will be of no consequence, earth fills shall be controlled so that the
completed fill shall be compacted throughout to a density not less
than 90% of the maximum unit weight of the earth material.
(2) Unless otherwise specifically noted, existing ponds or pits shall be
granular material which will be compact when placed in water.
(3) Except in situations covered in Subsection A(2), drainage of earth
fills during and after construction shall be maintained in such
manner that fill shall not be placed in ponded water nor earth be
washed from the fill into natural watercourses nor onto the
property of others in violation of P.A. 347.
B. Fills including waste materials other than earth (sanitary landfills).
(1) Classification. All fills which include materials other than earth
shall be classed as sanitary landfills and shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the best current standards for
sanitary landfills as provided for by P.A. 641 and the County Plan.
(2) Fire protection. Every landfill operation which includes refuse in
the fill shall have an adequate water supply and facilities for quick
delivery of water to any part of the fill for the purpose of
extinguishing fires. Capacity shall be such that at least 50 gallons
of water per minute can be applied to any fire continuously for at
least then 10 hours. The source of water supply and the facilities to
§ 101-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-11
1:227
be provided for delivery of water shall be indicated on plans
submitted for approval.
(3) Personnel facilities.
(a) Each sanitary landfill operation shall have a suitable
weatherproof shelter for personnel employed on the site.
Washroom and acceptable sanitary facilities shall be provided.
(b) There shall be provided within view of each sanitary landfill
operation an inspector's office, which shall be either separate
or partitioned off from employee's quarters. The inspector's
office shall be not less than 60 square feet in area with at least
dimensions of not less than six feet and shall have a window
facing the fill site. It shall be provided with a plan table
approximately 36 inches by 54 inches and chairs or benches
for at least three persons.
(c) Both employee quarters and inspector's office shall be heated
adequately for whatever seasons in which the fill may be
operated.
(4) Telephone. A telephone shall be maintained at each sanitary landfill
site and made known to Township emergency personnel. A twentyfour-
hour emergency telephone number shall also be made
available to Township forces.
(5) Fees. Fees payable to the Township for review of landfill plans and
inspection of landfill operations shall be set by resolution of the
Township Board.
(6) Permits.
(a) Issuance and renewal. Permits for landfills will be issued for a
period of two years and shall be concurrent, after the initial
permit, with the operating license issued under P.A. 641.
(b) Cancellation. Permits will be subject to summary cancellation
and filling must stop if:
[1] Operations are in violation of the approved plans or these
regulations; or
[2] Inspection charges are unpaid; or
[3] Filling operations are inactive or conducted on so small an
area that, in the opinion of the Board, the duration of
filling operations will itself constitute a nuisance; or
[4] Operation of the fill develops any unforeseen nuisance or
hazard to the health or safety of the community, and
adequate measures are not put into effect, forthwith, to
correct such conditions.
§ 101-11 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 101-12
1:228
§ 101-12. Operations.
§ 101-13. As-built plan.
A. General.
(1) Hauling. The hauling of landfill materials shall be confined to
routes which shall be approved by the Board and included in
provisions of the permit. The Board reserves the right, from time to
time, in its discretion, to make revisions in approved routes.
Vehicles hauling landfill materials shall not be overloaded so that
materials are spilled upon the highway. Vehicles hauling refuse to a
landfill shall be closed or refuse shall be covered when transported
through the Township.
(2) Hours of operation. Landfills which are so located and operated
that noises of operation can reasonably be considered disturbing to
neighboring residents shall not carry on operations between the
hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. nor on Sundays or holidays. Other
reasonable restrictions on hours of operation may be included in or
added to the conditions of individual permits.
(3) Township right of entry. The officers and agents of the Township
shall have at all times the right of entry to any premises where any
Township landfill permit is in effect.
B. Operation of sanitary landfills.
(1) Survey controls. Construction of a sanitary landfill shall proceed
only when there are in place sufficient survey stakes and markers
placed and identified so that the fill operator and the inspector can
determine readily and with certainty that construction of the fill
conforms to the locations and elevations shown on the approved
plans.
(2) Supervision. It shall be the permit holder's responsibility to have on
the job at all times when filling is in progress a qualified supervisor
who shall direct the dumping, spreading, compaction and covering
of the fill.
(3) Access. Access to the site of a sanitary landfill shall be limited to
those times when an attendant is on duty and only to authorized
persons. Chain link fencing at least six feet high and topped with
three strands of barbed wire or equivalent barriers approved by the
Board shall be installed to discourage unauthorized access. Gates
at entry points shall be closed and locked when the fill is
unattended. If necessary, watchmen shall be provided to prevent
hazards or nuisances resulting from unauthorized entry to the fill
area.
A. On completion of a sanitary landfill, the permit holder shall supply to
the Board an as-built engineering plan which shall show by accurate
§ 101-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-13
1:229
§ 101-14. Work by Township.
If the permit holder for any sanitary landfill shall fail or neglect to do any
of the things required by the permit or these regulations and he shall fail to
remedy such omissions forthwith after notice thereof delivered to him or to
his supervisor who can readily be located, the Township shall have the right
to enter the property and to do by its own forces or its agents whatever may
be necessary to eliminate any dangerous or objectionable conditions. The
permit holder shall be billed and shall pay for all such work done by the
Township.
survey data and references the actual location, depth and final surface
elevations of all areas containing refuse fill. This plan shall be to the
same scale and referred to the same control lines and datum as the plan
submitted with the application for permit. The as-built plan submitted
shall be an original tracing in ink on permanent transparent film or an
acceptable reproduction.
B. The as-built plan shall be retained in the Township files for reference in
the consideration of developments which may subsequently be
proposed on or adjacent to the fill area.
§ 101-13 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 101-14
1:230
Chapter 104
LIQUOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Possession or transportation of alcoholic
liquor in motor vehicles by underage
persons — Ch. 67, § 67-38.
Misrepresenting age to obtain alcoholic
liquor - Ch. 67, § 67-39.
Open containers of liquor - See Ch. 69,
§ 69-3A.
§ 101-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-14
1:231

ARTICLE I
Host Liquor Regulations
[Adopted 7-11-1991 as Ch. 56 of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 104-1. Title.
This article shall be know and may be cited as the "Charter Township of
Northville Host Liquor Ordinance."
§ 104-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT — A person 17 years of age or older.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR — Any beverage containing more than 1/2 of 1% of
alcohol by volume. The percentage of alcohol by volume shall be determined
in accordance with the provisions of MCL 436.1201 et seq., as amended.
CONTROL — Any form of regulation or dominion including a possessory
right.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE — A controlled substance as defined now or
hereafter by Article 7 of Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978
(MCL 333.7101 et seq., MSA 14.15 {7101} et seq.).
MINOR — A person not legally permitted by reason of age to possess
alcoholic liquor pursuant to MCL 436.1703, as amended.
OPEN HOUSE PARTY — A social gathering of persons at a resident or
premises, other than the owner or those with rights of possession or their
immediate family members.
RESIDENCE or PREMISES — A motel room, hotel room, home, apartment,
condominium or other dwelling unit, including the curtilage of the dwelling
unit or a hall, meeting room or other place of assembly occupied as a
dwelling or specifically for social functions and whether owned, leased,
rented or used with or without compensation.
§ 104-3. Responsibilities of adults and minors. [Amended
9-18-2003; 11-16-2006]
A. No adult having control of any residence or premises shall allow an
open house party to take place at the residence or premises by any
minor where the adult knew or reasonably should have known that any
alcoholic liquor or controlled substance was in the possession of or
being consumed by a minor at the residence or premises and where the
adult failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the possession and
consumption of the alcoholic or controlled substance at the residence
or premises.
B. A person less than 21 years of age shall not purchase or attempt to
purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic
§ 104-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-3
1:233
liquor, or possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor or have any
bodily alcohol content, except as otherwise provided in this section
or by other law. A person less than 21 years of age who violates this
subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the following fines
and sanctions:
(1) For the first violation, a fine of not more than $100, and may be
ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention or substance
abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in Section
6107 of the Public Health Code, Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of
1978, being Section 333.6107 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, and
designated by the administrator of the substance abuse services,
and may be ordered to perform community service and to undergo
substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own
expense as described in Subsection C.
(2) For a second violation, meaning a violation of this subsection
following a prior conviction under this section, MCL 436.1703 or a
local ordinance substantially corresponding to MCL 436.1703, a
fine of not more than $200, and may be ordered to participate in
substance abuse prevention or substance abuse treatment and
rehabilitation services as defined in Section 6107 of the Public
Health Code, Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, being Section
333.6107 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, and designated by the
administrator of the substance abuse services, and may be ordered
to perform community service and to undergo substance abuse
screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described
in Subsection C. A person is also subject to sanctions against his or
her operator's or chauffeur's license pursuant to Subsection D.
(3) For a third or subsequent violation, meaning a violation of this
subsection following two or more prior convictions under this
section, MCL 436.1703 or a local ordinance substantially
corresponding to MCL 436.1703, a fine of not more than $500, and
may be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention or
substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in
Section 6107 of the Public Health Code, Act No. 368 of the Public
Acts of 1978, being Section 333.6107 of the Michigan Compiled
Laws, and designated by the administrator of the substance abuse
services, and may be ordered to perform community service and to
undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her
own expense as described in Subsection C. A person is also subject
to sanctions against his or her operator's or chauffeur's license
pursuant to Subsection D.
C. The Court may order the person found violating Subsection B to
undergo screening and assessment by a person or agency as designated
by the substance abuse coordinating agency as defined in Section 6103
of Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, being Section 333.6103 of the
Michigan Compiled Laws, in order to determine whether the person is
§ 104-3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 104-3
1:234
likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug
education and alcohol or drug treatment programs.
D. Immediately upon entry of a conviction or a probate court disposition
for a violation of Subsection B, the Court shall consider all prior
convictions or probate court dispositions of Subsection B, or law(s) of
another state substantially corresponding to Subsection B, and shall
impose the following sanctions:
(1) If the Court finds that the person has one such prior conviction or
probate court disposition, the Court shall order the Secretary of
State to suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license of the person
for a period of not less than 90 days or more than 180 days. The
Court may order the Secretary of State to issue to the person a
restricted license after the first 30 days of the period of suspension
in a manner described in Subsection E and provided for in Section
319 of Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, being Section
257.319 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. In the case of a person
who does not possess an operator's or chauffeur's license, the
Secretary of State shall deny the application for an operator's or
chauffeur's license for the applicable suspension period.
(2) If the Court finds that the person has two or more such prior
convictions or probate court dispositions, the Court shall order the
Secretary of State to suspend the operator's or chauffeur's license
of the person for a period of not less than 180 days or more than
one year. The Court may order the Secretary of State to issue to the
person a restricted license after the first 60 days of the period of
suspension in a manner described in Subsection E and provided for
in Section 319 of Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, being
Section 257.319 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. In the case of a
person who does not possess an operator's or chauffeur's license,
the Secretary of State shall deny the application for an operator's
or chauffeur's license for the applicable suspension period.
E. In those cases in which a restricted license is allowed under this
section, the Court shall not order the Secretary of State to issue a
restricted license unless the person states under oath, and the Court
finds based upon record in open court, that the person is unable to take
public transportation to and from his or her work location or place of
alcohol or drug education institution and does not have any family
members or others able to provide transportation. The Court order
under Subsection D and the restricted license shall indicate the work
location of the person to whom it is issued, the approved route and
routes and permitted times of travel and shall permit the person to
whom it is issued to do only one or more of the following:
(1) Drive to and from the person's residence or work location;
(2) Drive in the course of the person's employment or occupation;
§ 104-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-3
1:235
(3) Drive to and from the person's residence and an alcohol or drug
education or treatment program as ordered by the Court;
(4) Drive to and from the person's residence and the Court probation
department or a Court-ordered community service program, or
both;
(5) Drive to and from the person's residence and an educational
institution at which the person is enrolled as a student.
F. If license sanctions are imposed, immediately upon the entry of a Courtordered
sanction pursuant to Subsection D, the Court shall order the
person convicted for the violation to surrender to the Court his or her
operator's or chauffeur's license. The Court shall immediately forward a
notice of Court-ordered license sanctions to the Secretary of State. If
the license is not forwarded to the Secretary of State, an explanation of
the reason why the license is absent shall be attached. If the finding is
appealed to the Circuit Court, the Court may, ex parte, order the
Secretary of State to stay the suspension issued pursuant to this section
pending the outcome of the appeal. Immediately following the
imposition of the sanction, the Court shall forward a notice to the
Secretary of State indicating the sanction imposed.
G. A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a person less than
21 years of age has consumed alcoholic liquor may request consent
from the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. In
the event the person refuses consent to a preliminary chemical breath
analysis, the peace officer may detain the person at the scene and
request a search warrant compelling the person to submit a breath
sample, blood sample or urine sample. The results of a preliminary
chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol or urine
alcohol test are admissible in a criminal prosecution to determine
whether the person less than 21 years of age has consumed or
possessed alcoholic liquor. [Amended 12-17-2009]
H. The Charter Township of Northville Police Department, upon
determining that a person less than 18 years of age who is not
emancipated pursuant to Act No. 293 of the Public Acts of 1968, being
Sections 722.1 to 722.6 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, allegedly
consumed, possessed, purchased, or attempted to consume, possess, or
purchase alcoholic liquor in violation of Subsection B shall notify the
parent or parents, custodian or guardian of the person as to the nature
of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is
reasonably ascertainable by the Charter Township of Northville Police
Department. The notice required by this subsection shall be made not
later than 48 hours after the Charter Township of Northville Police
Department determines that the person who allegedly violated
Subsection B is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated pursuant
to Act No. 293 of the Public Acts of 1968. The notice may be made by
any means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice,
including, but not limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first-
§ 104-3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 104-3
1:236
class mail. If a person less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for
violating Subsection B, his or her parents or legal guardian shall be
notified immediately as provided in this subsection.
I. This section does not prohibit a person less than 21 years of age from
possession of alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the
course of his or her employment if employed by a person licensed by the
Liquor Control Act (MCL 436.1 et seq.)42 and by the Liquor Control
Commission, or by an agent of the Liquor Control Commission, if the
alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or her personal consumption.
J. This section shall not be construed to limit the civil or criminal liability
of the vendor or the vendor's Clerk, servant, agent or employee for a
violation of this act.
K. The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person less than 21 years of
age who is enrolled in a course offered by an accredited postsecondary
educational institution in an academic building of the institution under
the supervision of a faculty member is not prohibited by this act if the
purpose of the consumption is solely education and is a necessary
ingredient of the course.
L. The consumption by a person less than 21 years of age of sacramental
wine in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue, or
temple is not prohibited by this act.
M. Subsection B does not apply to a person less than 21 years of age who
participates in either or both of the following:
(1) An undercover operation in which the person less than 21 years of
age purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of
the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local
prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal
enforcement action.
(2) An undercover operation in which the person less than 21 years of
age purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of
the Charter Township of Northville Police Department, the State
Police, or the Liquor Control Commission as part of an enforcement
action, except that any initial or contemporaneous purchase or
receipt of alcoholic liquor by the person less than 21 years of age is
under the direction of the Charter Township of Northville Police
Department, the State Police, or the Liquor Control Commission
and is part of the undercover operation. The Charter Township of
Northville Police Department shall not recruit or attempt to recruit
a person less than 21 years of age for participation in an
undercover operation at the scene of a violation of this section or
corresponding section of state law.
N. Definitions. As used in this section:
42.Editor's Note: See now MCL 436.1101 et seq.
§ 104-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 104-3
1:237
§ 104-4. Exception.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to legally protected religious
observances or legally protected educational activities.
§ 104-5. Applicable state law.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to be in usurpation of the statutory
authority of the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, whose regulations
are specifically adopted by reference herein.
§ 104-6. Penalties.
Any person, corporation, partnership, or any other legal entity who shall
violate any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
and, upon conviction thereof, may be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court.
BODILY ALCOHOL CONTENT — An alcohol content of 0.02 gram or
more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath or per 67
milliliters of urine.[Added 12-17-2009]
PROBATE COURT DISPOSITION — An order of disposition of the
probate court of the Family Division of the Circuit Court for a child
found to be within the provisions of Chapter XIIA of Act No. 288 of the
Public Acts of 1939, being Sections 712A.1 to 712A.32 of the Michigan
Compiled Laws.
WORK LOCATION — As applicable, either the specified place or places
of employment or the territory or territories regularly visited by the
person in pursuance of the person's occupation, or both.
§ 104-3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 104-6
1:238
Chapter 106
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Solid waste — See Ch. 149. Construction site maintenance — See Ch. 64.
§ 106-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the singular number include the plural and words
used in the plural number include the singular. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not mainly directory.
AIRCRAFT — Any contravene now known or hereafter invented, used or
designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall
include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
COMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or
literature:
That advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing;
or
A.
That which directs attention to any business or mercantile or
commercial establishment or other activity for the purpose of either
directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
B.
That which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission
fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit, but the terms
of this subsection shall not apply where an admission fee is charged
or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses
incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event
of any kind when either of the same is held, given or takes place in
connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted
under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety
and good order, provided that nothing contained in this subsection
shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of
any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind
without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law
of this state or under any ordinance of this Township; or
C.
Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter
is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or
D.
§ 104-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-1
1:239
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Garbage, refuse, and rubbish as defined herein and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to
create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
NEWSPAPER — Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general
law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service in
accordance with federal statute or regulation and any newspaper filed and
recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law and, in
addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine
regularly published with not less than four issues per year.
NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL — Any printed or written matter, any
sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine,
paper booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or
copies of matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a
commercial handbill or newspaper.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the Township, owned or used by the Township or other
public entity and devoted to active or passive recreation.
PARKWAY — That part of the street lying between the property lines and
that portion of the street right-of-way ordinarily used for vehicular traffic.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used, either wholly or in part, for the private residential
purposes whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps,
vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house,
building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid waste (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid waste consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard,
tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
TOWNSHIP — The Charter Township of Northville, Wayne County,
Michigan.
circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain
of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
§ 106-1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 106-1
1:240
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 106-2. Litter in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk
or other public place within the Township except in public receptacles,
in authorized private receptacles for collection or in the official Township
dump.
§ 106-3. Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent
scattering.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place
or upon private property.
§ 106-4. Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the Township the accumulation of litter from any building or lot
or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway in front of their business
premises.
§ 106-5. Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks free of litter.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the Township the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public place
or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of
business within the Township shall keep the sidewalk and parkway in front
of their business premises free of litter.
§ 106-6. Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the Township or upon
private property.
§ 106-7. Truck loads causing litter.
A. No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
Township unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent
any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any
street, alley or other public place nor shall any person drive or move
any vehicle or truck within the Township, the wheels or tires of which
carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place mud, dirt,
stick substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind.
§ 106-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-7
1:241
§ 106-8. Litter in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the Township
except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as
provided herein.
§ 106-9. Litter in lakes and foundations.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
bay or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the Township.
§ 106-10. Throwing or distributing commercial handbills in public
places.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
Township nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial
handbill in any public place, provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful
on any sidewalk, street other public place within the Township for any
person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.
§ 106-11. Placing commercial and noncommercial handbills on
vehicles.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without
charge to the receiver thereof a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of
a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
§ 106-12. Depositing commercial and noncommercial handbills on
uninhabited or vacant premises.
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
B. All trucks, trailers or other types of containers hauling garbage, paper,
wood, rubbish, metal and/or any other type of material likely to blow or
fall off onto the roadway or shoulders shall be in a closed container or
covered with a tarpaulin or other device sufficient to contain the items
herein mentioned.
§ 106-7 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 106-13
1:242
§ 106-13. Prohibiting distribution of handbills where properly
posted.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone
thereon not to do so or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous
position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words: "No
Trespassing," "No Advertisement" or any similar notice, indicating in any
matter that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or
have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any such handbills left upon
such premises.
§ 106-14. Distributing commercial and noncommercial handbills at
inhabited private premises.
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are
inhabited except by handing or transmitting any such handbills directly to
the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private
premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises
which are not posted as provided in this chapter, such person, unless
requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit
any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises if such
handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from
being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks streets or other
public places, except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited
by federal postal law or regulations.
§ 106-15. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to apply to the
distribution of mail by the United States nor to newspapers as defined in
this chapter nor to political or religious literature. The provisions of this
chapter shall also not apply to the literature of civic associations or service
clubs.
§ 106-16. Dropping litter from aircraft.
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the
Township any liter, handbill or any other object.
§ 106-17. Posting notices prohibited.
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device
calculated to attract the attention of the public to any lamppost, public
utility pole or shade tree or upon any public structure or building except as
may be authorized by law or required by law.
§ 106-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-18
1:243
§ 106-18. Litter on occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the Township, whether owned by such person or not, except that
the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
§ 106-19. Owner to maintain premises free of litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
§ 106-20. Litter on vacant lots.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open vacant private property
within the Township, whether owned by such person or not.
§ 106-21. Clearing of litter from open private property by Township.
A. Notice to remove. The Township Supervisor is hereby authorized and
empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property
within the Township or the agent of such owner to properly dispose of
litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public
health, safety or welfare. Such notices shall be by certified mail with
return receipt requested and addressed to said owner at his last known
address.
B. Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent so notified to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the
public health, safety or welfare within five days after receipt of written
notice provided for in Subsection A or within 10 days after the date of
such notice in the event the same is returned to the local Post Office
Department because of its inability to make delivery thereof, provided
that the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such
owner or agent as it appears on the tax roll, the Township Supervisor
and his authorized representatives are thereby authorized and
empowered to pay for the disposing of such litter or to order its disposal
by the Township.
C. Reimbursement to Township; tax lien. Whenever the Township
Supervisor or his authorized representatives shall enter upon any
parcel of land in order to accomplish abatement of an existing violation
pursuant to provisions of this chapter, the Township Supervisor is
hereby authorized and directed to keep an accurate account of all
expenses incurred and, based upon same, issue a certificate
determining and certify the reasonable cost involved for such work with
respect to each parcel of property. The Township Supervisor is also
§ 106-18 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 106-21
1:244
§ 106-22. Penalties. [Amended 9-18-2003]
Chapter 110
MINING AND QUARRYING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 117. Zoning — See Ch. 170.
authorized to add to such costs an administrative charge of 10% to
cover the expense of administering the work performed, overhead and
other contingent expenses. Within 10 days after receipt of said
certificate, the Township Supervisor shall forward a statement of the
total charges assessed on each parcel of property to the owner as
shown by the last current assessment of tax roll, and said assessment
shall be payable to the Township Treasurer within 30 days from the
date said statement was forwarded. If not paid within the prescribed
thirty-day period, such statement shall be filed with the Township
Assessor and shall thereupon be assessed against the land in question
and become a lien on such property. The amount so charged may be
discharged at any time by the payment of the amount specified in the
statement together with interest at the rate of 6% per annum compiled
from the time of filing said certificate with the Township Assessor.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties specified for a violation of the Township Code.43
B. Any minor, as defined in this state's probate code, who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be dealt with by the Juvenile Division of
the Probate Court or as otherwise prescribed by state law.
43.Editor's Note: See §§ 1-10, 1-14 and 1-16.
§ 106-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 106-22
1:245

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 110-1. Intent.
In the preparation and development of this chapter, on the basis of the
advice of experts and upon independent investigation, it has been
recognized that there are activities and impacts which require regulation
in view of the noise, dirt, dust and temporary and permanent changes to
the topography and environment which are inherent in mining operations.
It is the intent of the Township to regulate, inspect and monitor mining
operations in order to minimize the existence of dangerously steep slopes,
shifting earth, impairments or pollution of ground water, surface water
and the watershed and to protect the air, water and natural resources
and the public trust therein and the health, safety and general welfare
of the residents of Northville Township. To meet these objectives, such
mining operations shall be licensed and the fees required for licensure
shall be utilized to offset costs and expenses of monitoring, inspection and
administration.
§ 110-2. Compliance required; types of mined minerals regulated.
A. All operations regulated by this chapter shall be conducted in a manner
so as to meet all standards and requirements hereunder and, in
addition, all other applicable laws, ordinances and regulations effective
in this Township and the more restrictive provisions of this chapter and
such other laws, ordinances and regulations shall govern in the event of
a conflict.
B. This chapter regulates all types of strip and tunnel mining, including
the mining of metals, the mining of bituminous coal and lignite and the
mining and quarrying of all other minerals, including but not limited to
the following:
Group I
Dimension stone mining
Crushed and broken stone
Sand and gravel
Clay, ceramic and refractory minerals
Chemical and fertilizer minerals, including:
Barite
Fluorspar
Potash, soda and borate
Phosphate rock
Rock salt
Sulfur
§ 110-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-2
1:247
Group II
Gypsum
Talc, soapstone and pyrophylite
Miscellaneous nonmetallic minerals, including:
Agate
Amethyst
Bituminous limestone
Bituminous sandstone
Burrstone
Calcite
Corundum
Cryolite
Diamond
Diatomaceous earth
Diatomite
Emery
Fill dirt
Garnet
Gemstones
Gilsonite
Greensand
Grinding peat
Grindstone quarrying
Jade
Merrschaum
Mica
Millstone
Muscovite
Natural
Abrasive
Oilstone oxokerite
Peat humus
Perlite
Phlogopite
Pipestone
Pozzolana
Precious stones
§ 110-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 110-2
1:248
§ 110-3. Definitions.
Pulpstone
Pumice
Pumicite
Quartz
Reed peat
Rubbing stone
Ruby
Sapphire
Scoria
Screening peat
Scythestone
Sedge peat
Semiprecious stones
Sharpening stone
Shredding peat
Topsoil
Tripoli
Turquoise
Vermiculite
Volcanic ash
Whet stone
Wurtzilite
Other nonmetallic minerals with marketable value
A. For the purpose of construction and application of this chapter, the
following definitions shall apply:
MINING AND QUARRYING — Defined as the removal from a parcel
of land of any earth resource identified in § 110-2 as being regulated
by this chapter. However, "mining" and "quarrying" shall not include
the removal from a single parcel of land during any calendar year of
not less than 1,000 cubic yards of material when such removal is not
attendant to development in accordance with a subdivision preliminary
approval; or less than 10,000 cubic yards of material when such
removal is attendant to development in accordance with a subdivision
preliminary approval. All removal which is not regulated as mining and
quarrying shall be subject to the site plan review provisions of Chapter
170, Zoning, in the case of removal attendant to development subject
to site plan review and to any soil erosion and sedimentation control
regulations of the Township in the case of all removal. Such removal of
§ 110-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-3
1:249
§ 110-4. Inspections.
earth resources may also be subject to any land improvement ordinance
or other pertinent regulations which the Township may enact
subsequent to the enactment of this chapter.
RECLAMATION — The establishment, recovery and reconstruction of
the land contained in a mining site or part thereof to a condition
approved by the Township Board as part of a plan incorporated into a
permit issued hereunder.
TOWNSHIP — The Charter Township of Northville, County of Wayne,
State of Michigan.
TOWNSHIP BOARD — The Northville Township Board.
VIBRATION PERCEPTION THRESHOLD — The minimum ground or
structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a reasonable and
normal person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as,
but not limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving
objects.
B. Terms not specifically defined herein shall have the meanings
customarily assigned to them.
A. The Planning and Zoning Administrator or his/her designate or agent
shall be responsible for inspections under this chapter and shall at all
reasonable times have the right to peaceably enter upon the mining
property for the purpose of conducting inspections to insure
compliance with this chapter and with all other applicable law,
ordinances, codes and/or regulations the Township is authorized to
enforce. Any refusal to permit such inspection shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter and shall be cause for summary proceedings to
suspend and/or revoke the license issued pursuant hereto pending such
inspections. In addition to discretionary inspections, the administrator
shall make regular inspections during operations and reclamation with
such frequency as shall be necessary to ensure and monitor compliance
under all of the circumstances and, further, shall utilize the services of
such experts as the Township Board shall authorize for such purpose.
The Administrator shall make quarterly reports to the Township Board
concerning compliance with this chapter.
B. Should the Administrator or his/her designate and/or his/her agent
discover any noncompliance with the terms and conditions of this
chapter and/or the licensure permit issued hereunder and/or with any
other applicable law, ordinance or regulation, the Administrator shall
prepare a notice of this fact detailing the violations and shall send
copies of same to the licensee and to the Township Board. Within 15
days following such notice, the licensee shall advise the Township, in
writing, whether or not it concurs that a violation exists; and, if it is
agreed that a violation does exist, the licensee shall take steps to
§ 110-3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 110-4
1:250
remedy the violation. If the licensee does not agree, it shall, within the
same period of time, state the reasons for such lack of agreement.
C. The licensee shall correct any and all violations forthwith and in all
events in a period not to exceed 60 days from the date of the violation
notice unless, due to circumstances beyond licensee's control,
completion of the corrective measures are not possible within such
period, in which event the licensee may, upon approval of the Township
Board sought within the sixty-day period, have a reasonable additional
time within which to make the correction.
D. In the event of a dispute with respect to the existence of a violation, the
Township Board shall set a reasonable time for a hearing and shall
notify the licensee of the time, date and place of the hearing. After a
review of the reasons stated by the licensee for its position that no
violation exists, the Township may, in its discretion, include in the
notice of hearing responsive allegations with respect to the claimed
violation.
E. In the event the licensee has concurred that a violation exists but has
not remedied the same in a timely manner as provided for herein, a
notice of violation shall be sent and a hearing hereon established
utilizing the same form and procedure as set forth herein with respect
to the notice and hearing on a violation.
F. At the Township Board meeting, the matter of the disputed violation or
the failure to timely cure a violation shall be considered, which
consideration may be adjourned from time to time. Such consideration
shall include a hearing conducted at the meeting or meetings and shall
further include the opportunity of the licensee to appear in person or by
a duly authorized representative to present argument, witnesses and
other evidence on behalf and in the defense of the licensee or, in
addition to or in lieu thereof, to file a written presentation prior to the
initiation of the meeting. The licensee shall also be afforded the
opportunity to examine individuals who have made statements or
submitted other evidence supporting the existence of a violation or the
failure to timely cure a violation, provided that such examination shall
be limited in scope to matters relating directly to the statements made
and evidence submitted. The Township Board shall, further, make an
effort to prevent the occurrence of the violation or to cure the same in a
timely manner.
G. In the event the Township shall determine that a violation of this
chapter exists or that the licensee has failed to cure a violation in a
timely manner, the Township Board is authorized to take the following
action, taking into consideration whether the licensee made a
reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of a violation and/or cure
the same in a timely manner:
(1) If the violation constitutes the first uncured violation and/or the
first failure to cure a violation in a timely manner and the same has
§ 110-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-4
1:251
§ 110-5. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal infraction, subject to the following penalties:
not resulted in damage to person or property, the Board is
authorized to suspend the license for a period of up to one month.
(2) If the licensee has previously had one uncured violation and/or one
failure to cure a violation in a timely manner and there is an
additional uncured violation and/or failure to cure a violation in a
timely manner and/or if any violation or failure to cure a violation
results in property damages, the Township Board is authorized to
suspend the license for a period of up to three months.
(3) If the licensee is found to be in violation of this chapter on a third
occasion and/or if the licensee is found to have failed to cure a
violation in a timely manner for the third time or any combination
of these and/or if there are violations and/or failures to cure in
excess of three and/or if a violation has resulted in personal injury
of one or more individuals, the Township Board may suspend the
license for a period of up to one year or may revoke the license
permanently.
H. In the event the Township Board shall determine, in its discretion, that
serious and irreparable harm and damage is likely to occur to person or
property or that an impairment or pollution of the environment is likely
to occur, the Township Board may order an emergency summary
suspension of the license which shall become effective upon service of
same upon the licensee. The Township Board shall thereafter, as soon as
is practical, conduct a hearing with the same notice and procedural
standards set forth herein for violation hearings to determine whether
to revoke the suspension order; to continue the suspension order for a
fixed period of time; or to revoke the license permanently. The Board
shall state the reasons for its determination. If the licensee wishes to
expedite the hearing procedure, the licensee may waive the advanced
notice requirement and proceed immediately to a hearing.
I. Following the entry of a determination by the Township Board to
suspend or revoke licensure, the institution of a lawsuit in the Circuit
Court or other court shall not constitute a stay of the suspension or
revocation, as the case may be.
J. The procedures and remedial action authorized under this section shall
be in addition to, and not in lieu of, additional actions the Township may
seek pursuant to the following section.
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is
specified in connection with a particular section:
§ 110-4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 110-5
1:252
(1) First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of not less than $150, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each offense.
(2) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $300, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of, the
chapter.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
Code of the Charter Township of Northville, any equitable or other
remedies available may be sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses as provided by the law.
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
§ 110-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-5
1:253

ARTICLE II
Permit
§ 110-6. Permit required; deadline for compliance.
§ 110-7. Application procedure for mining permits.
A. From and after the effective date of this chapter, no person shall
commence and/or continue to operate a gravel or other mineral mining
and quarrying operation in the Township except in accordance with a
licensure permit issued by the Township Board pursuant to this chapter.
B. Any person conducting such operation on the date of the adoption of
this chapter shall have one year to comply with this chapter.
A. Application shall be made to the Township for a licensure permit. The
application shall be submitted to the Township Clerk who shall apprise
the Township Board of the filing of the application and shall refer the
application to the Township Planning Commission; the matter shall be
placed upon the agenda of the Township Board for final action. In its
deliberations on the application, the Township Board shall be entitled to
continue this matter to subsequent meetings from time to time and,
further, shall consult with any and all experts deemed appropriate
within the discretion of the Board. Upon completion of deliberations,
the Board shall either grant the licensure permit or deny the same and
state the reasons for denial.
B. The application submitted for a licensure permit shall contain the
following.
(1) Identifications:
(a) Names and addresses of all owners or parties of interest in the
proposed mining site together with their legal or equitable
interest in the property;
(b) Name and address of applicant;
(c) Name and address of person, firm or corporation that will be
conducting the actual removal operation and the name,
address and telephone number of the specific person
designated by the applicant for the purpose of receiving all
notices, correspondence and communications;
(d) Location, size and legal description of the proposed mining
operation area, as well as the total site and any and all
adjoining land owned by the applicant and/or any persons or
entities affiliated with applicant;
(e) Location and type of proposed processing plant;
(f) Amount of each type of resource to be removed;
§ 110-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:255
(g) Proposed method of removal and extraction, processing and/or
other procedures undertaken prior to transport of minerals
from the site;
(h) Proposed vehicular access to and from the operation and the
generally anticipated haul route;
(i) Types and amounts of explosives proposed to be used and the
areas to be blasted, if specifically approved in the license;
(j) Estimated period of time to complete operations with the
number, duration and description of each phase or phases
where appropriate;
(k) Amount and source of water to be utilized in processing and
the anticipated means and location of disbursement of such
water, following use;
(l) Name and address of the banking or savings and loan entity
which is to issue the irrevocable letter of credit to be posted by
the applicant, if applicable;
(m) Sworn statement that the applicant has never defaulted on any
bond posted to insure performance by the applicant in
connection with any gravel or mineral mining or any related
mining and/or construction activity; or, if applicant has
defaulted on any such bond, a brief description of the
circumstances surrounding the default, including the name of
the surety, date of default and any remedial action which was
taken;
(n) The name of the operator's carrier for public liability and
property damage insurance;
(o) The contemplated period of time, following reclamation,
required prior to the date upon which the property will be
usable for construction and improvement in accordance with
the terms of Chapter 170, Zoning, in the district in which the
property is situated. If the response hereto varies with respect
to two or more locations on the property, provide the
appropriate answer in relation to each varying portion of the
property.
(2) Vertical aerial photograph: Vertical aerial photographs, enlarged to
a scale of one inch equals 200 feet, from original photographs at a
negative scale no smaller than one inch equals 1,000 feet. The area
covered by the vertical aerial photographs shall include all land
subject to the application; all contiguous land which is proposed to
be used or has been used by any of the applicants for any
extraction, treatment or storage; all roads which can provide
access to any land involved in the proposed operation; all roads
other than state trunk lines which may be used to haul mined
§ 110-7 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 110-7
1:256
material; and all lands within one mile of each of the
aforementioned areas. Each such area or feature shall be
delineated on the aerial. All aerial photographs shall be taken not
more than one year prior to the date of the application of which
they are a part.
(3) Sectional map: Sectional map at an appropriate scale to cover the
areas within one mile of the boundaries of the land included in the
permit application showing the existing classification of all land
appearing on the map as shown in the Official Zoning Map which is
a part of Chapter 170, Zoning; roads, streets, and all uses of land
within the area of the sectional map and the names of these roads
and streets.
(4) Topographic survey: Topographic survey taken from aerial
photographs or field surveys of the existing parcel down to a scale
of one inch equals 200 feet prepared by a registered civil engineer
or registered land surveyor licensed by the State of Michigan
within the minimum four-foot contour intervals based upon USGS
data. The drawing shall also clearly show each and every area to be
mined and each and every area to be utilized for stockpiling,
processing, plant location and maintenance and storage areas.
(5) Geological and engineering survey: Geological and engineering
survey and data prepared by a geologist or engineer licensed by the
State of Michigan, indicating:
(a) Quality and quantity of each group of mineral to be excavated;
(b) Level of water table throughout the planned mining area for
which a permit is sought;
(c) Opinion as to each and every effect on the water table and
private wells of property owners within the reasonably
anticipated area of impact during and subsequent to the
operation;
(d) Quality of surface water, ground water and watershed
anticipated to be impacted during and subsequent to the
operation to the geographical extent reasonably expected to be
affected;
(e) Opinion whether the exposure of subterranean waters and/or
the impoundment of surface waters, where permitted, will
establish a stable water level at the level or levels proposed as
part of the operation and that the same will not interfere with
existing subterranean water or cause any harm or impairment
to the general public;
(f) Detailed plan for the disposition by controlled flow or
controlled drainage of any excess water into existing drains or
watercourses or drains or watercourses to be established,
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:257
demonstrating, among other things, that the facilities of such
drain and/or watercourse shall not be unduly burdened by the
introduction of the additional drainage.
(6) Plan of operation: A detailed operations and restoration plan for the
extraction of the natural resource deposits and restoration of the
site. The plan shall:
(a) Set forth in detail the arrangement and nature of all
operations, including the quantity of each type of material to
be removed and the machine, equipment and methods to be
used in the operation.
(b) Set forth a detailed explanation as to routing of commercial
vehicles and their size, weight and frequency of trips. If
different routes will be used at different stages of the
operation, a timetable for routing shall be included. The
applicant shall submit these proposed routings to Northville
Township, affected adjoining townships, the Wayne County
Department of Public Services, and the Michigan Department
of Transportation for review of the physical and design
capabilities of these routes to accommodate the potential
traffic, including turning movements to and from the site at all
points of egress and ingress. A letter from each jurisdiction
indicating their comments shall be included as part of this
application.
(c) Set forth in detail the types and amounts of explosives
proposed to be used and the areas to be blasted.
(d) Set forth in detail the amount and source of water to be utilized
in processing and the anticipated means and location of
dispersals of such water following use.
(e) Set forth in detail those features of the arrangements and
nature of operations which will ensure that the operations have
minimum negative impact on adjacent areas and on areas
affected by the routing of trucks and other commercial
vehicles.
(f) Set forth in detail the procedures to be employed to protect
groundwater, watercourses, water bodies and wetlands from
contamination and erosion directly or indirectly caused by
extraction and restoration activities. Procedures should
include the use of monitoring wells and the periodic sampling
of watercourses and water bodies and the termination of
mining activities, if any, of the periodic samplings indicated
damage from contamination or erosion. Monitoring wells may
be omitted if the Township Board of Trustees finds, based on
specific facts, that they are not needed to ensure protection of
water quality.
§ 110-7 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 110-7
1:258
(g) Set forth in detail the procedures to protect groundwater
levels and the direction and flow rates of subsurface aquifers.
Methods for the disposition by controlled flow or controlled
drainage of any excess water into existing drains or
watercourses shall be specified. Methods shall be such that the
facilities of such drain and/or watercourse shall not be unduly
burdened by the introduction of the additional drainage.
Procedures should include the property and the termination of
mining activities if monitoring wells indicate that impacts on
groundwater could result in significant draw down of existing
wells or other region's water table. Monitoring well may be
omitted if the Township Board of Trustees finds, based on
specific facts, that they are not needed to ensure protection of
water quantity and flow.
(h) Set forth in detail a timetable for each state of the operation
and a plan for restoration in one or more phases. The
restoration plan shall specify:
[1] The use or alternative uses to which each restored area
will or could be developed based on the current zoning and
Township Master Plan. Where the current zoning and
Master Plan differ, the applicant shall provide illustration
for development under both.
[2] The dates by which areas will be restored, as interim
restored areas and final restored areas pursuant to
§ 170-19.4L(2)(a) of Chapter 170, Zoning, as amended.
[3] The restoration topography drawn as contours at an
interval of two feet on the USGS datum.
[4] The location of water bodies and other major physical
features.
[5] A conceptual site plan for areas to be developed or
subdivided, and the proposed layout of such areas
including roads, rights-of-way, general building and
parking arrangements to meet area and setback
requirements.
[6] The methods and materials proposed for reclamation
including topsoiling and the amount and type of plantings.
(i) Provide for operations and restoration in conformance with the
provisions of § 170-19.4K and L of Chapter 170, Zoning, as
amended.
(7) Environmental impact report: An environmental impact report,
detailing the effects of the proposed operation on all aspects of the
environment, which shall include impact assessment regulations,
§ 110-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-7
1:259
§ 110-8. Application fee.
The application shall be accompanied by a processing fee to be paid by the
applicant in an amount to be set by resolution of the Township Board.
§ 110-9. Review of application.
Review of the application shall proceed as follows:
§ 110-10. Permit contents, conditions and monthly fees.
Article 32 of Chapter 170, Zoning, shall be prepared and submitted
with the application.
A. Upon receipt of an application under this chapter, the Clerk shall
forward copies of same to the Township Planning Commission and
Township Engineers.
B. The Planning Commission shall review and study the application
together with such supplemental information deemed necessary and
report its recommendation of approval or denial to the Township Board,
including recommended conditions or statements to be included in the
licensure permit, if granted.
C. The Township Engineers shall review the application and report its
recommendations to the Township Board. Such report shall include a
recommendation concerning whether or not an environmental report,
assessment or statement beyond those required herein should be made.
D. After considering the reports of the Planning Commission and Township
Engineers and such other facts, opinions and reports as may be
requested and available by the Board and after conducting a public
hearing on the application, the Township Board may issue a mining
licensure permit, if all the following conditions are found to exist:
(1) The applicant has received a special land use permit for mining and
quarrying as required by Chapter 170, Zoning, of the Code of the
Charter Township of Northville and the applicant is in full
compliance with all conditions and terms of such special land use
permit.
(2) The operation and reclamation plan submitted under the
application procedure of § 110-7B(6) of this chapter provides that
the applicant will conduct the mining and quarrying operation in
full compliance with all requirements of § 170-19.5 of Chapter 170,
Zoning, of the Code.
(3) That no areas directly or indirectly affected by the proposed
mining, quarrying and related activities will suffer any very serious
adverse consequences as a result of the establishment of the
proposed mining and quarrying operation utilizing factors set forth
in Chapter 170, Zoning.
§ 110-7 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 110-10
1:260
A. The permit shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the holder of the licensure permit as well
as the name and address of the land, if different from that of the
licensure permit holder. In addition, the permit shall also include
the name, address and telephone number of the person designated
as agent for all notices, correspondence and communication.
(2) The legal description of the property to which the permit shall
apply.
(3) The period for which the permit shall be valid, including its
expiration date.
(4) The allowable hours of operation.
(5) The number of feet from all the property lines and right-of-way
within which no cuts or excavations shall be made.
(6) The steepest horizontal to vertical grade on finished slopes where
excavations have been made.
(7) A statement essentially corresponding to the following: "This
permit may be suspended or revoked upon a hearing of the
Township Board, with notice by regular mail of said hearing to the
applicant, based upon a failure to comply with one or more of the
requirements of the Code of the Charter Township of Northville,
Chapter 110, Mining and Quarrying, as amended, or other
applicable law, ordinances or regulation and/or the terms and
conditions of this licensure permit or upon the ground that the use
constitutes a nuisance or danger to the public health, safety and/or
welfare."
(8) A statement to be countersigned by the applicant corresponding
substantially to the following: "The undersigned has read this
permit and understands and agrees that incorporated by reference
as part of the terms and conditions hereof are all the statements
and contents of the application for the permit as approved by the
Township Board, the terms and conditions of the Code of the
Charter Township of Northville, Chapter 110, Mining and
Quarrying, as amended, and of any other applicable law,
ordinances or regulations and, further that Northville Township
employees and agents are permitted to come upon the premises at
any reasonable time for the purpose of inspecting, monitoring and/
or administering this chapter."
(9) Any additional reasonable condition deemed appropriate by the
Township Board.
(10) A statement of the condition that, in no event, shall the area being
mined and unreclaimed exceed the lesser of 75 acres or 40% of the
land constituting the subject of the permit.
§ 110-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-10
1:261
§ 110-11. Permit renewal.
(11) A statement of the machinery, equipment and methods used in the
operation.
B. The applicant shall provide the Township Board with a recordable
affidavits to be recorded with the Wayne County Register of Deeds
binding the applicant and all heirs, successors, assigns and transferees
of the applicant to the terms and conditions of the licensure permit.
C. For the purpose of reimbursing the Township for inspections,
monitoring, administration and enforcement of this chapter with
respect to the licensee and in view of the relative impossibility of
calculating and precisely anticipating amounts to be required for such
purpose, the licensee shall make monthly payments to the Township in
an amount to be set by resolution of the Township Board commencing
one month after the date of issuance of the licensure permit. The fee
shall be based upon the amount of material removed from the area by
the licensee. At the end of each calendar year and as of the date of
termination in the final year of operations, an entity performing audits
in the regular course of its business shall certify the amount of
materials removed by the licensee during the previous year or during
such portion of the year until the date of termination, as applicable.
Such fee shall be in addition to any other fee(s) imposed by this chapter
and/or § 170-19.5 of Chapter 170, Zoning.
A. A licensee may apply for renewal of the licensure permit in order to
promote uninterrupted operations, application shall be made to the
Township Clerk no less than 30 days and no more than 60 days prior to
the expiration of a then-effective licensure permit. The application for
renewal shall be made on the form provided by the Clerk.
B. Upon receipt of an application, the Clerk shall refer copies of same to
the Township Board, the Zoning Administrator and to the Township
Engineer. The Planning and Zoning Administrator and the Township
Engineer shall forthwith report in writing to the Township Board with
respect to compliance by the applicant with all aspects of this chapter
during the period of the licensure permit which is about to expire. If
there has been compliance in all respects with this chapter, a renewal of
the licensure permit may be granted. In the event there has not been
compliance, the Township Board may, in its discretion, either deny the
renewal or grant the renewal for a period determined to be appropriate
by the Township Board upon stated conditions.
C. In all events, if it appears that protection of the public health, safety and
general welfare and/or protection of the air, water and natural
resources and the public trust therein require denial of the licensure
permit renewal, the Township Board may either deny renewal outright
or consider renewal upon conditions which vitiate the underlying cause
for denial.
§ 110-10 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 110-12
1:262
§ 110-12. Licensure period.
The period of the initial permit and/or any renewal permit shall be one year
or such other period of time the Board deems appropriate based upon all of
the relevant facts and circumstances.
§ 110-13. Performance bond.
A. Bond. The mining operation shall not commence until such time as the
licensee has posted with the Township Clerk a performance bond in an
amount determined by the Township Board, following recommendation
of its experts, to be reasonably necessary to insure reclamation. No less
than 25% of the total bond shall be in the form of cash or an irrevocable
letter of credit issued by a banking or savings and loan institution
licensed to do business in the State of Michigan, making the Township
the beneficiary thereof. All of the rest and balance of the bond shall be
in the form of a corporate surety bond issued by a company licensed for
such purposes in the State of Michigan. The conditions of such bonds
(letter of credit and surety bond) shall be that, if the licensee has
satisfactorily reclaimed the property being the subject of the permit in a
timely manner, in accordance with the licensure permit, the
performance bonds shall be returned to the licensee; otherwise, the
Township shall have a right to use the cash or proceeds of the
irrevocable letter of credit to the extent necessary to reclaim the
property and to cover the cost of enforcing and bringing about
compliance with this chapter, including reasonable attorney fees, and
the corporate surety bond shall serve to guarantee payment for all such
reclamation and enforcement and compliance requirements, as
aforementioned.
B. The cash or irrevocable letter of credit shall remain with the Township
until the expiration of one year after the parcel or parcels have been
reclaimed and all equipment, machinery, materials, building and other
commercial improvements removed as required by this chapter and/or
by the permit.
C. The establishment of the amount of the performance bond, the
Township Board shall take into account the size and scope of the
proposed operation, the current and projected costs of reclamation in
the event of default by the operator at such time as it is likely to be most
costly and other such conditions and factors as might be relevant in
determining a sum reasonable in light of all the facts and
circumstances. The Township Board, in considering any application to
renew the permit, may, in its discretion, increase or decrease the
amount of the performance bond, based upon increased costs, new
information or partial reclamation.
D. Cash in lieu of letter of credit. In the event that the applicant chooses to
post cash in lieu of an irrevocable letter of credit as provided herein,
such cash may be deposited in an interest bearing account in control of
the Township at a bank or savings and loan institution satisfactory to
§ 110-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-13
1:263
§ 110-14. Insurance requirements.
Insurance shall be a precondition to commencement of operations and
maintenance in full force and effect of insurance shall be a precondition
to the right to continue operations. The applicant shall provide binders
for personal injury and property damage insurance for the project to be
carried by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of
Michigan during all times during which any reclamation is left to be done
and during all times any machinery and/or equipment remains on the site
or any structures, equipment or improvements to be removed remain on
the site. This insurance shall be carried in amounts no less than $1,000,000
for personal injury and not less than $1,000,000 for injury and damage
to more than one person's property arising out of a single occurrence.
This insurance shall cover injury or damage occurring upon the site of the
operation as well as upon injuries occurring upon adjoining property as the
result of conditions or activities conducted upon the subject property.
the Township, provided that all sums on deposit shall be readily
accessible to the Township in the event of need or default. Such interest
shall accrue for the benefit of applicant or be paid over to applicant.
§ 110-13 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 110-14
1:264
ARTICLE III
Standards and Required Improvements
§ 110-15. Operation activities.
All activities, equipment, roadways and material storage areas shall be
treated, covered, muffled or otherwise controlled to ensure compliance with
the following performance standards:
§ 110-16. Fencing.
All mining sites shall be fenced prior to the commencement of extractive
operations and prior to the placement on the site of machinery or buildings.
The fence shall completely surround the borders of the subject property;
provided, however, for good cause shown in relation to the protection of
public safety in view of the operations conducted, the Township Board
may, in its discretion, modify the precise location of fencing. The minimum
specifications for the fencing shall be as follows: A six foot high farm-type
fence of nine-gauge top wire, twelve-gauge bottom wire, fourteen-gauge
stays and intermediate wire and spacing of six inches vertically by 12 inches
horizontally; all stays shall be of fourteen-gauge wire; and support posts
shall be spaced on sixteen-foot centers or less.
§ 110-17. Posting.
The perimeter of any mining site shall be conspicuously and adequately
posted with signs in accordance with the sign provisions of Chapter 170,
Zoning, as amended, to indicate the danger of trespassing in the area. In
no event shall such signs be more than 200 feet apart and the same shall
be constructed of a weather-resistant rigid and sturdy material and shall be
maintained and replaced as needed.
§ 110-18. Visual screening.
All active excavations and mining operations shall be visually screened from
view from all adjacent public highways and residentially used parcels. Any
of the following methods shall be used for such screening as determined by
the Township Board, following recommendation of the Township Planning
Commission:
A. Operations will be conducted in a way to minimize negative impacts on
adjacent areas.
B. Operations will be conducted in a way to minimize negative impact on
groundwater, watercourses, water bodies and wetlands.
C. Operations will be conducted in a way to minimize dust and dirt.
D. Equipment used shall be constructed, maintained and operated in such
a manner as to eliminate, insofar as is practicable, noises and vibrations
which are injurious or substantially annoying to persons living in the
vicinity.
§ 110-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-18
1:265
§ 110-19. Hours of operation.
A. Construction of a raised earth berm along the boundary lines of the
premises where such lines abut a public highway, abut privately owned
property which is improved and occupied for residential purposes and
at such places as are necessary to screen processing equipment from
the view of a person standing at ground level on any parcel of land
improved and occupied for residential purposes located adjacent to or
which fronts on any of the road forming the boundaries of the mining
site. When constructed along public highways, the berm shall be of a
sufficient height to screen processing equipment from the view of the
general public using the highway as required by Chapter 170, Zoning.
Where the berm is constructed adjacent to residential property or to
screen nonadjacent residential property, it shall be sufficient in length
and height to screen that portion of the property actually improved and
occupied for residential purposes as required by Chapter 170, Zoning.
All beams constructed adjacent to residential property shall be
designed to prevent soil erosion, encroachment and excessive water
runoff. During the next planting season following the placement of the
berm and as often as may be necessary thereafter to ensure the
existence of a vegetative ground cover, the licensee shall seed or plant
the berm in a manner suitable for the area and for soil conditions so as
to provide vegetation to check erosion and to provide a visible ground
cover substantially similar to the vegetation cover previously on the
property and/or adjacent property. Topsoil shall be spread as needed to
sustain growth of vegetation. Where the topography of the area acts as
a natural screen, the Township Board may waive the berm requirement.
The berm shall have slopes not in excess of one foot vertical and three
feet horizontal; or
B. Planting of coniferous trees along the boundaries of the property with
sufficient rows and depth to permit effective screening as determined
by the Township Board and following recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
A. Excavation, washing and stockpiling of extracted material and all truck
movements associated with the hauling of extracted materials shall be
restricted to weekdays between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
except in cases of a public emergency declared by the Township Board
of Trustees and described in detail in the license.
B. The Board of Trustees, upon review and recommendation of the
Planning Commission, may permit extended hours of operation as a
separate special land use, in accordance with the standards and
procedures described below:
(1) Operations, specified in writing as part of the permit and special
land use request, may begin no earlier than 6:30 a.m. on weekdays,
excluding holidays, provided operations that involve trucks over
one ton entering or exiting the site will cease by 5:30 p.m. and
§ 110-18 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 110-19
1:266
other operations shall cease by 6:00 p.m., instead of 7:00 p.m.
otherwise allowed.
(2) Operations, specified in writing as part of the permit and special
land use request, may be conducted on Saturdays, excluding
holidays, to begin no earlier than 6:30 a.m. and to cease by 2:30
p.m.
(3) Conditions and restrictions can be imposed on the extended hours
of operations to ensure compliance with the standards of this
section.
(4) All hours of operation shall be consistent with the License
Ordinance and mining permit.
(5) The Planning Commission shall find all of the following:
(a) The extended hours will not negatively impact surrounding
existing uses as described in § 170-19.5E(11)(a), (b) and (c) of
Chapter 170, Zoning, to a significantly greater degree than the
regular hours.
(b) The extended hours will not discourage development in the
surrounding area in accordance with the Township Master
Plan.
(c) Site improvements to mitigate negative impacts have been
maintained, the applicant has demonstrated compliance with
the Township's operating standards and a good faith effort to
respond to reasonable concerns expressed by the public
regarding the operation.
(6) The operator shall post on a sign in clear view at the entrance the
approved hours of operations.
(7) The special land use shall require review and renewal on an annual
basis in accordance with the following procedures:
(a) The operator shall notify the Township of the request to
continue the extended hours of operation at least 30 days
before the expiration date, the applicant shall provide a written
summary of complaints regarding the extended hours of
operation and the response to such complaints during the year.
(b) A notice of the request for special land use renewal shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Township and sent to all owners of property within 300 feet of
the site. The notice will indicate that a public hearing may be
requested, but that no hearing will be held unless such a
request is made.
(c) The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing, if
requested, and review the impact of the extended hours of
§ 110-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-19
1:267
§ 110-20. Access to major thoroughfare; removal of material from
roadway.
All parcels being mined under the provisions of this chapter shall have
direct access to a paved thoroughfare, which roadway shall be improved
to the specifications of the Wayne County Department of Public Services.
In the event the operation of a mined area shall cause any mined material,
overburden and/or similar materials to be deposited upon the public
highway in the Township, it shall be the responsibility of the operator
to remove such materials within 12 hours of receipt of notice from the
Planning and Zoning Administrator or his/her designate. This requirement
shall not waive any other higher or more restrictive requirements by any
other governmental entity or agency.
§ 110-21. Dust control along roadways.
All roads within the mineral mining site shall be maintained by the operator
at all times in a dust controlled condition by the use of hard surface paving
material or the application of other dust retardants. Moreover, the location
and maintenance of roads shall be such as to avoid harm and/or impairment
to any bodies of water as well as to surface and/or groundwater.
§ 110-22. Sound, vibration and dust.
operation based on the standards in Subsection B(5) above.
The Planning Commission shall either approve, approve with
conditions or deny the extended hours of operation. Any
approval shall again be valid for one year. The Planning
Commission shall provide a report of its findings and decisions
to the Board of Trustees during its annual review of the mining
permit.
A. All equipment and facilities used in the production, processing or
transportation of sand, gravel or stone shall be constructed, maintained
and operated in such a manner as to eliminate, insofar as practical,
sounds, vibrations or dust which interfere with the reasonable use and
enjoyment of surrounding property. At a minimum, the operations shall
conform to all performance standards set forth in Chapter 170, Zoning,
as amended, or any successor zoning ordinance, and Chapter 117,
Noise, of this Code, except as specifically modified herein. Where
feasible, the processing plant and accessory equipment shall be
situated below the average grade of the surrounding parcels so as to
effectuate screening from sight, sound, dust and vibration.
B. The intensity level of sounds shall not exceed the following decibel
levels, as measured from the nearest property line of the following
types of adjacent uses, where applicable; 55 decibels from residentially
used property; 62 decibels from commercially used property; and 70
decibels from industrially used property. Measurements shall be made
under this section on an "A" weighting scale.
§ 110-19 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 110-22
1:268
§ 110-23. Lighting.
All lighting used to illuminate the property and operation and each and
every portion thereof shall be directed away from surrounding property.
Shielding shall be required where lighting would otherwise be directed
toward a residential use and/or county road.
§ 110-24. Protection of public health and safety; drainage.
No aspect of the operation, including, without limitation, mining storage
and/or transportation of minerals, shall result in a danger to the public
health or safety, and/or impairment and/or pollution of the ground water,
surface water and/or watershed and surface water shall at all times, be
directed in such a manner so as not to interfere with the adjoining property
owners; provided, however, that maintenance of the direction and volume
of the natural flow of surface water shall not be deemed an interference.
Proper drainage shall be provided at all times to prevent the collection and
stagnation of water, except in conformance with the reclamation plan as
approved as part of the licensure permit.
§ 110-25. Distance requirements.
Minimum setbacks for future excavation and operations areas, excavationand-
operations-in-progress areas, interim restoration-in-progress areas and
interim restored areas:
§ 110-26. Machinery, equipment and methods of operation.
Machinery, equipment and methods of operation on the mining site shall
be limited to those specified in the permit application, unless approval for
C. All machinery and other operations conducted on or at the mining site
which cause vibration shall be conducted so as to prevent transmission
of ground vibration. The ground vibration shall be measured from any
lot line adjoining the site and the vibrations shall not exceed the
vibration perception threshold of an individual standing on said lot line.
A. Future excavation and operations areas, excavation-and-operations-inprogress
areas, interim restoration-in-progress areas and interim
restored areas shall be set back from the outer boundary of the subject
property a minimum of 50 feet, except that a larger setback may be
required by the Township Board of Trustees in circumstances where a
greater setback is deemed necessary to adequately protect adjacent
land areas. Grading and excavation activities may take place up to the
property line beginning six months before the completion of excavation
in an area when necessary to implement an approved restoration plan.
B. Excavation, washing and stockpiling of extracted material shall not be
conducted closer than 300 feet to the margin of any stream or
waterway without written permission from the Michigan Water
Resources Commission.
§ 110-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-26
1:269
same is subsequently granted by the Township Board, in which case such
approval shall be made part of the permit. In no event shall the activity
of gravel crushing or concrete crushing be permitted unless specifically
authorized by the license after a finding that such activity will not be a
detriment to the health, safety and welfare of the surrounding properties.
§ 110-27. Protection of wetlands and watercourses.
Any and all activities of the mining operation, where applicable, shall be
subject to all of the standards required in any other applicable law,
ordinance or regulation for wetlands and watercourse protection, including
this chapter.
§ 110-26 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 110-27
1:270
ARTICLE IV
Standards for Reclamation of Mined Area
§ 110-28. Applicability of standards of special land use permit.
The reclamation and restoration of the mining and quarrying site shall be in
compliance with all standards and conditions for reclamation and restoring
as provided by the applicable special land use permit.
§ 110-29. Time limit for restoration.
A. All excavation-and-operations-in-progress areas shall be restored to
interim restoration areas within 12 months after the cessation of
mining and quarrying operations therein. For the purpose of this
subsection, operations shall be deemed to have ceased for 12 months if
no more than 1,000 cubic yards of material has been removed for a 12
month period.
B. All interim restoration areas shall be fully restored in accordance with
the final restoration provision of the approved operations and
restoration plan within 36 months of the cessation of operations in the
entire parcel approved as a mining and quarrying special land use.
C. Deviations from the timetable of the restoration plan and the uses to
which the proposed areas will be put shall be permitted only upon
approval of an amended special land use permit.
§ 110-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-29
1:271

ARTICLE V
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 110-30. Effect on other ordinances and Code provisions.
The balance of the Code of the Charter Township of Northville, except
as herein amended, shall remain in full force and effect. All proceedings
pending and all rights and liabilities existing, acquired or incurred at the
time this amendatory ordinance takes effect are saved and may be
consummated according to the law enforced when they are commenced.
This amendatory ordinance shall not be construed to affect any right
pending before the effective date of this amendatory ordinance.
§ 110-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 110-30
1:273
Chapter 113
MOTOR VEHICLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cruising — See Ch. 69. Uniform Traffic Code — See Ch. 166.
§ 110-30 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 110-30
1:274
ARTICLE I
Motor-Driven Vehicles
[Adopted 7-11-1991 as Ch. 51 of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 113-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPERATOR — Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of
any motor vehicle as that term is defined in this article.
OWNER — Any of the following:
OPERATE — To be in actual physical control of the operation of a motor
driven vehicle; as that term is defined in this article whether or not the
motor is running or on, provided that "operate" shall also mean the
trailering of a motor driven vehicle.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, the state and any of its
agencies or subdivisions and any body of persons whether incorporated or
not.
SNOWMOBILE — Any motor driven vehicle which must be registered under
the provisions of MCL 324.82101 et seq., as amended.
MOTOR-DRIVEN VEHICLE — Any motor driven vehicle which is not subject
to registration under the provisions of Public Act 300 of 1949, as amended
(MCL 257.1 et seq.), and includes, but not limited to, snowmobiles,
minibikes, all-terrain vehicles, go-carts and any other vehicle of whatever
description, the purpose of which is to convey a person from one place to
another by means of motor drive or power.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motorized vehicle which is subject to registration
under the provisions of Public Act 300 of 1949, as amended (MCL 257.1
et seq.), which includes, but is not limited to, automobiles, trucks and
motorcycles. This definition only applies to §§ 113-4 and 113-5.[Added
5-20-2010]
§ 113-2. Registration required; exemption.
A person who holds the legal title to a motor driven vehicle as that term
is defined in this article.
A.
A vendee or lessee of a motor driven vehicle as that term is defined
in this article which is the subject of an agreement for the conditional
sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of
the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of
possession vested in the conditional vendee or licensee.
B.
A person renting a motor driven vehicle as that term is defined in this
article or having the exclusive use of such a motor driven vehicle for
more than 30 days.
C.
§ 113-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-2
1:275
§ 113-3. Registration procedures.
A. Except as otherwise provided, a motor driven vehicle shall not be
operated within the Township unless registered by the owner as
provided in the chapter. Registration is not required for a motor driven
vehicle operated exclusively on lands owned or under the control of the
owner of the motor driven vehicle.
B. Snowmobiles duly registered under the provisions of MCL 324.82101 et
seq., as amended, are exempt from the fees and registration only as
otherwise imposed under the provisions of this article.
A. On or before the first day of September of each year, the owner of each
motor driven vehicle registration by this article shall file an application
for registration with the Director of Public Safety on forms and in the
manner prescribed by him. The application shall be signed by the owner
of the motor-driven vehicle. Such owner shall be a person 18 years of
age or older or, in the case of a minor, the person making application
and being equally subject to all the provisions of this article pertaining
to an owner shall be the parent or legal guardian of such minor. The
application shall be accompanied by a fee to be set by resolution of the
Township Board of Trustees. Upon receipt of the application in
approved form, the Director of Public Safety enter it upon his records
and issue to the applicant a certificate of registration containing the
number awarded to the motor drive vehicle, the name and address of
the owner and such other information as the Director of Public Safety
deems necessary. The certificate of registration shall accompany the
motor-driven vehicle and shall be made available for immediate
inspection upon demand by any peace officer.
B. The registration fees received under this article shall be deposited by
the Director of Public Safety with the Township Treasurer for the
general fund account of the Township.
C. Initial certificates of registration awarded pursuant to this article shall
expire on August 31, 1973, and thereafter certificates of registration
renewals thereof shall expire on August 31 of each succeeding year.
D. The owner of a motor-driven vehicle shall notify the Director of Public
Safety within 15 days if the motor-driven vehicle is destroyed or
abandoned, sold, or an interest therein transferred either wholly or in
part to another person or if his address no longer conforms to the
address appearing on the certificate of registration. The notice shall
consist of a surrender of the certificate of registration. When the
surrender of the certificate is by reason of the motor-driven vehicle
being destroyed or abandoned, the Director of Public Safety shall
cancel the certificate and enter such fact in his records and the number
may then be reassigned. When the surrender of the certificate is by
reason of the sale of or transfer of interest in the motor-driven vehicle,
the Director of Public Safety shall cancel the certificate and enter such
fact in his records. When the surrender of the certificate is by reason of
§ 113-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 113-3
1:276
§ 113-4. Operation of vehicles on public property. [Amended
5-20-2010]
A person shall not operate a motor-driven vehicle within the Township upon
a public highway, land used as a street or sidewalk, a shoulder of a street
or public highway, a public or private parking lot, land constituting a public
right-of-way or easement of public land.
§ 113-5. Operation on private property and off-road operation on
publicly owned land. [Amended 5-20-2010]
A person shall not operate a motor-driven vehicle or motor vehicle within
the Township except on land owned or under the control of said person
or on land owned by another person whose consent to the use of such
land for the operation of such motor-driven vehicle or motor vehicle is
evidenced by a writing signed by the landowner. Any person who operates
a motor-driven vehicle or motor vehicle on, in, upon, or across land owned
by another shall present the written consent of the landowner to any
peace officer upon demand. Failure to make such a presentation constitutes
prima facie evidence that said person was operating it without permission
of the landowner. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit
the operation of a motor vehicle upon any public road. This section shall
prohibit the off-road operation of a motor-driven vehicle or motor vehicle on
all publicly owned land.
§ 113-6. Authorization of Director of Public Safety.
The Director of Public Safety or Township Supervisor may authorize use
of a motor-driven vehicle on a public highway, street, parking lot or land
within the jurisdiction of the Township for a special event of limited duration
conducted according to a prearranged schedule and upon issuance of a
permit therefor.
the owner's change of address, the Director of Public Safety shall enter
such fact in his records and reissue the certificate.
E. The owner of a motor-driven vehicle shall paint on or attach in a
permanent manner to the vehicle the identification number of the
certificate of registration. The identification number shall be in block
characters of good proportion not less than three inches of height,
reading from left to right and contrasting in color so as to be distinctly
legible and visible. No number other than the number awarded to the
motor-driven vehicle under this article shall be attached or otherwise
displayed on the motor-driven vehicle.
F. If any certificate of registration is lost, mutilated or illegible, the owner
of the motor-driven vehicle shall obtain immediately a duplicate of the
certificate upon application and a fee to be set by resolution of the
Township Board of Trustees.
§ 113-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-7
1:277
§ 113-7. Supervision of children on land not owned by parent or
guardian.
A parent or legal guardian shall not permit his or her child to operate a
motor-driven vehicle without the direct supervision of an adult except on
land owned or under the control of the parent or legal guardian.
§ 113-8. Hours of operation.
No person shall operate a motor-driven vehicle within 500 feet of a dwelling
from 9:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m.
§ 113-9. Seizure of vehicle.
Whenever a law enforcement officer shall find a motor-driven vehicle being
operated in violation of the provisions of this article, he may seize, secure
and impound said vehicle until such time as compliance with the provisions
of this article has been fulfilled. Return of the motor-driven vehicle shall not
be made to anyone other than the owner and only after payment of a fee to
be set by resolution of the Township Board.
§ 113-10. Evidence of operation.
In a proceeding for a violation of this article involving prohibited operation
or conduct, the registration number displayed on a motor-driven vehicle
constitutes prima facie evidence that the owner of the motor-driven vehicle
was the person operating the motor-driven vehicle at the time of the
offense.
§ 113-11. Prohibitions.
A person shall not operate a motor-driven vehicle:
§ 113-12. Owner responsibility.
The owner of a motor-driven vehicle shall not permit or allow said motordriven
vehicle to be operated contrary to the provisions of this article.
A. At a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and proper, having due
regard for the conditions then and there existing.
B. While under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs,
barbital or any derivative of barbital.
C. To hunt, pursue, worry or kill a bird of animal.
D. In a reckless or careless manner.
E. On a railroad or railroad right-of-way, except railroad, public utility or
law enforcement personnel while in the performance of their duties.
F. On or across a cemetery or burial ground.
§ 113-7 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 113-13
1:278
§ 113-13. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall
be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the following
penalties:
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is
specified in connection with a particular section:
(1) First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of not less than $150, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each offense.
(2) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $300, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of, the
chapter.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
Code of the Charter Township of Northville, any equitable or other
remedies available may be sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs. Damages
and expenses as provided by the law.
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
§ 113-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-13
1:279

ARTICLE II
Parking of Vehicles on Public or Private Property
[Adopted 7-11-1991 as Ch. 52 of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 113-14. Definitions.
§ 113-15. Parking restrictions of commercial vehicles.
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE, OR TRAILER — Such commercial vehicles or
trailers as so defined in Public Act 300 of 1949, as amended.
MOTOR — Any machine the purpose of which is to provide power for
the operation of the vehicle or any part of the vehicle, including without
limitation the refrigeration motor or condenser or the heater motor or
coil of any trailer.
OWNER OF A VEHICLE OR TRAILER — Any person, firm, association
or corporation set forth on the records of the Michigan Secretary of
State as the owner.
OWNER OF PRIVATE PROPERTY — For purposes of this article shall be
prima facie that person, whether natural person, firm, copartnership,
association or corporation, set forth as the owner on the current tax
rolls of the Township as certified by the Township Treasurer. A person
claiming to be an owner, lessee or renter of private property shall bear
the burden of providing the claimed ownership or possessory estate in
or to such private property in any prosecution under this article.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved
by human power.
A. No commercial vehicle or trailer subject to the registration
requirements or other provisions of Public Act 300 or 1949, as
amended, shall be caused or permitted to stand or park whether
occupied or not unless the active conduct of fueling, repairing, or
loading, or unloading same is occurring on public property or private
property except when the commercial vehicle or trailer or except when
the commercial vehicle or trailer is standing or parked on property and
at a location designated for such standing or parking on site plan
approval by the Township pursuant to Chapter 170, Zoning.
B. Any person who is the owner of a commercial vehicle or trailer in
violation of this article or any person who immediately before a
violation of this article was in actual physical control of the commercial
vehicle or trailer or both such persons shall be held responsible and
criminally for any violation of this article.
§ 113-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-16
1:281
§ 113-16. Parking with motor operating.
No vehicle subject to the registration requirements or other provisions of
Public Act 300 of 1949, as amended, shall be caused or permitted to stand
or park on public property or private property with a motor operating
unless a natural person licensed as an operator or chauffeur pursuant to
Public Act 300 or 1949, as amended, is physically present and in actual and
constant physical presence and in actual and constant physical supervision
and control of the operation of such motor. A person in the vehicle who is
sleeping, reclining, incapacitated or removed from the area of the vehicle in
closest proximity to the on/off or ignition switch shall be deemed a person
not in actual and constant physical supervision and control of the operation
of the motor of such vehicle. Any person who is an owner of a vehicle in
violation of this article or any person who immediately before a violation of
this article was in actual physical control of the vehicle or both shall be held
responsible and liable for any violation of this article.
§ 113-17. Vehicles for sale.
§ 113-18. Operation of vehicles on private property.
No person shall operate a vehicle which must be registered under Public
Act 300 of 1949, as amended, being MCL 257.1 to 257.923 on, in, upon
or across private property located within the Township without permission
of the landowner. Any person operating such a motor vehicle on, in, upon
or across land owned by another shall present the written consent of
the landowner to any peace officer upon demand. Failure to make such
presentation shall constitute prima facie evidence that said person was
operating it without permission of the landowner.
§ 113-19. Appearance tickets.44
A Township police officer or any authorized person, upon reasonable cause
to believe a person has committed an offense under this article, may issue
A. An owner of a vehicle subject to the registration requirements or other
provisions of Public Act 300 or 1949, as amended, shall not cause or
permit such vehicle to be offered for sale by a sign placed in, upon or
about such vehicle and communicating such vehicle is offered for sale
at a time when such vehicle is operated, standing or parked on public
property or on private property which is not owned, leased or rented by
said owner of such vehicle.
B. Any person, firm, association, copartnership, corporation or other
entity who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment, together with
the costs of prosecution.
44.Editor's Note: See Ch. 4, Appearance Tickets.
§ 113-16 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 113-19
1:282
and serve an appearance ticket upon such person. The placement of the
appearance ticket upon the vehicle shall be deemed due notice to the owner
of the vehicle.
§ 113-20. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall
be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the following
penalties:
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is
specified in connection with a particular section:
(1) First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of not less than $150, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each offense.
(2) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $300, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of, the
chapter.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
code of ordinances, any equitable or other remedies available may be
sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses as provided by the law.
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
§ 113-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-20
1:283

ARTICLE III
Motor Carrier Fuel Tax Licenses and Trip Permits
[Adopted 7-11-1991 as Ch. 54 of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 113-21. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AXLE — Any two or more load-carrying wheels mounted in a single
transverse vertical plane.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — A road tractor, or a truck tractor or
a truck having more than two axles, if the road tractor, or truck tractor
or truck is propelled by motor fuel. "Commercial motor vehicle" shall not
include either a road tractor, a truck, a truck tractor owned by a farmer
or used in connection with the farmer's farming operation and not used for
hire.
MOTOR CARRIER — A person who operates or causes to be operated a
commercial motor vehicle on a public road or highway in this Township.
NONPROFIT, PRIVATE, PAROCHIAL, DENOMINATIONAL, OR PUBLIC
SCHOOL, COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY — An elementary, secondary or postsecondary
education facility.
PERSON — A natural person, partnership, firm, association, joint-stock
company, syndicate, or corporation, or any receiver, trustee, conservator,
officer, other than a unit of government having jurisdiction and control of
property by virtue of law or by appointment of a court.
PUBLIC ROADS OR HIGHWAYS — A road, street, or place maintained by
the State of Michigan or a political subdivision thereof and located in the
Charter Township of Northville and generally open to use by the public
as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular travel, notwithstanding
that they may be temporarily closed or travel restricted for the purpose of
construction, maintenance, repair or reconstruction.
ROAD TRACTOR — A motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles, but not constructed to carry any load either independently or as a
part of the weight of the vehicle or load being drawn.
TOWNSHIP — The Charter Township of Northville.
TRUCK — A motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
TRUCK TRACTOR — A motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles and not constructed to carry a load other than a part
of the weight of the vehicle and load being drawn.
§ 113-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-22
1:285
§ 113-22. Motor carrier license required to operate in Township;
affixing of license to vehicle.
No person shall act as a motor carrier in this Township unless the person
is a holder of an unrevoked motor carrier fuel tax license issued by the
Revenue Division of the Department of Treasury for the State of Michigan
pursuant to Act No. 119 of the Public Acts of 1980 (MCL 207.211 et seq.).
The license shall be affixed to the right hand of the cab of every commercial
motor vehicle while it is being operated by a licensed motor carrier in the
Township.
§ 113-23. Trip permit in lieu of license.
A person may act as a motor carrier in this Township without a motor
carrier fuel tax license if the person possesses a valid trip permit issued
by the Revenue Division of the Department of Treasury for the State of
Michigan.
§ 113-24. Exempted commercial vehicles.
This article shall not apply to a commercial motor vehicle operated and
owned by the State of Michigan, a political subdivision of the State of
Michigan, or the federal government, or to a commercial motor vehicle
owned by, or leased and operated by, a nonprofit, private, parochial, or
denominational school, college, or university, or a public school, college, or
university.
§ 113-25. Operation of vehicles found in violation.
When a person is discovered in this Township operating a commercial
motor vehicle which is in violation of this article, another person shall
not thereafter operate this vehicle on the public roads or highways of this
Township, except to remove it from the public road or highway for the
purpose of parking or storing the vehicle, until a license or a trip permit is
obtained pursuant to Act No. 119 of the Public Acts of 1980.
§ 113-26. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be
responsible for a municipal infraction, subject to the following penalties:
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is
specified in connection with a particular section:
(1) First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of not less than $150, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each offense.
(2) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $300, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense.
§ 113-22 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 113-26
1:286
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of, the
chapter.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
Code of the Charter Township of Northville, any equitable or other
remedies available may be sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses as provided by the law.
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
§ 113-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-26
1:287

ARTICLE IV
Size, Weight and Load Restrictions
[Adopted 7-11-1991 as Ch. 57 of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 113-27. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Motor Vehicle Size, Weight and Load
Restriction Ordinance."
§ 113-28. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article shall, for the
purposes of this article, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them
in this section, and Act 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, as amended, being
§ 257.1 through § 257.82 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AXLE — The common axis of rotation of one or more wheels whether
power driven or freely rotating, and whether in one or more segments and
regardless of the number of wheels carried thereon.
CIVIL INFRACTION — An act or omission prohibited by law which is not a
crime as defined in Section 5 of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931, as
amended, being § 750.5 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, and for which civil
infractions may be ordered.
DRIVER — Every person who drives or is in actual control of a vehicle.
GROSS WEIGHT — The weight of the vehicle without load plus the weight
of the load thereon.
HIGHWAY OR STREET — The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY — Every vehicle which is designed for
agricultural purposes and used exclusively in agricultural operations.
MAXIMUM AXLE LOAD — The gross weight over the axle which includes
vehicle and load.
PERSON — Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation and their legal successors.
PEACE OFFICER — A person who is trained and certified pursuant to Act
No. 203 of the Public Acts of 1965, being §§ 28.601 and 28.616 of the
Michigan Compiled Laws.
ROADWAY — That portion of the highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel. In the event a highway includes two or more
separate roadways, the term "roadway," as used herein, shall refer to any
such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively.
SEMITRAILER — Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a
pole-trailer, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn
§ 113-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-28
1:289
by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that
of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
SPACINGS BETWEEN AXELS — The distance from axle center to axle
center.
SPECIAL MOBILE EQUIPMENT — Every vehicle which is not designed
or used primarily for the transportation of persons or property and which
is incidentally operated or moved over the highways, including but not
limited to, farm tractors, road construction or maintenance machinery,
mobile office trailers, mobile toolshed trailers, mobile trailer units used for
housing stationary construction equipment, ditch-digging apparatus, and
well-servicing apparatus.
TANDEM AXLE — Two axles spaced more than three feet six inches and less
than nine feet apart.
TANDEM AXLE ASSEMBLY — Two axles spaced more than three feet six
inches and less than nine feet apart, one axle in front of the other and
so attached to the vehicle wherein an attempt is made by connecting
mechanism to distribute the weight equally between the two axles.
TRAILER — Every vehicle with or without motive power, other than a poletrailer,
designed for carrying property or persons and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
TRUCK — Every motor vehicle designed and used to maintained primarily
for the transportation of property.
TRUCK TRACTOR — Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry a load other than
a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
VEHICLE — Every device in, or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by
human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
WEIGHMASTER — A peace officer designated by the Supervisor and
approved by the Township Board to enforce the provisions of this article.
§ 113-29. Misdemeanor offenses; nonapplicability.
Unless specifically declared in this article to be a civil infraction, it is a
misdemeanor for a person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or
permit to be driven or moved, on a highway, a vehicle or vehicles of a size
or weight or otherwise exceeding the limitations stated in this article. The
provisions of this article governing size, weight and load shall not apply to
fire apparatus, or to an implement of husbandry incidentally moved upon a
highway, or to a vehicle operated under the terms of a special permit issued
as herein provided.
§ 113-30. Maximum width of vehicles; exceptions; operation of
certain buses.
§ 113-28 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 113-30
1:290
§ 113-31. Height of vehicles; posting of clearance; liability for
damages to bridge or viaduct.
Except as provided in § 113-32, a vehicle unloaded or with load shall not
exceed a height of 13 feet six inches. The owner of a vehicle which collides
with a lawfully established bridge or viaduct shall be liable for all damages
and injury resulting from a collision caused by the height of the vehicle,
whether the clearance of the bridge or viaduct is posted or not. A person
A. The total outside width of a vehicle or the load on a vehicle shall not
exceed 96 inches except as otherwise provided in this article.
B. The total outside width of a farm tractor or farm implement or
machinery shall not exceed 188 inches. An agricultural implement
wider than 108 inches shall not be moved on the highway between the
hours of sunset and sunrise.
C. The total outside width of the load of a vehicle hauling concrete pipe,
agricultural products, or unprocessed logs, pulpwood, or wood bolts
shall not exceed 108 inches.
D. Whenever pneumatic tires, in substitution for the same type or other
type of tiers, have been or are placed upon a vehicle in operation on a
highway, the maximum width from the outside of one wheel and tire to
the outside of the opposite wheel and tire shall not exceed 102 inches
but the outside width of the body of the vehicle shall not exceed 96
inches.
E. The total outside width of a bus shall not exceed 102 inches.
F. A vehicle or farm tractor, farm implement or machinery shall not extend
beyond the center line of any highway in the Township, except when
authorized by law. If the width of the farm equipment or machinery
would make it impossible to stay away from the center line, a permit
shall be obtained under § 113-39.
G. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the Township
Engineer may designate a highway on which a person may operate a
vehicle or vehicle combination, the operations of which would
otherwise be prohibited under this section, upon the Engineer's
determination that the highway is capable of being utilized for such
purposes without injury to the public or the highway. The outside width
of the vehicle or of each vehicle in the vehicle combination shall not
exceed 102 inches including the load on the vehicle. However, the
Engineer may require that the owner or lessee of the vehicle or of each
vehicle in the vehicle combination secure a permit under § 113-39. This
subsection does not restrict the issuance of a special permit under
§ 113-39 for the operation of a vehicle or vehicle combination.
H. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
The owner of the vehicle and/or the driver may be charged with a
violation of this section.
§ 113-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-31
1:291
who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. The owner and/
or the driver of the vehicle may be charged with a violation of this section.
§ 113-32. Vehicle height limit for transportation of flammable
liquids in bulk.
A truck, truck tractor, semitrailer, or trailer manufactured on or after July
27, 1978, shall not be used to transport flammable liquids, in bulk, having
a flash point at or below 70° F., if the truck, truck tractor, semitrailer, or
trailer exceeds 11 feet 8 1/2 inches in height.
§ 113-33. Length of vehicles; combinations.
A. A vehicle, except a truck tractor, trailer or semitrailer, including load,
shall not exceed a total length of 40 feet. The total length of a
semitrailer operating in a truck tractor and semitrailer combination
shall not exceed 53 feet, including load. All semitrailers longer than 50
feet shall have a wheelbase of 40 1/2 feet plus or minus 1/2 foot,
measured from the kingpin coupling to the center of the rear axles or to
the center of the tandem axle assembly if equipped with two axles. A
combination of truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer, or truck and
semitrailer or trailer, or a combination of truck tractor and two
semitrailers, including load, shall not exceed a total overall length of 59
feet except as provided for on routes designated and approved by the
State Transportation Department and by local authorities with respect
to highways under their jurisdiction on which a person may operate a
combination of a truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer or truck tractor
and two semitrailers with no limit on the overall combination length, if
the length of each semitrailer or trailer including load does not exceed
28 1/2 feet. A truck tractor and semitrailer combination with a
semitrailer length longer than 50 feet shall not be allowed to operate
with more than two axles on the semitrailers. All truck tractor and
semitrailer combinations with a semitrailer length longer that 50 feet
shall travel exclusively on highways designated by the appropriate road
authority. Township authorities shall have the option of prohibiting
stops within their jurisdictions unless the stop occurs along
appropriately designated routes, or is necessary for emergency
purposes or to reach shippers, receivers, warehouse, and terminals
along designated routes. A trailer or semitrailer in actual and lawful use
in this state on December 1, 1982, may be operated in this state for the
life of the vehicle in a combination with other vehicles in actual and
lawful use in this state on December 1, 1982, if the combination was of
legal length under the law of this state immediately preceding January
24, 1984. In calculating the length of a trailer or semitrailer under this
subsection, the length shall be based on the cargo-carrying portion of
the vehicle only, including load. A truck tractor or other motor vehicle
shall not haul more that one trailer and one semitrailer or more than
two semitrailers in combination at any one time, except that a farm
tractor may haul two wagons or trailers or garbage and refuse haulers
may, during daylight hours, haul up to four trailers for garbage and
§ 113-31 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 113-33
1:292
refuse collection purposes, not exceeding in any combination a total
length of 55 feet at a speed of not to exceed 15 miles per hour. In
determining the length of a vehicle or a vehicle combination under
this subsection, the length shall not be considered to include safety
and energy conservation devices, including but not limited to impact
absorbing bumpers, rear view mirrors, turn signals lamps, marker
lamps, steps and hand holds for entry and egress, flexible fender
extensions, mud flaps or splash and spray suppressant devices; loadinduced
tire bulge; refrigeration or heating units; or air compressors. A
device shall be excluded from a determination of length only if it is not
designed or used for the carrying of cargo.
B. If a combination of two semitrailers is pulled by a truck or truck tractor,
a fifth wheel connecting assembly which conforms with motor carrier
safety rules promulgated by the Michigan Public Services Commission
pursuant to the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, Act No. 181 of the
Public Acts of 1963, as amended, being §§ 480.11 to 480.21 of the
Michigan Compiled Laws shall be used on each semitrailer.
C. A train of vehicles or a vehicle operated alone shall not carry a load
extending more than three feet beyond the front of the train of vehicles
or vehicle.
D. A motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer whose frame or body extends more
than 60 inches beyond the rear of its rear axle and is more than 42
inches above the roadway shall not be operated on the highways of this
state unless equipped with a fender or bumper on the extreme rear of
the frame or body. The bumper shall extend downward from the rear of
the frame or body to within 30 inches of the roadway and be of
substantial construction.
E. A truck tractor and semitrailer combination with a semitrailer length
longer than 50 feet whose frame or body extends more than 36 inches
beyond the rear of its axle and is more than 42 inches above the
roadway shall not be operated on the highways of this Township unless
equipped with an underride guard on the extreme rear of the frame or
body. The underride guard shall meet all of the following requirements:
(1) Provide a continuous horizontal beam having a maximum ground
clearance of 22 inches, as measured with the vehicle empty and on
ground level.
(2) Extend to within four inches of the lateral extremities of the trailer
on both left and right sides.
F. A truck and semitrailer combination with a semitrailer length longer
than 50 feet shall not be operated on the highways of this Township at
this times specified in MCL 257.684 unless equipped with all of the
following lamps and reflectors, in addition to any other lamps and
reflectors required under this act:
§ 113-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-33
1:293
§ 113-34. Towing of mobile homes.
(1) Two side marker lamps which display an amber light, one on each
side of the semitrailer, located at 1/2 the distance from the front to
the rear of the semitrailer.
(2) Two reflectors which reflect an amber light, one on each side of the
semitrailer, located at 1/2 the distance from the front to the rear of
the semitrailer as practicable.
(3) Two clearance lamps, one on each side of the semitrailer, located at
1/2 the distance from the front to the rear and as near to the top of
the semitrailer as practicable.
G. A lamp required under Subsection F shall be lighted at the times
specified in MCL 257.684 and shall be visible when lighted at a distance
of 500 feet from the side of the semitrailer on which it is mounted. A
reflector required under Subsection F(2) shall be visible at the times
specified in section 684 from all distances from 50 feet to 500 feet from
the semitrailer when directly in front of lawful upper beams of
headlamps.
H. A combination of vehicles shall not have more than 11 axles.
I. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, a number of motor
vehicles, wholly or partially assembled, may be transported over the
highways of this Township in combination, utilizing one tow bar or three
saddle mounts with full mount mechanisms and utilizing the motive
power of one of the vehicles in combination. The combination shall not
exceed the maximum length of 65 feet for the transportation of
assembled motor vehicles, and the vehicles in the combination shall be
adequately and securely fastened together in compliance with
regulations of the state and of any federal agency having jurisdiction
over the transportation. If motor vehicles are towed by means of triple
saddle mounts, the towed vehicles shall have brakes acting on all
wheels which are in contact with the roadway. A combination exceeding
55 feet in length may be operated only on highways approved and
designated for that operation by the state transportation department
and by local authorities with respect to highways under their
jurisdiction.
J. The total gross weight of a truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer
combination of a truck tractor and two semitrailers combination which
exceeds 59 feet in length shall not exceed a ratio of 400 pounds per
engine net horsepower delivered to clutch or its equivalent specified in
the SAE Handbook published by the Society of Automotive Engineers,
Inc. (1977).
K. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
The owner of the vehicle may be charged with a violation of this section.
§ 113-33 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 113-34
1:294
A. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article a person shall not
operate a towing vehicle, having attached mobile home having a body
length in excess of 45 feet and having a combined length of over 60
feet, a realistic body width of over 100 inches at base rail, and a height
of over 12 1/2 feet in the roadways of this Township. However, the
jurisdictional authority may issue permits to mobile home transport
companies, or to mobile home manufacturers or dealers, for the
movement, in the ordinary course of their business, of mobile homes to
home transport companies or to mobile home manufacturers or dealers,
for the movement, in the ordinary course of their business, of mobile
homes to a width of 14 1/3 feet plus normal appurtenances not exceed
six inches; of mobile homes to a realistic body length of eight feet and
having a combined length of 95 feet; of combinations of prebuilt
housing modules or mobile homes having a total length not to exceed
80 feet and having a combined length of 95 feet; or of prebuilt housing
modules or mobile homes to a width of 14 1/3 feet plus an eave not to
exceed two feet in width; over all highways, including interstate and
defense highways. Special permits for the movement of prebuilt
housing modules or mobile homes, whose width including an eave of
two feet exceeds 14 feet and are transported on interstate highways,
may be issued on a single-trip basis only in accordance with § 113-39. A
prebuilt housing module or mobile home whose width including an eave
of two feet exceeds 14 feet shall be moved only on the lane furthest to
the right of the operator of the vehicle moving the module or mobile
home shall be moved in manner so that the eave portion of the module
or mobile home shall overhang on the shoulder of the highway on which
the module or mobile home is moved. The permit shall provide the days
and the times of the day, but not on Saturdays, Sundays, holidays or the
noon before until the noon after a holiday, during which the movement
shall take place. The permit shall be issued only upon condition that the
permittee comply with permit requirements and limitations of law, to
insure the operation of a mobile home under permit in a manner which
will not impede traffic on the highways and with safety in the movement
of a mobile home, and only at a safe speed and when the pavement is
not slippery. A fourteen-foot wide mobile home shall not be moved when
the wind velocity exceeds 25 miles per hour. On units exceeding 80 feet
in overall combination length, or 12 feet in overall width, the permit
shall provide that the mobile home be equipped with two flashing
amber lights on the rear of the mobile home and one flashing amber
light on the top of the towing vehicle and the back of the mobile home.
The signs shall be of durable material, in good condition, with black
lettering on interstate yellow background. Each letter shall be of block
lettering not less than 12 inches high at the front and not less than 16
inches high at the rear of the unit. A vehicle escort shall be required on
those roads where the state police consider escort vehicles necessary
for highway safety. The distance between mobile home axle centers
shall not be less than 34 inches. The axles and tires shall meet
standards established by the State Transportation Department. This
section shall not grant or give authority to the State Transportation
§ 113-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-34
1:295
§ 113-35. Wheel and axle loads; general restrictions
Department that did not exist on May 1, 1982, in accordance with
Section 1.0 of Public Law 85-767, 23 U.S.C. 127.
B. As used in this section, "mobile home" means a prebuilt housing module
or a home which is designed to be transported by a motor vehicle upon
a public highway and designed, equipped, and used for sleeping, eating
and living quarters, or is intended to be so used.
C. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
The owner of the vehicle may be charged with a violation of this section.
A. The maximum axle load shall not exceed the number of pounds
designated in the following provisions which prescribe the distance
between axles:
(1) When the axle spacing is nine feet or more between axles, the
maximum axle load shall not exceed 18,000 pounds for vehicles
equipped with high pressure pneumatic or balloon tires.
(2) When the axle spacing is less than nine feet between two axles but
more than 3 1/2 feet, the maximum axles load shall not exceed
13,000 pounds for high pressure pneumatic or balloon tires.
(3) When axles are spaced less than 3 1/2 feet, the maximum axle load
shall not exceed 9,000 pounds per axle.
(4) Subsections A(1), (2), and (3) shall be known as the normal loading
maximums.
B. When such normal loading is in effect, the Wayne County Office of
Public Services may designate certain highways, or sections of those
highways, where bridges and road surfaces are adequate for heavier
loading, which designation may be revised as needed, on which the
maximum tandem axle assembly loading shall not exceed 16,000
pounds for any axle of the assembly.
C. Except as provided in Subsection H on a legal combination of vehicles,
only one tandem axle assembly shall be permitted on the designated
highways at the gross permissible weight of 16,000 pounds per axle,
and no other tandem axle assembly in the combination of vehicles shall
exceed a gross weight of 13,000 pounds per axle. When the maximum
gross weight of a combination of vehicles with load does not exceed
73,280 pounds, two tandem axle assemblies shall be permitted on the
designated highways at a gross permissible weight of 16,000 pounds
per axle.
D. The normal size of the tires shall be rated size as published by
manufacturers, and the maximum wheel load permissible for any wheel
shall not exceed 700 pounds per inch of width of tire.
§ 113-34 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 113-35
1:296
E. During the months of March, April and May of each year, the maximum
axle load allowable on concrete pavements, or pavements with a
concrete base, shall be reduced by 25% from the maximum axle loads
as specified in this article, and the maximum axle loads allowable on all
other types of roads during these months shall be reduced by 35% from
the maximum axle loads as specified. The maximum wheel load shall
not exceed 525 pounds per inch of tire width on all concrete base or 450
pounds per inch of tire width on all other roads during the period the
seasonal road restrictions are in effect.
F. The Wayne County Office of Public Services may suspend the
restrictions imposed by this section when and where, in its discretion,
conditions of the highways so warrant, and may impose the restricted
loading requirements of this section on designated highways at any
other time as the conditions of the highway may require.
G. For the purpose of enforcement of this article, the gross vehicle weight
of a single vehicle and load or a combination of vehicles and loads shall
be determined by weighing individual axles or groups of axles, and the
total weight on all the axles shall be the gross vehicle weight. In
addition, the gross axle weight shall be determined by weighing
individual axles or by weighing a group of axles and dividing the gross
weight of the group of axles by the number of axles in the group.
Pursuant to Subsection H, the maximum individual axle putting the
gross weight of the group of axles and dividing the gross weight by the
number of axles in the group. However, when determining the gross
vehicle or combination of vehicles weight in accordance with the
provisions of Subsection H axles spaced nine feet or more apart shall
not be considered in the same group.
H. The State Transportation Department or Wayne County Office of Public
Services with respect to highways under its jurisdiction may designate
a highway, or section of a highway, for the operation of vehicles having a
gross vehicle weight of not more that 80,000 pounds which do not
exceed any of the following:
(1) Twenty thousand pounds on any one axle.
(2) A tandem axle weight of 17,000 pounds per axle including all
enforcement tolerances.
(3) An overall gross weight on a group of two or more consecutive
axles equaling:
W = 500 x (LN)
(N-1 + 12N + 36)
Where W = Overall gross weight on a group of two or more
consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds.
Where L = Distance in feet between the extreme of a group of two
or more consecutive axles.
§ 113-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-35
1:297
§ 113-36. Owner or lessee information to be painted on certain
trucks.
§ 113-37. Weighing of vehicles; powers of Weighmaster.
Where N = Number of axles in the group under consideration,
except that two consecutive sets of tandem axles are not less than
36 feet apart, and the gross vehicle weight does not exceed 80,000
pounds including all enforcement tolerances. Except for five-axle
truck tractor, semitrailer combinations having a consecutive sets
of tandem axles, vehicles having a gross weight in excess of
80,000 pounds or in excess of the vehicle gross weight determined
by application of the formula in this subsection shall be subject to
the maximum axle loads of Subsections A, B and C.
I. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
A. All motor trucks, tractors, trailers or semitrailers, except as provided in
Subsection B of this section of more than 3,500 pounds weight in
operation upon public highways in the Township of Northville shall have
painted upon them information relative to name and address of the
registered owner of the vehicle, and lessee of vehicle if the vehicle is
being operated under lease, in letters of not less than three inches in
height. This information shall be conspicuously placed upon the vehicle.
B. This section shall not apply to trucks eligible for and equipped with
farm commercial license plates.
C. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
A. The Weighmaster, having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle
and load is unlawful may require the driver to stop and submit to a
weighing of the vehicle by means of either portable or stationary scales
approved and sealed by the State Department of Agriculture as a legal
weighing device and may require that the vehicle be driven to the
nearest weighing station of the Department of State Highways and
Transportation for the purpose of allowing an officer or agent of the
Wayne County Office of Public Services to determine whether the
conveyance is loaded in conformity with this article.
B. When the Weighmaster, upon weighing a vehicle and load, determines
that the weight is unlawful, the officer or agent any require the driver to
stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until that
portion of the load is shifted or removed as necessary to reduce the
gross axle load weight of the vehicle to the limit permitted under this
article. All material so unloaded shall be cared for by the owner or
operator.
C. A driver or owner of a vehicle who knowingly fails to stop at or who
knowingly bypasses any scales or weighing station is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
§ 113-35 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 113-37
1:298
§ 113-38. Fines for overweight vehicles. [Amended 6-16-2011]
An owner of a vehicle or a lessee of the vehicle of an owner-operator who
causes or allows a vehicle to be loaded and driven or moved in a highway
when the weight of that vehicle violates the provisions of this article is
responsible for a civil infraction and shall be assessed a civil fine in an
amount equal to $0.03 per pound for each pound of excess load over 1,000
pounds when the excess is 2,000 pounds or less; $0.06 per pound in excess
load when the excess is over 2,000 pounds but not over 3,000 pounds;
$0.09 per pound for each pound of excess load when the excess is over
3,000 pounds but not over 4,000 pounds; $0.12 per pound for each pound
of excess load when the excess is over 4,000 pounds but not over 5,000
pounds; $0.15 per pound for each pound of excess load when the excess
is over 5,000 pounds but not over 10,000 pounds; and $0.20 per pound for
each pound of excess load when the excess is over 10,000 pounds. However,
the court shall have discretionary power as to the amount of the civil fine
within the schedule provided by this section and may impose the civil fine
provided in § 113-43 for a civil infraction where at the time of the violation
either the motor vehicle, motor vehicle and semitrailer, or trailer did not
exceed the total weight which would be lawful for each unit by a proper
distribution of the load upon various axles supporting each unit.
§ 113-39. Special permit for unusual vehicles.
D. A driver who fails to obey the instruction of any official traffic control
device prohibiting the use of streets by trucks or other commercial
vehicles, or imposing limitations as to the weight of vehicles on
designated streets, which is placed in accordance with Chapter 166,
Uniform Traffic Code, of the Code of the Charter Township of Northville
or the Wayne County Office of Public Service, is responsible for a civil
infraction.
E. The Weighmaster shall not stop a truck or vehicle in movement upon a
road or highway within the Township for any purpose unless the
Weighmaster is driving a duly marked vehicle, clearly showing and
denoting the branch of government represented.
F. A driver or owner of a vehicle who knowingly fails to stop when
requested or ordered to do so by the Weighmaster who is authorized to
require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the vehicle and
load by means of a portable scale is guilty of a misdemeanor.
G. A driver or owner of a vehicle who knowingly fails to produce a current
driver's license and current vehicle registration when requested or
ordered to do so by the Weighmaster is guilty of a misdemeanor.
A. The Wayne County Office of Public Services (WCOPS), upon application
in writing and good cause being shown, may issue a special permit in
writing authorizing the applicant to operate or remove or combination
of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
§ 113-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-39
1:299
§ 113-40. Designation and identification of Weighmaster.
The Supervisor may designate, subject to the approval of the Township
Board, one or more agents who shall be called "Weighmaster" who shall
enforce the provisions of this article. Each Weighmaster, when enforcing the
provisions of this article, shall drive a motor vehicle marked "Weighmaster."
Each Weighmaster shall carry an identification card denoting his or her
title, may carry or wear a badge and wear a shoulder patch which shall
be clearly visible and shall identify the branch of government represented.
For purpose of enforcing the sections of this article, agents designated
as Weighmaster shall be a peace officer but not be authorized to carry a
firearm.
specified in this article not in conformity with this article upon a
highway under the jurisdiction of the county.
B. The application for a special permit shall be on a form prescribed by the
WCOPS and shall specifically describe the vehicle or vehicles and load
to be operated or moved and the particular highways upon which
permit to operate is requested.
C. The WCOPS may issue special permits authorizing the operation upon a
highway of traction engines or tractors having movable tracks with
transverse corrugations upon the periphery of those movable tracks on
farm tractors or other farm machinery, the operation of which upon a
highway would otherwise be prohibited under this article.
D. A permit shall specify the trip or trips and date or dates for which it is to
be valid and the WCOPS may restrict or prescribe conditions of
operation of the vehicle or vehicles, if necessary, to protect the safety of
the public or to insure against undue damages to the road foundations,
surfaces, structures, or installations, and may require a reasonable
inspection fee and other security as may be considered necessary to
compensate for damages caused by the movement. A permit may be
issued on an annual basis.
E. A person may transport telephone, telegraph, or electric poles of a
greater length than otherwise authorized over the highways in the
construction, maintenance, or repair of telephone, telegraph or electric
lines, if a permit is first secured from the Wayne County Office of Public
Services.
F. A person may transport concrete pipe of a greater width than otherwise
authorized over highways, if a permit for each project is first secured
from the WCOPS.
G. A permit issued under this section shall be carried in the vehicle or
combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to
inspection by the Weighmaster. A person shall not violate any of the
terms or conditions of the special permit.
H. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction.
§ 113-39 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 113-41
1:300
§ 113-41. Truck routes.
§ 113-42. Issuance of citations.
The Weighmaster may issue citations for violations of this article in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Sections 741 to 750 of the
Michigan Vehicle Code, Act 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, as amended,
MCL 257.741 to 257.750.
§ 113-43. Penalties.
A. The Township Board and the County of Wayne with respect to highways
under their jurisdiction, except state trunk line highways, by ordinance
or resolution, may do any of the following:
(1) Prohibit the operation of trucks or other commercial vehicles on
designated highways or streets.
(2) Impose limitations as to the weight of trucks or other commercial
vehicles on designated highways or streets.
(3) Provide that only certain highways or streets may be used by trucks
or other commercial vehicles.
B. Any prohibitions, limitations, or truck route designations established
under Subsection A shall be designated by appropriate signs placed on
the highways or streets. The design and placement of the signs shall be
consistent with the requirements of Act 300, P.A. 1949, as amended,
being § 257.608 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
C. A person who violates a prohibition, limitation, or truck route
designation established pursuant to Subsection A is responsible for a
civil infraction.
A. A person found to have committed a civil infraction under this article
shall be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $100, costs and
excess weight fines as identified in § 113-38.
B. A person convicted of violating a provision of this article not consisting
a civil infraction shall be punished by a fine or not more than $500 or by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both such fines and
imprisonment in the discretion of the court.
§ 113-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-43
1:301

ARTICLE V
Operating Under the Influence of Intoxicating Liquor (OUIL)
[Adopted 9-16-1999]
§ 113-44. Operating motor vehicles under the influence. (MCL
257.625)
A. A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a
highway or other place open to the general public or generally
accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the
parking of vehicles, within Northville Township if either of the following
applies:
(1) The person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, a
controlled substance, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a
controlled substance.
(2) The person has an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100
milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of
urine.
B. The owner of a vehicle or a person in charge or in control of a vehicle
shall not authorize or knowingly permit the vehicle to be operated upon
a highway or other place open to the general public or generally
accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the
parking of motor vehicles, within Northville Township by a person who
is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance or a
combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, who has
an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood,
per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine, or whose ability to
operate the motor vehicle is visibly impaired due to the consumption of
intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of
intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance.
C. A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a
highway or other place open to the general public or generally
accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the
parking of vehicles, within this Northville Township when, due to the
consumption of intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance, or a
combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, the
person's ability to operate the vehicle is visibly impaired. If a person is
charged with violating Subsection A, a finding of guilty under this
subsection may be rendered.
D. A person who is less than 21 years of age, whether licensed or not, shall
not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general
public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area
designated for the parking of vehicles, within this Northville Township
if the person has any bodily alcohol content. As used in this subsection
"any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following:
§ 113-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-44
1:303
(1) An alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or more than 0.07
grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per
67 milliliters of urine.
(2) Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the
consumption of intoxicating liquor, other than consumption of
intoxicating liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious
service or ceremony.
E. A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle in
violation of Subsection D while another person who is less than 16 years
of age is occupying the vehicle. A person who violates this subdivision is
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as follows: community service for
not more than 60 days; a fine of not more than $500; imprisonment for
not more than 93 days. In the judgment of sentence under this section,
the court may, unless the vehicle is ordered forfeited under MCL
257-625b order vehicle immobilization as provided in MCL 257.904d.
F. If a person is convicted for violating Subsection A the person is guilty of
a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following:
(1) Community service for not more than 45 days.
(2) Imprisonment for not more than 93 days.
(3) A fine of not less than $100 or more than $500.
G. A person who is convicted of violating Subsection B is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or
a fine of not less than $100 or more than $500, or both.
H. A person who is convicted of violating Subsection C is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following:
(1) Community service for not more than 45 days.
(2) Imprisonment of not more than 93 days.
(3) A fine of not more than $300.
I. If a person is convicted of violating Subsection D, all of the following
apply:
(1) Except as otherwise provided in Subsection I(2), the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the
following:
(a) Community service for not more than 45 days.
(b) A fine of not more than $250.
(2) If the violation occurs within seven years of one or more prior
convictions, the person may be sentenced to one or more of the
following:
§ 113-44 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 113-44
1:304
(a) Community service for not more than 60 days.
(b) A fine of not more than $500.
(c) Imprisonment of not more than 93 days.
J. In addition to imposing the sanctions prescribed under this section, the
court may order the person to pay the costs of the prosecution under
the code of criminal procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCL 760.1 to 776.22.
K. A person sentenced to perform community service under this section
shall not receive compensation and shall reimburse the state or
appropriate local unit of government for the cost of supervision
incurred by the state or local unit of government as a result of the
person's activities in that service.
L. If a person is charged with a violation of Subsection A, C, or E, or MCL
275.625m, the court shall not permit the defendant to enter a plea of
guilty or nolo contenders to a charge of violating Subsection D in
exchange for dismissal of the original charge. This subsection does not
prohibit the court from dismissing the charge upon the prosecuting
attorney's motion.
M. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection O, if a person is charged
with operating a vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled
substance in violation of Subsection A, the court shall require the jury
to return a special verdict in the form of a written finding or, if the court
convicts the person without a jury or accepts a plea of guilty or nolo
contenders, the court shall make a finding as to whether the person was
under the influence of a controlled substance or a combination of
intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance at the time of the
violation.
N. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection O, if a person is charged
with operating a vehicle while his or her ability to operate the vehicle
was visibly impaired due to his or her consumption of a controlled
substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled
substance in violation of Subsection C, the court shall require the jury
to return a special verdict in the form of a written finding or, if the court
convicts the person without a jury or accepts a plea of guilty or nolo
contenders, the court shall make a finding as to whether, due to the
consumption of a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating
liquor and a controlled substance, the person's ability to operate a
motor vehicle was visibly impaired at the time of the violation.
O. A special verdict described in Subsections M and N is not required if a
jury is instructed to make a finding solely as to either of the following:
(1) Whether the defendant was under the influence of a controlled
substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled
substance at the time of the violation.
§ 113-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-44
1:305
§ 113-45. Chemical tests; temporary license or permit. (MCL
257.626g)
(2) Whether the defendant was visibly impaired due to his or her
consumption of a controlled substance or a combination of
intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance at the time of the
violation.
P. If a jury or court finds under Subsection M, N, or O that the defendant
operated a motor vehicle under the influence of or while impaired due
to the consumption of a controlled substance or a combination of a
controlled substance and an intoxicating liquor, the court shall do both
of the following:
(1) Report the finding to the Secretary of State.
(2) On a form or forms prescribed by the state court administrator,
forward to the department of state police a record that specifies the
penalties imposed by the court, including any term of
imprisonment, and any sanction imposed under MCL 257.625n or
MCL 257.904d.
Q. Except as otherwise provided by law, a record described in Subsection
P(2) is a public record and the department of state police shall retain
the information contained on that record for not less than seven years.
R. In a prosecution for a violation of Subsection D, the defendant bears the
burden of proving that the consumption of intoxicating liquor was a
part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony by a
preponderance of the evidence.
A. If a person refuses a chemical test offered pursuant to MCL 257.625a(6)
or submits to a chemical test or a chemical test is performed pursuant
to a court order and the test reveals an unlawful alcohol content, the
peace officer who requested the person to submit to the test shall do all
of the following:
(1) On behalf of the Secretary of State, immediately confiscate the
person's license or permit to operate a motor vehicle and, if the
person is otherwise eligible for a license or permit, issue a
temporary license or permit to the person. The temporary license
or permit shall be on a form provided by the Secretary of State.
(2) Except as provided in Subsection B, immediately do all of the
following:
(a) Forward a copy of the written report of the person's refusal to
submit to a chemical test required under MCL 257.625d to the
Secretary of State.
§ 113-44 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 113-45
1:306
(b) Notify the Secretary of State by means of the law enforcement
information network that a temporary license or permit was
issued to the person.
(c) Destroy the person's driver's license or permit.
B. If a person submits to a chemical test offered pursuant to MCL
257.525a(6) that requires an analysis of blood or urine and a report of
the results of that chemical test is not immediately available, the peace
officer who requested the person to the test shall comply with
Subsection A(1) pending receipt of the test report. If the report reveals
an unlawful alcohol content, the peace officer who requested the person
to submit to the test shall immediately comply with Subsection A(2). If
the report does not reveal an unlawful alcohol content, the peace officer
who requested the person to submit to the test shall immediately notify
the person of the test results and immediately return the person's
license or permit by first-class mail to the address given at the time of
arrest.
C. A temporary license or permit issued under this section is valid for one
of the following time periods.
(1) If the case is not prosecuted, for 90 days after issuance or until the
person's license or permit is suspended pursuant to MCL 257.625f,
whichever occurs earlier. The prosecuting attorney shall notify the
Secretary of State if a case referred to the prosecuting attorney is
not prosecuted. The arresting law enforcement agency shall notify
the Secretary of State if a case is not referred to the prosecuting
attorney for prosecution.
(2) If the case is prosecuted, until the criminal charges against the
person are dismissed, the person is acquitted of those charges, or
the person's license or permit is suspended, restricted, or revoked.
D. As used in this section, "unlawful alcohol content" means any of the
following, as applicable:
(1) If the person tested is less than 21 years of age, 0.02 grams or more
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or
per 67 milliliters of urine.
(2) If the person tested was operating a commercial motor vehicle
within this state, 0.04 grams or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters
of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters or urine.
(3) If the person tested is not a person described in Subsection D(1) or
(2), 0.10 grams or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of blood, per
210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine.
§ 113-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-45
1:307

ARTICLE VI
Driving While License Suspended
[Adopted 9-16-1999]
§ 113-46. Operator's or chauffeur's license suspension or
revocation; penalties; vehicle group designation suspension or
revocation. (MCL 257.904)
A. A person whose operator's or chauffeur's license or registration
certificate has been suspended or revoked and who has been notified as
provided in MCL 257.212 of that suspension or revocations whose
application for license has been denied, or who has never applied for a
license, shall not operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or other place
open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles,
including an area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, within
this Northville Township.
B. A person shall not knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by the
person to be operated upon a highway or other place open to the
general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an
area designated for the parking or vehicles, within this state by a
person whose license or registration certificate is suspended or
revoked, whose application for license has been denied, or who has
never applied for a license, except as permitted under this act.
C. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person who violates
Subsection A or B is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as follows: for
a first violation, by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine or
not more than $500, or both. Unless the vehicle was stolen or used with
the permission of a person who did not knowingly permit an unlicensed
driver to operate the vehicle, the registration plates of the vehicle shall
be canceled by the Secretary of State upon notification by a peace
officer.
D. Before a person is arraigned before a District Court Magistrate or
Judge on a charge of violating this section, the arresting officer shall
obtain the person's driving record from the Secretary of State and shall
furnish the record to the court. The driving record of the person may be
obtained from the Secretary of State's computer information network.
E. This section does not apply to a person who operates a vehicle solely for
the purpose of protecting human life or property if the life or property is
endangered and summoning prompt aid is essential.
F. A person whose vehicle group designation is suspended or revoked and
who has been notified as provided in MCL 257.212 of that suspension or
revocation, or whose application for a vehicle group designation has
been denied as provided in this act, or who has never applied for a
vehicle group designation and who operates a commercial motor
vehicle within this state, except as permitted under this act, while any
of those conditions existing is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable,
§ 113-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-46
1:309
§ 113-47. Detention of driver when vehicle immobilization required;
temporary vehicle registration plate. (MCL 257.904c)
§ 113-48. Use of available technology for vehicle immobilization;
sale or lease of vehicle during immobilization period; tampering
with devices; penalties. (MCL 257.904e)
except as otherwise provided in this section, by imprisonment for not
more than 3 days or more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100,
or both.
G. For purposes of this section, a person who never applied for a license
includes a person who applied for a license, was denied, and never
applied again.
A. When a peace officer detains the driver of a motor vehicle for a violation
of a law of this state or local ordinance for which vehicle immobilization
is required, the peace officer shall do all of the following:
(1) Immediately confiscate the vehicle's registration plate and destroy
it.
(2) Issue a temporary vehicle registration plate for the vehicle in the
same form prescribed by the Secretary of State for temporary
registration plates issued under MCL 257.226a or 257.226b.
(3) Place the temporary vehicle registration plate on the vehicle in the
manner required by the Secretary of State.
(4) Notify the Secretary of State through the law enforcement
information network in a form prescribed by the Secretary of State
that the registration plate was confiscated and destroyed, and a
temporary plate was issued.
B. A temporary vehicle registration plate issued under this section is valid
until the charges against the person are dismissed, the person pleads
guilty or nolo contenders to those charges, or the person is found guilty
of or is acquitted of those charges.
A. A court shall order a vehicle immobilized under section (MCL 257.904d)
by the use of any available technology approved by the court that locks
the ignition, wheels, or steering of the vehicle or otherwise prevents
any person from operating the vehicle or that prevents the defendant
from operating the vehicle. If a vehicle is immobilized under this
section, the court may order the vehicle stored at a location and in a
manner considered appropriate by the court. The court may order the
person convicted of violating section (MCL 257.625) or a suspension,
revocation, or denial under section (MCL 257.904) to pay the cost of
immobilizing and storing the vehicle.
B. A vehicle subject to immobilization under this section may be sold
during the period of immobilization, but shall not be sold to a person
§ 113-46 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 113-48
1:310
who is exempt from paying a use tax under section 3(3)(a) of the use
tax act, 1937 PA 94, MCL 205.93 without a court order.
C. A defendant who is prohibited from operating a motor vehicle by
vehicle immobilization shall not purchase, lease, or otherwise obtain a
motor vehicle during this immobilization period.
D. A person shall not remove, tamper with, or bypass or attempt to
remove, tamper with, or bypass a device that he or she knows or has
reason to know has been installed on a vehicle by court order by vehicle
immobilization or operate or attempt to operate a vehicle that he or she
knows or has reason to know has been ordered immobilized.
E. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not
more than $100, or both.
F. To the extent that a local ordinance regarding the storage or removal of
vehicles conflicts with an order of immobilization issued by the court,
the local ordinance is preempted.
G. If a peace officer stops a vehicle that is being operated in violation of an
immobilization order, the vehicle shall be impounded pending an order
of a court of competent jurisdiction.
H. The court shall require the defendant or a person who provides
immobilization services to the court under this section to certify that a
vehicle ordered immobilized by the court is immobilized as required.
§ 113-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-48
1:311

ARTICLE VII
Motor Carrier Safety
[Adopted 9-18-2003]
§ 113-49. Title.
This article and the state laws adopted by reference herein shall be
collectively known and may be cited as the "Northville Township Motor
Carrier Safety Ordinance."
§ 113-50. Adoption of Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963 by
reference.
The following provisions of the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, 1963
Public Act No. 181, as amended (being sections 480.11 et seq. in the
Michigan Compiled Laws) are hereby adopted by reference: Sections 1
through 1a (MCL 480.11 - 480.11a), Sections 2a through 2d (MCL 480.12a
- 480.12d), Sections 2i through 2j (MCL 480.12i - 480.12j), Sections 2t-3a
(MCL 480.12t - 480.13a), Sections 7 through 7d (MCL 480.17 - 480.17d),
and Sections 10 through 12 (MCL 480.20 - 480.22).
§ 113-51. Penalties.
The penalties provided by the state laws adopted by reference herein
are hereby adopted as the penalties for violations of the corresponding
provisions of this article.
§ 113-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-51
1:313

ARTICLE VIII
Napier Road Speed Limit
[Adopted 6-15-2006]
§ 113-52. Speed limit established.
Except in those instances where a lower speed is specified in the Michigan
Vehicle Code, 1949 Public Act 300, as amended (MCL 257.1 et seq.), as
adopted by Chapter 166 of the Code of Ordinances, § 166-3, it is prima facie
lawful for the driver of a vehicle on Napier Road, between Five Mile Road
and Eight Mile Road, within the Charter Township of Northville, to drive
at a speed not exceeding 35 miles an hour, except when this speed would
be unsafe. It is prima facie unlawful for a person to exceed the speed limit
prescribed above. A person who violates this section is responsible for a
civil infraction and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 166
of the Code of Ordinances, § 166-3D, and/or any other applicable provision
of this Code.
§ 113-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-52
1:315
Chapter 117
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisance barking by dogs — See Ch. 53, Art.
I, § 53-7.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 67.
Horn blowing and loud noises — Ch. 69,
§ 69-2.
Noise from operation of landfills — See Ch.
101, § 101-12A(2).
Mining and quarrying — See Ch. 110.
Noise control at outdoor gatherings — See
Ch. 117.
Noisemaking by peddlers — See Ch. 133.
Noise associated with garbage collection and
recycling — See Ch. 149, Art. I, § 149-8.
§ 117-1. Purpose.
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to control loud, noisy, boisterous
or offensive activities within the Township.
§ 117-2. Prohibited activities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm, partnership,
association or corporation to participate in any activity within the
Township which shall be so loud, noisy, boisterous, or offensive in
nature as to endanger the safety, health, comfort or repose of the
public, including, but not limited to:
(1) The sounding of any horn or other audible signal device on any
automobile, motorcycle, bus, streetcar or other motor vehicle
except as a danger signal necessary or intended to prevent or
attempt to prevent an impending accident; use of any such signal
device which is unreasonably loud or the sounding of such device
for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time.
(2) The playing of any radio, television, phonograph or any musical
instrument in such a manner or at such a volume so as to annoy,
disturb, or offend the quiet, comfort or repose of the public,
particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(3) Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing or the making of any
other loud noise on the public streets in such a manner as to annoy,
disturb or offend the quiet, comfort or repose of the public,
particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(4) The hawking of goods, merchandise or newspapers in a loud and
boisterous manner so as to annoy, disturb or offend the quiet,
comfort or repose of the public.
§ 113-52 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 117-2
1:316
§ 117-3. Noise levels.
(5) The keeping of any animals or birds which, by casing frequent or
loud or continued noise, shall annoy, disturb or offend the quiet,
comfort or repose of the public.
(6) The blowing of any whistle or siren in such a manner as to annoy
disturb, or offend the quiet, comfort or repose of the public, except
as a signal to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a
warning of fire or danger.
(7) The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, except
through a muffler or other device which effectively prevents loud
explosive noises therefrom.
(8) The erection, excavation of, demolition, alteration or repair of any
building or the excavation of streets and/or highways other than
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., unless a permit first
be obtained from the Building Department.
(9) The creating of a loud and excessive noise in connection with
loading and unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction
of bails, boxes, crates, and/or containers.
(10) The use of any drum, loud speaker, amplifier or other instrument or
for the purpose of attracting the attention of any person in such a
manner as to annoy, disturb or offend the quiet, comfort or repose
of the public.
(11) Operation of a motor vehicle in such a loud, noisy, boisterous or
offensive manner as to annoy, disturb or offend the quiet, comfort
or the public.
(12) Operation of a sound truck with radio or amplifier without first
having obtained a permit therefor from the Township Clerk.
(13) Operation of gasoline powered lawn maintenance equipment and
chain saws between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
B. Operation of police, fire or ambulance vehicles in Township. Heavy
machinery, equipment engaged in necessary excavations or repair of
bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of the Township, county or
state on those occasions when the public safety, welfare and
convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day
and the reasonable use of stationary amplifiers or loud speakers in the
course of noncommercial public addresses are exempted from the
provisions of the chapter.45
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 117-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-3
1:317
§ 117-4. Penalties. [Amended 9-18-2003]
Chapter 122
OIL AND GAS OPERATIONS
§ 122-1. Definitions.
Words used in this chapter unless otherwise defined shall be the common
meaning of such words as generally understood in the oil and gas industry
unless the content of this chapter clearly implies otherwise.
PERSON — Includes any individual, partnership, copartnership, limited
partnership, association or corporation and their lessees, trustees or
receivers.
A. No person shall operate or cause to be operated on public or private
property any stationary source of sound in such a manner as to create a
sound level which exceeds the limits set forth for the receiving land use
category in the following table when measured at or within the property
boundary of the receiving land use;
Receiving Land Use Category
Maximum Allowable Sound
Level Limit
Residential Business or
commercial
55 dBA 62 dBA
B. When the ambient noise level is as great or greater than the
appropriate sound level limit less three dBA, the following rule shall
apply.
C. A noise source shall be in violation of this chapter if the noise level
measured with the source in operation exceeds the ambient sound level
alone by more than three dBA.
D. For this chapter, the "ambient noise level" is defined as total of all noise
produced at a measurement site, excluding the noise produced by the
source in question.
E. For any source of sound which emits a pure tone or impulsive sound,
the maximum allowable sound level limit will be decreased by five dBA.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties specified for a violation of the Township Code.46
B. Any minor, as defined in this state's probate code, who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be dealt with by the Juvenile Division of
the Probate Court or as otherwise prescribed by state law.
46.Editor's Note: See §§ 1-10, 1-14 and 1-16.
§ 117-3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 122-2
1:318
§ 122-2. Occupation deemed hazardous; minimum requirements.
§ 122-3. Compliance with state and federal laws.
All drilling operations for the discovery of oil, gas, petroleum or other
hydrocarbons, equipping of wells, producing and marketing of oil, gas,
petroleum and hydrocarbons, plugging of wells and all material used and
work done in connection with the exploring for, producing and marketing
petroleum products shall be in conformity with all state and federal laws
and statutes and rules and regulations pertaining thereto and particularly
with the statutes of the state and the regulations of the Supervisor of Wells
of the state.
§ 122-4. Right of entry.
The Fire Chief, Building Inspector or other such employee of the Township
as shall be designated for the purpose by the Board shall have the right
and privilege at any time to enter upon the premises covered by any permit
issued pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of making inspections
thereof to determine if the requirements of this chapter are complied with
or the requirements of any other ordinance of this Township are met.
§ 122-5. Building permit required.47
All buildings and structures, with the exception of the oil well heads, which
shall be constructed or located on property to be used in connection with oil
and gas operations, shall require a building permit. All requirements of the
A. The business and occupation of drilling and exploring for, producing,
obtaining, transporting, gathering and storing of oil, gas, petroleum
and hydrocarbons within the corporation limits of the Township is a
hazardous and dangerous business and an occupation which should be
regulated, controlled and limited for the purpose of providing
protection for the lives, health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the
Township and of the public generally and for the protection of property
from the danger of fire, explosion, gas leaks, nuisances and other
hazards injurious to the public peace, health, welfare and safety.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be the minimum
requirements for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety
and welfare and compliance with all terms thereof shall not be deemed
to relieve any person from any duty imposed by law to use all necessary
care and take all necessary precautions for the safeguarding of the
public peace, health and safety and the rights of any individual or group
of individuals, and it shall be the duty of any person drilling, operating
or maintaining any well to use all necessary care and take all
precautions reasonably necessary under the circumstances to protect
the public or the rights of any part thereof.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 122-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-5
1:319
Building Code, as adopted by the Township (Chapter 58), shall be complied
with in the permit procedure.
§ 122-6. Inspections.48
In addition to any inspections pursuant to the Building Code, the Fire Chief
shall inspect the location of any accessory buildings prior to the issuance of
a permit.
§ 122-7. Adoption of standards by reference.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to be in usurpation of the statutory
authority of the Supervisor of Wells contained in MCL 319.12 through
319.27, whose regulations are specifically adopted by reference herein.
§ 122-8. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal infraction, subject to the following penalties:
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is
specified in connection with a particular section:
(1) First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of not less than $150, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each offense.
(2) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $300, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of, the
chapter.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
Code of the Charter Township of Northville, any equitable or other
remedies available may be sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses as provided by the law.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 122-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 122-8
1:320
Chapter 125
OPEN OCCUPANCY
§ 125-1. Discrimination in sale, lease or rental prohibited.49
It is unlawful for an owner, lessee or sublessee of real property or an agent
or representative thereof to refuse to sell, exchange, rent or lease any
housing accommodation or living quarters of any sort within the Township
of Northville because of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex,
height, weight, familial status or marital status.
§ 125-2. Discrimination in lending prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to discriminate in the
lending of money, guaranteeing of loans, accepting of mortgages or
otherwise making available finds for the purchase, acquisition,
construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing
accommodations or living quarters of any sort within the Township because
of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, height, weight, familial
status or marital status.
§ 125-3. Discrimination by real estate broker or salesman
prohibited.
It is unlawful for any real estate broker or salesman to refuse to accept or
convey offers to purchase, offers to lease or any other proposed agreements
with reference to the sale, exchange or lease of real property within the
Township because of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, height,
weight, familial status or marital status.
§ 125-4. Discrimination in housing accommodations prohibited.
It is unlawful for any owner, lessee or sublessee of real property or any
other person concerned with transactions in real property to discriminate
because of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, height, weight,
familial status or marital status with reference to the terms, conditions
or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any housing accommodations
or living quarters of any sort within the Township or in the furnishing of
facilities or services in connection therewith.
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 122-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 125-5
1:321
§ 125-5. Publication indicting certain preference prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to publish, circulate,
issue or display or cause to be published, circulated, issued or displayed
any communication, notice, advertisement or sign of any kind relating to
the sale, rental or lease of real property within the Township indicating
exclusive of or preference for any person or group of persons based upon
religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, height, weight, familial status
or marital status.
§ 125-6. False or substantially misleading statements prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to knowingly or
intentionally present false or substantially misleading statements to the
authorities charged with enforcement of this chapter or to sign a complaint
for violation of this chapter based upon false or substantially misleading
information.
§ 125-7. Inducement to violate chapter prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation by threats, intimidation,
coercion, extortion or conspiracy to induce or attempt to induce any person
owning an interest in real property in the Township to violate the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 125-8. Exceptions.
The provisions of §§ 125-1 and 125-4 of this chapter shall not apply to the
owner of a dwelling house, apartment building or multiple-housing facility
of any sort in which said owner or member of his immediate family resides
who rents or leases three or fewer housing units in said in said dwelling
house, apartment building or multiple-housing facility.
§ 125-9. Permissible transaction.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting any person, firm
or corporation from imposing any and all conditions and requirements
relative to any of the transactions herein described, provided that such
conditions do not concern religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex,
height, weight, familial status or marital status and provided that such
conditions are imposed uniformly regardless of religion, race, color, national
origin, age, sex, height, weight, familial status or marital status. Nothing in
this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the owner, lessee or sublessee
of real property or any person, firm or corporation concerned in real estate
transactions from exercising absolute discretion in establishing property or
in any transactions involving real property, provided that such terms and
conditions do not concern religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex,
height, weight, familial status or marital status. Nothing in this chapter
shall be construed as requiring an owner, lessee or sublessee of real
property to offer said property to the public at large before selling or
renting same.
§ 125-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 125-10
1:322
§ 125-10. Penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the following
penalties:
Chapter 128
OUTDOOR GATHERINGS
§ 128-1. Purpose.
The Township Board finds and declares that the interests of the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township require the
regulation, licensing and control of assemblages of large numbers of people
in excess of those normally drawing upon the health, sanitation, fire, police,
transportation, utility and other public services regularly provided in the
Township.
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is
specified in connection with a particular section:
(1) First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of not less than $150, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each offense.
(2) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $300, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of, the
chapter.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
Code of the Charter Township of Northville, any equitable or other
remedies available may be sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses as provided by the law.
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
§ 125-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-2
1:323
§ 128-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ATTENDANT — Any person who obtains admission to an outdoor assembly
by the payment of money or by the rendering of services in lieu of the
payment of money for admission.
LICENSEE — Any person to who a license is issued pursuant to this chapter.
OUTDOOR ASSEMBLY or ASSEMBLY — Any event attended by more than
250 attendants, all or any part of which includes a theatrical exhibition,
public show, display, entertainment, amusement or other exhibition,
including, but not limited to, musical festivals, rock festivals, peace festivals
or similar gatherings but does not mean:
PERSON — Any natural person who organizes, promotes, conducts or
causes to be conducted an outdoor assembly.
SPONSOR — Any person who organizes, promotes, conducts or causes to
be conducted an outdoor assembly.
§ 128-3. License required.
A person shall not sponsor, operate, maintain, conduct or promote an
outdoor assembly in the Township unless he shall have first made
application for and obtained, as hereinafter prescribed, a license for each
such assembly.
§ 128-4. Application for license; fee.
Application for a license to conduct an outdoor assembly must be made in
writing on such forms and in such manner as prescribed by the Township
Clerk and shall be made at least 60 days prior to date of the proposed
assembly. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in
an amount to be set by resolution of the Township Board and shall include
at least the following:
An event which is conducted or sponsored by a governmental unit or
agency on publicly owned land or property; or
A.
An event which is conducted or sponsored by any entity qualifying for
tax exempt status under Section 501C.3 of the Internal Revenue Code
of 1954, being 26 U.S.C. § 501C.3, as incorporated by reference in MCL
206.201 as amended; or
B.
An event held entirely within the confines of a permanently enclosed
and covered structure.
C.
A. The name, age, residence and mailing address of the person making the
application:
§ 128-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 128-4
1:324
§ 128-5. Explanations, drawings and maps to accompany
application.
(1) Where the person making the application is a partnership,
corporation or other association, this information shall be provided
for all partners, officers and directors or members.
(2) Where the person is a corporation, a copy of the Articles of
Incorporation shall be filed and the names and addresses shall be
provided of all shareholders having a financial interest greater than
$500.
B. A statement of the kind, character and type of proposed assembly.
C. The address, legal description and proof of ownership of the site at
which the proposed assembly is to be conducted. Where ownership is
not vested in the prospective licensee, he shall submit an affidavit from
the owner indicating his consent to the use of the site for the proposed
assembly.
D. The date or dates and hours during which the proposed assembly is to
be conducted.
E. An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected at the
assembly for each day it is conducted and a detailed explanation of the
evidence of admission which will be used and of the sequential
numbering or other method which will be used for accounting
purposes.
A. Each application shall be accompanied by a detailed explanation,
including a drawing and diagrams where applicable, of the prospective
licensee's plans to provide for the following:
(1) Police and fire protection.
(2) Food and water supply and facilities.
(3) Health and sanitation facilities.
(4) Medical facilities and services including emergency vehicles and
equipment.
(5) Vehicle access and parking facilities.
(6) Camping trailer facilities.
(7) Illumination facilities.
(8) Communication facilities.
(9) Noise control and abatement.
(10) Facilities for cleanup and waste disposal.
(11) Insurance and bonding arrangements.
§ 128-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-5
1:325
§ 128-6. Approval by officials.
On receipt by the Township Clerk, copies of the application shall be
forwarded to the Director of Public Safety and Fire Chief, the State Fire
Marshal and to such other appropriate public officials as the Clerk deems
necessary. Such officers and officials shall review and investigate matters
relevant to the application and within 20 days of receipt thereof shall report
their findings and recommendations to the Township Board.
§ 128-7. Issuance or denial of license; conditions; insurance.50
Within 30 days of the filing of the application, the Township Board shall
issue, set conditions prerequisite to the issuance of or deny a license.
The Township Board may require that adequate security or insurance be
provided before a license is issued. Where conditions are imposed as
prerequisite to the issuance of a license, within five days of such action,
notice thereof must be mailed to the applicant by certified mail and, in the
case of denial, the reasons therefor shall be stated in the notice.
§ 128-8. Denial of license.
A license may be denied if:
§ 128-9. License specifications; posting on premises.
A license shall specify the name and address of the licensee, the kind and
location of the assembly, the maximum number of attendants permissible,
the duration of the license and any other conditions imposed pursuant to
this chapter. It shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises of
the assembly and shall not be transferred to any other person or location.
§ 128-10. Minimum requirements.
In processing an application, the Township Board shall, at a minimum,
require the following:
B. In addition, the application shall be accompanied by a map or maps of
the overall site of the proposed assembly.
A. The applicant fails to comply with any or all requirements if this chapter
or with any or all conditions imposed pursuant hereto or with any other
applicable provision of state of local law; or
B. The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent
statement in the application or in any supporting document.
A. Security personnel. The licensee shall employ at his/her own expense
such security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide for
the adequate security and protection of the maximum number of
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 128-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 128-10
1:326
attendants at the assembly and for the preservation of order and
protection of property in and around the site of the assembly. No license
shall be issued unless the Director of Public Safety is satisfied that
such necessary and sufficient security personnel will be provided by the
licensee for the duration of the assembly.
B. Water facilities. The licensee shall provide potable water, sufficient in
quantity and pressure to assure proper operation of all water-using
facilities under conditions of peak demand. Such water shall be
supplied from a public water system, if available, and if not available,
then from a source constructed, located, and approved in accordance
with MCL 333.12701 and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law
or from a source and delivered and stored in a manner approved by the
Township.
C. Rest room facilities.
(1) The licensee shall provide separate enclosed flush-type water
closets as defined in MCL 333.901 et seq. and the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto and in accordance with any
other applicable state or local law. If such flush-type facilities are
not available, the Township Health Officer may permit the use of
other facilities which are in compliance with MCL 333.12771 and
the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto and in
accordance with any other applicable state of local law.
(2) The licensee shall provide lavatory and drinking water facility
constructed, installed and maintained in accordance with MCL
338.901 et seq. and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or local
law. All lavatories shall be provided with hot and cold water and
soap and paper towels.
(3) The number and type of facilities required shall be determined on
the basis of the number of attendants in the following manner:
Facilities Male Female
Toilets 1.300 1:200
Urinals 1:100
Lavatories 1:200 1:200
Drinking fountains 1:500
Taps or faucets 1:500
(4) Where the assembly is to continue for more than 12 hours, the
licensee shall provide shower facilities on the basis of the number
of attendants in the following manner:
§ 128-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-10
1:327
Facilities Male Female
Shower heads 1:100 1:100
(5) All facilities shall be installed, connected and maintained from
obstructions, leaks and defects and shall at all times be in operable
condition as determined by the Health Officer.
D. Food service.
(1) If food service is made available on the premises, it shall be
delivered only through concessions licensed and operated in
accordance with the provisions of MCL 289.1107 et seq. and the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto and in accordance
with any other applicable state of local law.
(2) If the assembly is distant from food service establishments open to
the public, the licensee shall make such food services available on
the premises as will adequately feed the attendants.
E. Medical facilities. If the assembly is not readily and quickly accessible
to adequate existing medical facilities, the licensee shall be required to
provide such facilities on the premises of the assembly. The kind,
location, staff strength, medical and other supplies and equipment of
such facilities shall be as prescribed by the Township.
F. Liquid waste disposal. The licensee shall provide for liquid waste
disposal in accordance with all rules and regulations pertaining thereto
established by the Township. If such rules and regulations are not
available or if they are inadequate, then liquid waste disposal shall be
accordance with the United States Public Health Service Publication
No. 526, entitled, "Manual of Septic Tank Practice." If liquid waste
retention and disposal is dependent upon pumpers and haulers, they
shall be licensed in accordance with MCL 324.11701 et seq. and the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto and in accordance with
any license. The licensee shall provide the Township with a true copy of
an executed agreement in force and effect with a licensed pumper or
hauler, which agreement will assure proper, effective and frequent
removal of liquid waste from the premises so as to neither create nor
cause a nuisance or menace to the public health.
G. Solid waste disposal.
(1) The licensee shall provide for solid waste storage on and removal
from the premises. Storage shall be in approved, covered, fly-tight
and rodentproof containers provided in sufficient quantity to
accommodate the number of attendants. Prior to issuance of any
license, the licensee shall provide the Township with a true copy of
an executed agreement in force and effect with a licensed refuse
collector, which agreement will assure proper, effective and
frequent removal of solid waste from the premises so as to neither
create not cause a nuisance or menace to the public health.
§ 128-10 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 128-10
1:328
(2) The licensee shall implement effective control measures to
minimize the presence of rodents, flies, roaches and other vermin
on the premises. Poisonous materials, such as insecticides or
rodenticides, shall not be used in any way so as to contaminate food
or equipment to otherwise constitute a hazard to the public health.
Solid waste containing food waste shall be kept in such conditions
as to prevent the harborage or feeding of vermin.
H. Public bathing beaches. The licensee shall provide or make available or
accessible public bathing beaches only in accordance with MCL
333.12541 and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto and
in accordance with any other applicable provisions of state or local law.
I. Public swimming pools. The licensee shall provide or make available
public swimming pools only in accordance with MCL 333.12521 and the
rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto and in accordance with
any other applicable provision of state or local law.
J. Access and traffic controls. The licensee shall provide for ingress to and
egress from the premises so as to ensure the orderly flow of traffic onto
and off of the premises. Access to the premises shall be from a highway
or road which is a part of the county system of highways or which is a
highway maintained by the State of Michigan. Traffic lanes and other
space shall be provided, designated and kept open for access by
ambulance, fire equipment, helicopter and other emergency vehicles.
Prior to the issuance of a license, the Director of the Department of
State Police and the Director of the Department of State Highways must
approve the licensee's plan for access and traffic control.
K. Parking. The licensee shall provide a parking area sufficient to
accommodate all motor vehicles but in no case shall be provide less
than one automobile space for every four attendants.
L. Camping and trailer parking. A licensee who permits attendants to
remain on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
shall provide for camping and trailer parking and facilities in
accordance with MCL 333.12501 and the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto and in accordance with any other applicable provision
by state or local law.
M. Illumination. The licensee shall provide electrical illumination of all
occupied areas sufficient to ensure the safety and comfort of all
attendants. The licensee's lighting plan shall be approved by the
Township Electrical Inspector.
N. Insurance. Before the issuance of a license, the licensee shall obtain
and provide evidence of public liability insurance and property damage
insurance from a company or companies approved by the Commissioner
of Insurance of the State of Michigan in limits to be set by resolution of
the Township Board, which insurance shall insure liability for death or
injury to persons or damage to property which may result from the
conduct of the assembly or conduct incident thereto and which
§ 128-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 128-10
1:329
§ 128-11. License revocation.
The Township Board may revoke a license whenever the licensee, his
employee or agent fails, neglects or refuses to fully comply with any and all
provisions and requirements set forth herein or with any and all provisions,
insurance shall remain in full force and effect in the specified amounts
for the duration of the license. The evidence of insurance shall include
an endorsement to the effect that the insurance company shall notify
the Clerk of the Township in writing at least 10 days before the
expiration or cancellation of said insurance.
O. Bonding. Before the issuance of a license, the licensee shall obtain from
a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in Michigan a
corporate surety bond in the amount to be set by resolution of the
Township Board and in a form approved by the Township Attorney,
conditioned upon the licensee's faithful compliance with all of the terms
and provisions of this chapter and all applicable provisions of state of
local law and which shall indemnify the Township, its agents, officers
and employees and the Township Board against any and all loss, injury
or damage whatever arising out of or in any way connected with the
assembly and which shall indemnify the owners of property adjoining
the assembly site for any costs attributable to cleaning up and/or
removing debris, trash or other waste resultant from the assembly.
P. Fire protection. The licensee shall, at his/her own expense, take
adequate steps as determined by the State Fire Marshal to ensure fire
protection.
Q. Sound-producing equipment, including, but not limited to, public
address systems, radios, phonographs, musical instruments and other
recording devises, shall not be operated on the premises of the
assembly so as to be unreasonably loud or raucous or so as to be a
nuisance or disturbance to the peace and tranquillity of the citizens of
the Township.
R. Fencing. The licensee shall erect a fence completely enclosing the site
of sufficient height and strength as will preclude persons in excess of
the maximum permissible attendants from gaining access and which
will have sufficient gates properly located so as to provide ready and
safe ingress and egress.
S. Communications. The licensee shall provide public telephone
equipment for general use on the basis of at least one unit for each
1,000 attendants.
T. Miscellaneous. Prior to the issuance of a license, the Township Board
may impose any other conditions reasonably calculated to protect the
health, safety, welfare and property of attendants or citizens of the
Township.
§ 128-10 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 128-11
1:330
regulations, chapters, statutes or other laws incorporated herein by
reference.
§ 128-12. Acts constituting violations.
It shall be unlawful for a licensee, his employee or agent to knowingly:
§ 128-13. Penalties. [Amended 9-18-2003]
Chapter 133
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 133-1. Definitions.
A. Advertise, promote or sell tickets to, conduct or operate an assembly
without first obtaining a license as herein provided.
B. Conduct or operate an assembly in such a manner as to create a public
or private nuisance.
C. Conduct or permit, within the assembly, any obscene display, exhibition,
show, play entertainment or amusement.
D. Permit any person on the premises to cause or create a disturbance in,
around or near the assembly by obscene or disorderly conduct.
E. Permit any person to unlawfully use, sell or possess any narcotics,
narcotic drugs, drugs or other substances as defined by state law.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties specified for a violation of the Township Code.51
B. Any minor, as defined in this state's probate code, who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be dealt with by the Juvenile Division of
the Probate Court or as otherwise prescribed by state law.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CANVASSING AND SOLICITING — Going from house to house or place
to place or remaining on public property or private property within
the Township which is not owned by the canvasser, solicitor or the
employer of either for the purpose of taking orders for or selling food
products, books, magazines, goods, wares or merchandise of any nature
or for the purpose of taking orders for or selling the installation or
servicing of any household equipment or appliances or the maintenance
or installation of any building or building improvements. This definition
shall include persons soliciting funds for donations of any kind.
Newspaper deliveries, dairy product deliverers and other persons
51.Editor's Note: See §§ 1-10, 1-14 and 1-16.
§ 128-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-1
1:331
§ 133-2. License or permit required; minors; posted premises.
traveling on regularly established routes at the request, express or
implied, of their customers are not within this definition.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS — Any organization registered as a
charitable organization under the statutes of the State of Michigan.
PEDDLING — Going from house to house or place to place or remaining
on public property or private property within the Township which is
not owned by the peddler or the employer of the peddler and carrying
or transporting, by person, wagon, motor vehicle or any other type
of conveyance, for the purpose of offering for immediate sale, food
products, books, magazines, goods, wares or merchandise of any
nature.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation or any other
organization.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION — Any organization registered as such
under the statutes of the State of Michigan.
TOWNSHIP — The Charter Township of Northville.
B. The masculine pronoun shall also stand for the feminine and neutral
pronoun throughout this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit, canvass or peddle in the
Township without first obtaining a license in compliance with this
chapter, unless the person is a charitable organization or a nonprofit
organization.
B. It shall be unlawful for any charitable organization or nonprofit
organization to solicit, canvass or peddle in the Township without first
registering with the Township Police Department and obtaining a
permit in compliance with this chapter.
C. No license shall be issued until an applicant obtains the age of 18 years,
except that a person between the ages of 12 and 18 years may be issued
a license if the applicant is accompanied by a sponsoring adult at both
the time of applying for the license and at the actual time of canvassing,
soliciting or peddling.
(1) Persons under the age of 12 years shall be exempt from registering
or licensing. Each person under 12 years of age must be
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian who is licensed under
this chapter when soliciting, canvassing or peddling.
(2) If any soliciting, canvassing or peddling is to be carried on by a
person under the age of 17 years, an approved copy of the
Michigan State Department of Labor Form No. H52, showing the
approved hours of work and the type of soliciting, canvassing or
peddling to be done, shall be attached to the application.
§ 133-1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 133-2
1:332
§ 133-3. Application for license; issuance or denial; appeals.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit, canvass or peddle upon any
premises in the Township If anyone in control of the premises requests
the person not to do so or if a notice is placed on the premises in a
conspicuous position near the entrance indicating that the occupants of
the premises do not desire to have solicitors, canvassers or peddlers
call upon them.
A. Application for licenses shall be made upon forms provided by the
Police Department, which shall be signed and verified under oath by
each applicant and the individual or the authorized agent for any firm,
partnership, corporation or other organization and shall, as a minimum,
contain the following:
(1) The name, address, telephone number, date of birth, sex, color of
hair, color of eyes, weight and height of each individual or
employee who will solicit, canvass or peddle.
(2) The name, residential address, business address and telephone
number of each partner when the applicant is a partnership.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of incorporated
applicants and of the resident agent of the corporation. The names,
residential address, business address and telephone numbers of
the principals, officers, directors and local representatives of the
corporation or other business organization. If a foreign
corporation, it must state whether it is authorized to do business in
the State of Michigan.
(4) A brief description of the product or services involved.
(5) For each applicant, agent or employee of an applicant under the
age of 17 years, appropriate working papers shall be filed with the
Police Department at the time of application.
(6) A description of vehicles being used in the operation along with the
license plate number of each vehicle and a valid certificate of
insurance.
(7) A statement by the applicant that he has never been convicted of a
felony or crime involving theft, dishonesty, false statement or fraud.
(8) A statement that the applicant is not disqualified to receive a
license by reason of anything in this chapter.
B. The Township Police Department will review all applications for a
permit.
C. A license may be denied or revoked for any of the following reasons:
(1) The prior revocation of a license under this chapter.
§ 133-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-3
1:333
§ 133-4. Registration for permit.
§ 133-5. License fee.
A license fee shall be established by resolution of the Township Board of
Trustees. The Township Board may modify the established fee schedule by
resolution at any time.
§ 133-6. Fee exemptions; filing of affidavit.
(2) An incomplete application.
(3) Misrepresentation of any facts in the license application.
(4) The conviction of a felony or a crime involving theft, dishonesty,
false statements or fraudulent scheme, trick or device by the
applicant.
(5) The inability of the applicant to produce a valid driver's license or
state identification card.
(6) The failure to visibly display the permit issued by the Township
while soliciting, canvassing or peddling in the Township.
(7) Any violation of this chapter.
D. Any person whose license application has been denied shall have the
right to petition the Township Board for an appeal. The Township shall
grant a public hearing on the appeal and the applicant shall have the
right to appear and present evidence on his or her own behalf.
Following the hearing, the Board shall submit to the applicant a written
statement of its findings and determinations. The Board's decision shall
be based on satisfactory compliance with the requirements of this
section of this chapter.
A. The registration for a permit shall be made on the forms provided by
the Police Department, which shall be signed and verified under oath by
the person to whom the permit will be issued. The registration form
shall, at a minimum, contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the charitable or nonprofit organization
along with proof that the organization falls within the definitions
set forth in this chapter and is entitled to exemption from the
licensing provision of this chapter.
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the person registering
and proof that he or she is part of that organization.
B. A fee shall not be charged for registration.
A. No license fee shall be charged to any person who sells produce which
he or she has raised himself or who has obtained the age of 65 years or
§ 133-3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 133-6
1:334
§ 133-7. Expiration date of licenses, registrations and permits.
Each license, registration or permit issued by the Police Department shall
expire at 12:00 midnight of the last day of December of each year, unless
previously terminated under any provision of this chapter.
§ 133-8. Display of license or permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as a peddler, canvasser or
solicitor without displaying the license or permit issued by the Township.
Each vehicle, conveyance or container must have a copy of the license or
permit issued to the peddler, canvasser or solicitor attached to it so it can
be seen from the outside.
§ 133-9. Regulations regarding scales, stopping, traffic and noise.
§ 133-10. Vehicles used to sell food products.
who is a newspaper deliverer or who is a veteran of state or national
military service who has been honorably discharged.
B. Any person who has obtained a license from the State of Michigan
pursuant to 1921 Public Act No. 359 (MCL §§ 35.441 - 35.443) shall be
exempt from the licensing provisions of this chapter.
C. Anyone claiming exemption from licensing or the license fee shall swear
by affidavit to the facts which entitled him or her to an exemption, and
that affidavit shall be filed with the Police Department. All exempt
persons shall be issued a license upon approval of their license
application as provided for in this chapter.
A. No person shall use any scales which do not have valid approval by the
State of Michigan, Bureau of Weights and Measures, or the City of
Detroit Department of Weights and Measures.
B. No person shall stop in any one place longer than is necessary to make
a sale or solicitation or in any event shall not stop on private property
without the consent of the property owner and shall not stop for a
period longer than 30 minutes at a time. No person shall stop for the
purpose of selling or offering to sell any food products within a distance
of 300 feet from a public, private or parochial school building or the
lands on which those school buildings are located in the Township on
any day during which school is in session.
C. No person operating as a solicitor, canvasser or peddler shall interfere
with traffic or permit large numbers of persons, especially children, to
congregate upon the public streets.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to call out or make a noise of any
kind or to use a bell, horn or other noisemaking device for the purpose
of attracting attention.
§ 133-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-10
1:335
§ 133-11. Hours of peddling/solicitation; additional requirements.
§ 133-12. Transfer and assignment of license, registration, or
permit.
No license, registration or permit issued under the provisions of this
chapter shall be used or worn at any time by any person other than the one
to whom it was issued and only when engaged in the activities for which the
license, registration, or permit was issued.
§ 133-13. Permission to operate in public parks required.
No solicitor, canvasser or peddler shall operate in any public park controlled
or managed by the Township or in any public park within the boundaries of
the Township unless that person first obtains permission from the Township
Board or Wayne County.
§ 133-14. Revocation of license or permit.
Before a license or permit can be revoked, the Township Board shall serve
the license holder or identification card holder, by first-class mail mailed no
A. All vehicles used in the sale of food products must be kept clean and
sanitary at all times; and when containing food products, they must be
kept only in places and operated in a manner which, in the opinion of
the Health Care Officer for the Wayne County Department of Health
and the Michigan Department of Agriculture, are sanitary and
wholesome.
B. All vehicles or other conveyances used for the purpose of selling or
transportation of food products for human consumption in the Township
shall be inspected and shall carry a current, valid approval by the
Wayne County Board of Health or the Michigan Department of
Agriculture before a license is granted to the operator. The holder of a
license for whom a vehicle or other conveyance is operated shall be the
person responsible for all the conditions and requirements of this
chapter.
C. Failure to maintain the standards and requirements of the Wayne
County Board of Health or the Michigan Department of Agriculture for
the sale or transportation of food constitutes cause for revocation of the
license under which the vehicles or other conveyances are operated.
A. No peddling or solicitation may be conducted after 6:00 p.m. or before
10:00 a.m., prevailing time.
B. No peddler or solicitor shall enter into property which has posted a "No
Solicitation," "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," or "No
Advertisements" sign, or its equivalent, posted in a conspicuous and
prominent location. [Added 5-18-2017]
§ 133-10 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 133-14
1:336
less than four days prior to the hearing, with a notice of hearing which shall
contain the following:
§ 133-15. Penalties.
Chapter 139
SEWER AND WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewer use — See Ch. 142. Subdivision control — See Ch. 152.
A. Notice of proposed action.
B. Reason for proposed action.
C. Date, time, and place of the hearing.
D. A statement that licensees may present evidence and testimony and
confront adverse witnesses.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties specified for a violation of the Township Code.52
B. Any minor, as defined in this state's Probate Code, who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be dealt with by the Juvenile Division of
the Probate Court or as otherwise prescribed by state law.
52.Editor's Note: See §§ 1-10, 1-14 and 1-16.
§ 133-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-15
1:337

ARTICLE I
Sewage Disposal Systems
[Adopted 7-11-1991 as Subchapter B of Ch. 61 of the Code of
Ordinances]
§ 139-1. Establishment of sewage disposal system as public utility.
As authorized by the laws of the State of Michigan, there is hereby
established a Northville Township sewage disposal system, which shall
be maintained and operated as a single public improvement on a public
utility basis in accordance with the Master Utility Plan and all applicable
provisions of the Township Code.
§ 139-2. Prohibitions.
§ 139-3. Connection requirement.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit or permit to be
deposited in any area under the jurisdiction of the Township for
discharge onto the ground or into any natural watercourse any
substance which is injurious to the public health or detrimental to the
public welfare.
B. Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful to
construct or maintain any privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other
facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
C. It shall be unlawful to introduce new inflow sources to the separate
sanitary sewer system in the Township.
D. It shall be unlawful to construct combined sewers in the Township.
E. It shall be unlawful for any new building sanitary wastewater
connection to contain footing drain and/or roof leader wastewater
contributions.
A. Public sanitary sewer systems are essential to the health, safety and
welfare of the people of the Township. Failure or potential failure of
septic tank disposal systems poses a threat to the public health, safety
and welfare, presents a potential for ill health, transmission of disease,
mortality and economic blight and constitutes a threat to the quality of
surface and subsurface waters of the Township. The connection to
available public sanitary sewer systems at the earliest reasonable date
is a matter for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare
and necessary in the public interest, which is declared as a matter of
legislative determination by the Township Board.
B. Any building or structure in which toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing or
other facilities which generate water-carried sewage are used or are
available for use for household, commercial, industrial or other
purposes shall be connected to the Township sewage disposal system
§ 139-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-3
1:339
§ 139-4. Use of septic tank when public sewer not available.
available to service the building or structure. "Available" means the
Township sewage disposal system is located in a right-of-way, easement,
highway, street or public way which crosses, adjoins or abuts the
property and passing not more than 200 feet at the nearest point from
the building or structure from which the sewage originates.
C. Time limit for connection; notice requirements.
(1) The connection shall be completed promptly but not later than 24
months after the date of occurrence of any of the following events:
(a) Publication of a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Township that a sanitary sewer has been constructed and
has been accepted by the Township for public use; or
(b) Modification of a proprietor's structure so as to become a
structure in which sewage originates as determined by a
certificate of occupancy issued by the Township; or
(c) First-class mail notice to the owner of the property as listed on
the current tax rolls that a sanitary sewer service is available;
or
(d) Posting of notice on the property that sanitary sewer service is
available.
(2) The notice shall provide that the structure(s) on the property shall
be connected to the available Township sewage disposal system
and the date by which such connection shall be accomplished. The
notice shall give the approximate location of the Township sewer
which is available for connection of the structure(s) involved and
shall advise the owner of the connection charges and tap-in fees
applicable.
D. When a structure in which sewage originates is not connected to the
available Township sewage disposal system within 90 days of the
modification of a structure or by the date specified in the notice, the
Township may bring an action for amendatory injunction or order in a
court of competent jurisdiction to compel the owner to connect
immediately to the Township sewage disposal system, which action
shall be in addition to and shall not exclude or limit the penalties
applicable pursuant to § 139-10.
E. All expense for labor and materials necessary to transmit the sewage
from the building sewer to the available Township sewer shall be the
sole obligation of the owner, not the Township.
A. Where a public sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be
connected with a septic tank or other private sewage disposal facility
which shall meet all requirements of the Wayne County Health
§ 139-3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 139-4
1:340
§ 139-5. Control and management.
The sewage disposal system shall be under the exclusive control and
management of the Northville Township Water and Sewer Commission,
subject to required approvals by the Township Board.
§ 139-6. Rules and regulations. [Amended 10-17-2002]
The Director of Public Services shall establish and from time to time amend
rules and regulations to provide for protection of the sewage disposal
system and to govern use of its facilities and services. Such rules and
regulations, when approved by resolution of the Township Board, shall be
considered a part of this article and violations thereof shall be subject to the
penalties provided herein.
§ 139-7. Charges.
Department. The owner shall operate the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the
Township.
B. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served
by a private sewage disposal facility, as provided in § 139-3 above, a
direct connection shall be made to the public sewer as required by this
article and any septic tank, privy, vault, cesspool and similar private
sewage facilities on the property shall be abandoned and filled in a
manner approved by the Health Department.
A. Charges and rates for connection privileges, connection permits and
installations and for service provided by the sewage disposal system
shall be recommended by the Director of Public Services and shall be
amended from time to time by the Board of Trustees if found advisable.
Such charges and rates, when approved by resolution of the Township
Board, shall be considered a part of this article. [Amended
10-17-2002]
B. Charges for sewage disposal service shall constitute a lien on the
property served. On or before October 1 each year, the Director of
Public Services shall submit to the Township Treasurer a certified
statement of outstanding unpaid sewage disposal charges. The
Township Treasurer shall place such charges on the next general tax
roll, and the same shall be collected as part of the general Township
taxes.
C. If notice is given in writing to the Director of Public Services or the
Township Board that a tenant is responsible for sewage disposal
charges, then such charges thereafter shall not become a lien on the
property but, in such cases, the Director of Public Services shall require
a cash deposit in an amount to be set by resolution of the Township
Board before any water service or sewage disposal service is furnished
to the property.
§ 139-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-8
1:341
§ 139-8. Construction requirements.
The materials and construction of building sewers and of all connections
into the sewage disposal system shall conform to specifications established
by the Director of Public Services.
§ 139-9. Extensions of system.
§ 139-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-21-2009]
Notwithstanding any language in this article to the contrary, any person
who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to the following penalties:
A. All extensions of or additions to the sewage disposal system shall be at
the proprietor's expense and shall be made or supervised by the Water
Utility in the following manner:
(1) Any proprietor who purposes to make any extension or addition to
the sewage disposal system shall first apply to the Director of
Public Services, which will advise him of any features which will be
required in the proposed improvement in order to conform and fit
such improvement to the Master Utility Plan for the Northville
Township Sewage Disposal System.
(2) The proprietors shall then cause to be prepared engineering plans
and specifications for the proposed improvement which meet all
requirements for the design and construction of sewage disposal
facilities in the Township as well as the requirements of the Master
Utility Plan.
(3) The proprietor shall submit his engineering plans and
specifications for approval to the Director of Public Services.
B. No construction shall begin until the engineering plans and
specifications have been approved by the Director of Public Services
and have received all other applicable approvals and permits.
C. The proprietor shall be responsible for the cost of Township
engineering supervision, construction layout and detailed inspection to
assure that the construction conforms to the approved plans and
specifications.
D. The Director of Public Services and its agents shall maintain
supervisory inspection and shall have the right to enter any premises
where the work is in progress or is completed for the purpose of such
inspection and shall have the right to stop work and to condemn and
order the removal of completed work not in accordance with the
approved plans and specifications.
§ 139-8 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 139-10
1:342
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is
specified in connection with a particular section:
(1) First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of not less than $300, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each offense.
(2) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $500, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of, the
article.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
Code of the Charter Township of Northville, any equitable or other
remedies available may be sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses as provided by law.
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser-included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
§ 139-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-10
1:343

ARTICLE II
Water Supply Systems
[Adopted 7-11-1991 as Subchapter C of Ch. 61 of the Code of
Ordinances; amended in its entirety 5-21-2009]
§ 139-11. Establishment of water system as public utility.
As authorized by the laws of the State of Michigan, there is hereby
established a Northville Township water system, which shall be maintained
and operated as a single public improvement on a public utility basis in
accordance with the Master Utility Plan and all applicable provisions of the
Township Code.
§ 139-12. Operation by Township.
All water mains and other water supply facilities hereafter constructed in
the public right-of-way or easements and all facilities of every sort provided
for use in the production and distribution of a public supply of water within
the Township of Northville shall be named and operated by the Township.
§ 139-13. Control and management.
The water system shall be under the exclusive control and management
of the Northville Township Director of Public Services, subject to required
approvals by the Township Board.
§ 139-14. Rules and regulations.
The Director of Public Services shall establish and from time to time shall
amend, if found advisable, rules and regulations to provide for protection of
the water system and to govern use of its facilities and services. Such rules
and regulations, when approved by resolution of the Township Board, will
be considered a part of this article, and violations thereof will be subject to
the penalties provided herein.
§ 139-15. Rates and charges.
A. Charges and rates for connection privileges, connection installations,
meter installations, capacity provided and water supplies, with any
other services required of the water system, will be established by the
Director of Public Services and will be amended by the Director of
Public Services from time to time if found advisable. Such charges and
rates, when approved by resolution of the Township Board, will be
considered a part of this article.
B. Charges for water service will constitute a lien on the property served.
On or before October 1 of each year, the Director of Public Services
shall submit to the Township Treasurer a certified statement of
outstanding unpaid water service charges. The Treasurer shall place
such charges on the next general tax roll, and the same shall be
collected as part of the Township taxes.
§ 139-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-16
1:345
§ 139-16. Connections.
No connection shall be made to any water system mains without obtaining
a permit. Application for a permit shall be made to the Township Building
Department.
§ 139-17. Water meters.
§ 139-18. Extensions of system.
A. The owner or lessee of the real property which is a water service
customer shall provide access inside the owner's or lessee's building to
an authorized representative of the Township for the purpose of
examining, repairing, updating, or replacing the water meter or other
remote reading equipment so that such equipment is operating
properly. Failure to provide access to the inside of the building to the
Township within seven days after the Township has made written
demand to the owner or lessee for such access shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
B. Tampering, damaging, changing, rerouting, removing or bypassing the
water meter by persons other than Township personnel is strictly
prohibited and shall constitute a misdemeanor.
C. If a water meter fails to register properly as a result of mechanical
failure, the Township shall have the authority to estimate the quantity of
water on which the billing is made until such time as the meter is
repaired or replaced. The estimate shall be based on previous usage
and/or usage of similar users.
A. All extensions of or additions to the water system shall be at the
proprietor's expense and shall be made or supervised by the Water
Utility in the following manner:
(1) Any proprietor who proposes to make any extension or addition to
the public water system shall first apply to the Director of Public
Services, which will advise him of any features which will be
required in the proposed improvement in order to conform and fit
such improvement to the Master Utility Plan for the Northville
Township Water System.
(2) The proprietor shall then cause to be prepared engineering plans
and specifications for the proposed improvement which meet all
requirements for the design and construction of water supply
facilities in the Township as well as the requirements of the Master
Utility Plan.
(3) The proprietor shall submit his engineering plans and
specifications for approval of the Director of Public Services.
§ 139-16 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 139-18
1:346
§ 139-19. Hydrants and valves regulated.
B. No construction shall begin until the engineering plans and
specifications have been approved by the Director of Public Services
and have received all other approvals and permits.
C. The proprietor shall be responsible for the cost of engineering
supervision, construction layout and detailed inspection to assure that
the construction conforms to the approved plans and specifications.
D. The Director of Public Services and its agents shall maintain
supervisory inspection and shall have the right to enter any premises
where the work is in progress or is completed for the purpose of such
inspection and shall have the right to stop work and to condemn and
order the removal of completed work not in accordance with the
approval plans and specifications.
A. The Director of Public Services shall regulate and control the operation
and use of the valves and hydrants of the Township water system and
withdrawal of water therefrom.
B. The Water Utility shall issue permits and licenses prior to the operation
and use of the valves and hydrants of the Township water system for
purposes other than public safety or maintenance of the system.
C. No person, other than employees and agents of the Township, shall
open or close or in any manner interfere with or operate any valve in
the Township water system.
D. No person shall open or operate any fire hydrant connected with the
Township water system except in the following instances:
(1) Such person is an authorized employee or agent of the Township.
(2) Such person is a volunteer or paid firefighter of the Township Fire
Department, performing the duties of a firefighter, under the
direction and supervision of the Chief of the Department.
(3) Such person has first applied for and obtained a permit from the
Township, paying such charges as the Township Board may by
resolution establish therefor, acting solely within the provisions of
the permission set forth in said permit and complying at all times
with the rules and regulations established by the Township Board
or the Township Director of Public Services or both.
(4) Such person has first applied for and obtained a license to utilize
such fire hydrants for fire emergency purposes only from the
Township, paying such charges as the Township Board may, by
resolution, establish therefor, acting within the provisions of the
license granted and complying at all times with the rules and
regulations established by the Township Board or the Township
Director of Public Services or both.
§ 139-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-19
1:347
§ 139-20. Outdoor water use restrictions. [Added 11-19-2009]
The Charter Township of Northville, through its contract with the Detroit
Water and Sewerage Department, is obligated to take steps to insure that,
whenever possible, the use of the municipal water system shall be used
during the nonpeak hours of 12:00 midnight (EDT) to 6:00 a.m. (EDT).
To satisfy this contractual commitment, the following municipal water use
restrictions are in effect:
§ 139-21. Violations and penalties.
Notwithstanding any language in this article to the contrary, any person
who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to the following penalties:
E. No person shall place anything or any object within 15 feet of any fire
hydrant or otherwise obstruct any hydrant so as to interfere with its
proper use. No person shall use any wrench or tool in opening any
hydrant other than a regulation Fire Department wrench.
A. For those properties in the Township that are serviced by an
underground irrigation system, outdoor watering, including the
sprinkling of lawns and landscaping, shall be done only during the
nonpeak hours of 12:00 midnight (EDT) to 6:00 a.m. (EDT).
B. Properties with an even-numbered address shall be allowed to irrigate
on even-numbered dates within the month.
C. Properties with an odd-numbered address shall he allowed to irrigate
on odd-numbered dates within the month.
D. A water user may manually irrigate landscaping, provided that the
irrigation is not connected to an underground system and is attended
and monitored by the water user, at any time other than during the
hours of 6:00 a.m. (EDT) and 10:00 a.m. (EDT).
E. If the above provisions create a practical hardship for a municipal water
user, the municipal water user can petition the Director of Public
Services or his/her designee, asking for relief from one of the abovereferenced
restrictions. The petition shall set forth the requested relief,
and shall detail the extraordinary circumstances that would justify the
requested relief, as well as the duration of the requested relief. The
Director of Public Services or his/her designee can grant or deny or
modify the petition, taking into consideration the contractual
obligations of the Township, as well as the articulated circumstances of
the petitioner. The decision of the Director of Public Services or his/her
designee shall be final.
F. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions, as set
forth in Subsections A through D, without obtaining relief, as provided
in Subsection E, shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, in
accordance with the provisions of § 139-21 of the chapter.
§ 139-19 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 139-21
1:348
§ 139-22. through § 139-30. (Reserved)
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is
specified in connection with a particular section: [Amended
11-19-2009]
(1) First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of not less than $300, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each offense.
(2) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $500, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of, the
article.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
Code of the Charter Township of Northville, any equitable or other
remedies available may be sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses as provided by law.
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser-included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
§ 139-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-22
1:349

ARTICLE III
Cross-Connections
[Adopted 7-11-1991 as Ch. 66 of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 139-31. Purpose.
Pursuant to the Safe Drinking Water Act, being Act No. 399 of the Public
Acts of 1976, and Act No. 246 of the Public Acts of 1945, the Township
of Northville for the purpose of protecting the public health, providing for
supervision and control over the public water supply, prohibiting certain
cross-connections, providing for the administration and fees applicable to
regulating and inspecting for the elimination and prevention of prohibited
cross-connections, and providing penalties, the Northville Township Cross-
Connection Ordinance is adopted. This chapter does not and is not intended
to supersede other laws or ordinances governing plumbing or the public
water supply system; rather, the intent is to supplement such other controls.
§ 139-32. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited, amended or repealed as
"Northville Township Cross-Connection Ordinance."
§ 139-33. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply when the following terms are utilized
in this article:
BACKFLOW — Water of questionable quality, wastes, or other contaminants
entering a public water supply system due to a reversal of flow.
PUBLIC WATER or PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY — The water or water supply
system of the Township of Northville Water and Sewer Department.
SAFE AIR GAP — The minimum distance of a water inlet or opening above
the maximum high-water level or overflow rim in a fixture, device, or
container to which public water is furnished which shall be not less than
two times the inside diameter of the water inlet pipe, but shall not be less
than one inch and need not be more than 12 inches.
SECONDARY WATER SUPPLY — A water supply system maintained in
addition to a public water supply, including, but not limited to, water
systems from ground or surface sources not meeting the requirements of
Act No. 399 of the Public Acts of 1976, being §§ 325.1001 to 325.1023 of the
Michigan Compiled Laws, or water from a public water supply which in any
way has been treated, processed, or exposed to any possible contaminant or
stored in other than an approved storage facility.
SUBMERGED INLET — A water pipe or extension thereto from a public
water supply terminating in a tank, vessel, fixture, or appliance which may
contain water of questionable quality, waste or other contaminant, and
which is unprotected against backflow.
§ 139-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-33
1:351
WATER UTILITY — The Township of Northville and the Township or
Northville Water and Sewage Department.
§ 139-34. Connection rules.
A connection with a public water supply system shall comply with existing
laws, ordinances, and rules including:
§ 139-35. Prohibited cross-connections.
Prohibited cross-connections are the following:
§ 139-36. Approval of corrective action; time limit.
A. Act No. 266 of the Public Acts of 1929, as amended, being §§ 338.901 to
338.917 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.53
B. Northville Township Cross-Connection Ordinance.
C. Rules regulating acceptable protection against cross-connections
adopted from time to time by the Board of Trustees of the Township of
Northville.
A. A cross-connection shall not be made between a public water supply
system and a secondary water supply.
B. A cross-connection shall not be made by submerged inlet.
C. A cross-connection shall not be made between a public water supply
and piping which may contain sanitary waste or a chemical
contaminant.
D. A cross-connection shall not be made between a public water supply
system and piping immersed in a tank or vessel which may contain a
contaminant.
E. A backflow shall constitute a prohibited cross-connection.
F. A reasonably foreseen potential backflow shall constitute a prohibited
cross-connection.
A. A user of public water shall obtain written approval by the Water Utility
or authorized inspection agency of any proposed corrective action or
protective device before using or installing it.
B. The total time allowed for completion of the necessary corrections shall
be contingent upon the degree of hazard involved and include the time
required to obtain and install equipment. If the cross-connection has
not been removed, after a reasonable period of time, the Water Utility
shall physically separate the public water supply from the on site piping
53.Editor's Note: Sections 338.901 to 338.917 were repealed by P.A. 2002 No. 733, § 59
(MCLA § 338.3569).
§ 139-33 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 139-36
1:352
§ 139-37. Identification of secondary water sources.
When a secondary water source is used in addition to a public water supply
system, exposed public water and secondary water piping shall be identified
by distinguishing colors or tags and so maintained that each pipe may be
traced readily in its entirety. If piping is so installed that it is impossible
to trace it in its entirety, it will be necessary to protect the public water
supply at the service connection in a manner acceptable to the Department
of Public Health.
§ 139-38. Private water storage tanks.
A private water storage tank supplied from a public water supply system
shall be deemed a secondary water supply unless it is designed and
approved for potable water usage.
§ 139-39. Authorized inspection agency.
The employees or agents of the Water Utility and the employees or agents
of the Wayne County Public Health Department as may be designated
from time to time by resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Township
of Northville shall be the persons authorized to inspect and enforce this
article, and shall be defined as the authorized inspection agency.
§ 139-40. Right of entry.
§ 139-41. Discontinuance of water service.
The Township of Northville Water and Sewer Department may discontinue
water service to any customer, user or property served by or containing
a prohibited cross-connection. Public water supply to such discontinued
customer, user or property shall not be restored until the authorized
inspection agency shall certify a prohibited cross-connection no longer
system in such a manner that the two systems cannot again be
connected by any unauthorized person.
A. The employees or agents or the authorized inspection agency shall have
the right to enter upon any property served by a connection to the
public water supply for purposes of inspecting the plumbing system or
piping systems for cross-connections.
B. The owner, lessee or occupant of any property served by public water
shall promptly furnish to the employees or agents of the authorized
inspection agency all information which may be requested concerning
the plumbing system or piping systems on such property.
C. The refusal to permit entry as provided in Subsection A, or to furnish
information as provided in Subsection B, above, shall prima facie
constitute the property as containing prohibited cross-connections.
§ 139-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-41
1:353
exists and until all charges and fees of the public water supply and of the
authorized inspection agency have been fully paid.
§ 139-42. Labeling of water outlets.
Any water outlet which could be used for potable water purposes and which
is not supplied by public water or by an approved potable system shall be
labeled in a conspicuous manner as "WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING."
The owner, lessee or occupants of property upon which such a water outlet
is located, or any of them, shall be individually responsible for creating and
maintaining the presence of such label.
§ 139-43. Fees.
The owner, lessee or occupant of property inspected for compliance with
the provisions of this article, or any of them, shall pay to the Township of
Northville a fee for such inspection in accordance with a schedule of fees as
may from time to time be adopted by resolution of the Board of Trustees of
the Township of Northville.
§ 139-44. Penalties. [Amended 10-17-2002; 5-21-2009]
Notwithstanding any language in this article to the contrary, any person
who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to the following penalties:
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is
specified in connection with a particular section:
(1) First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of not less than $300, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each offense.
(2) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $500, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of, the
article.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
Code of the Charter Township of Northville, any equitable or other
remedies available may be sought.
§ 139-41 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 139-44
1:354
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses as provided by law.
§ 139-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 139-44
1:355
Chapter 142
SEWER USE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 58.
Design and construction standards — See Ch.
72.
Grading and drainage — See Ch. 85.
Sewer and water — See Ch. 139.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 152.
§ 139-44 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 139-44
1:356
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 142-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all users that discharge into the Ypsilanti
Community Utilities Authority's (YCUA) or the City of Detroit Water and
Sewerage Department's (DWSD) publicly owned treatment works
(collectively the POTW). In addition, it shall be unlawful for any
nondomestic user located outside the Township limits to continue
discharges to the POTW except as provided in this chapter. In addition, this
chapter shall establish permit requirements for connections or alterations
to Township, YCUA, or DWSD sewage works facilities or the POTW; govern
the design, construction, alteration or use of and connection to the sewage
works and POTW; regulate the discharge of wastewater into the sewage
works and POTW; prohibit certain detrimental conduct; authorize the
issuance of permits; authorize inspections; provide for administration and
enforcement of this chapter; establish civil and criminal penalties for
violations; and authorize the enforcement of and ensure compliance within
the Township with the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, the Clean Water
Act and the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act,
more specifically defined herein, and regulations promulgated and adopted
under said acts and statutes.
§ 142-2. Definitions and word usage.
A. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter,
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act and
the Clean Water Act, which are used interchangeably in this chapter
and refer to Public Law 92-500, as adopted in 1972 and amended by
Public Law 95-217 in 1977, and any succeeding amendments and any
administrative rules promulgated thereunder, as amended or revised
from time to time.
ALTERNATIVE DISCHARGE LIMIT — Limits set by the POTW in lieu
of the promulgated national categorical pretreatment standard for
integrated facilities in accordance with the combined waste stream
formula as set by the EPA.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER —
A responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user is a
corporation, who shall be a president, secretary, treasurer, or vice
president of the corporation in charge of a principal business
function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or
decisionmaking functions for the corporation, or the principal
manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation
facilities employing more than 250 persons or having a gross
annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in second
(1)
§ 142-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-2
1:357
AVAILABLE CYANIDE — The quantity of cyanide that consists of
cyanide ion (CN), hydrogen cyanide in water (HCNaq), and the cyanocomplexes
of zinc, copper, cadmium, mercury nickel and silver,
determined by EPA method OIA-1677, or other method designated as a
standard method or approved under 40 CFR 136.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Programs, practices,
procedures or other directed efforts, initiated and implemented by
the user, which can or do lead to the reduction, conservation or
minimization of pollutants being introduced into the ecosystem,
including but are not limited to the Ypsilanti Community Utilities
Authority (YCUA) or City of Detroit publicly owned treatment systems.
BMPs include, but are not limited to, equipment or technology
modifications, process or procedure modifications, reformulation or
design of products, substitution of raw materials, and improvements
in housekeeping, maintenance, training, or inventory control and may
include technical and economic considerations. BMPs may be structural
or nonstructural or both. In determining what BMPs will be required
of a user in a particular case, the Director may consider all relevant
technological, economical, practical, and institutional considerations as
determined relevant and appropriate by the Director, consistent with
quarter 1980 dollars) if authority to sign documents has been
assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate
procedures.
A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively.
(2)
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above
and if all of the following apply:
The authorization is made in writing by the individual
described in Subsections (1) or (2) of this definition;
(a)
This authorization specifies either an individual or a position
having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility
from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the
position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field
superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company; and
(b)
The written authorization is submitted to the Director. If an
authorization is no longer accurate because a different
individual or position has responsibility for the overall
operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for
environmental matters for the company, a new authorization
satisfying the requirements of this definition shall be submitted
to the Director prior to or together with any reports to be
signed by an authorized representative.
(c)
(3)
§ 142-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-2
1:358
achieving and maintaining compliance with the requirements of this
chapter and other applicable laws and regulations.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES PLAN (BMPP) — A written
document that describes how the BMPs will be accomplished.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure, five days at 20° C. expressed in terms of weight
and concentration (milligrams per liter).
BOARD — The Board of Trustees of Northville Charter Township.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the drainage from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building
wall.
BUILDING SEWER — That extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other places of disposal.
BYPASS — Intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of
an industrial user's treatment facility.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — A measure of the oxygenconsuming
capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water
or wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from
a chemical oxidant in a specified test. It does not differentiate between
stable and unstable organic matter and thus does not necessarily
correlate with biochemical oxygen demand. Also known as "OC" and
"DOC," oxygen consumed and dichromate oxygen consumed,
respectively.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The difference between the amount of chlorine
added to water or wastewater and the amount of residual chlorine
remaining at the end of a specified contact period. The demand for any
given water varies with the amount of chlorine applied, time of contact
and temperature.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and
sewage.
COMBINED WASTE STREAM — The waste stream at industrial
facilities where regulated process effluent is mixed with other
wastewaters (either regulated or unregulated) prior to treatment.
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — A substance amenable to treatment in
the wastewater treatment plant such as biochemical oxygen demand,
suspended solids, pH and fecal coli form bacteria, plus additional
pollutants identified in the National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit if the publicly owned treatment works was
designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does remove such
pollutant to a substantial degree. Examples of such additional
pollutants may include chemical oxygen demand (COD), total organic
§ 142-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-2
1:359
carbon, and phosphorus and phosphorus compounds, nitrogen
compounds, fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE —
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant
added is heat.
DAILY MAXIMUM — The concentration or mass loading that shall
not be exceeded on any single calendar day. Where daily maximum
limitations are expressed in terms of concentration, the daily discharge
is the arithmetical average measurement of the pollutant concentration
derived from all measurements taken that day. Where daily maximum
limitations are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the
total mass discharged during the day. If a composite sample is required
for a parameter, the determination whether the daily maximum
limitation for that parameter has been exceeded on a single calendar
day shall be based on the composite sample collected for that
parameter on that calendar day. If grab samples are required for a
parameter, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for
that parameter has been exceeded on a calendar day shall be based on
the average of all grab samples collected for that parameter on that
calendar day. If only one grab sample is collected for a parameter on
a given day, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation
for that parameter has been exceeded for the day shall be based on the
results of that single grab sample. If the pollutant concentration in any
sample is less than the applicable detection limit, that value shall be
regarded as zero when calculating the daily maximum concentration.
DEBT SERVICE CHARGES — The charges levied to customers of the
wastewater system which are used to pay principal, interest and
administrative costs of retiring the debt incurred for construction of the
sewage works.
A sample formed either by continuous sampling or by mixing
discrete samples obtained at intervals over a period of time. The
individual samples shall be obtained through flow-proportional
composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by DWSD or
YCUA. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab
sampling is authorized by DWSD or YCUA, the samples must be
representative of the discharge. Manual generation of a composite
sample through the collection and combining of grab samples may
be approved if the user demonstrates to the satisfaction of the
Director that this will provide a representative sample of the
effluent being discharged.
(1)
The decision to allow the alternative sampling must be documented
in the industrial user's file for that facility or facilities. Composite
sampling protocols delineated in the user's permit take
precedence.
(2)
§ 142-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-2
1:360
DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT or
DNRE — The State of Michigan Department of Natural Resources and
Environment, administrator or other duly authorized official.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Northville Township Department
of Public Services or the Director's authorized deputy, agent or
representative.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations, which are discharged to or otherwise enter a
POTW.
DWSD — The Detroit Water and Sewerage Department.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The United
States Environmental Protection Agency, administrator or other duly
authorized official.
FATS, OILS, and GREASE (FOG) — Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids,
soaps, fats, waxes, oils, or any other nonvolatile or semivolatile material
of animal, vegetable or mineral origin that is extractable by organic
solvents in accordance with standard methods.
FLOW PROPORTIONAL SAMPLE — A composite sample taken with
regard to the flow rate of the wastestream.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — A nondomestic user that engages
in one or more of the following food preparation activities: cooking by
frying (all methods); baking (all methods); grilling; sauteing, rotisserie
cooking; broiling (all methods); boiling; blanching; roasting; toasting;
poaching; infrared heating; searing; barbecuing; and any other food
preparation activity that produces a hot, consumable food product in or
on a receptacle that requires washing.
FOOTING DRAIN — A pipe or conduit which is placed around the
perimeter of a building foundation and which intentionally admits
groundwater.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample taken from a waste stream on a one-time
basis over a period of time of not more than 15 minutes without regard
to the flow in the waste stream.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum
pump tank trucks.
INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANTS — Any pollutant which is not a
compatible pollutant.
INDUSTRIAL USER — A person who contributes, causes or permits
wastewater to be discharged into the POTW, including, but not limited
to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether
public or private, commercial or charitable, but excludes single-family
§ 142-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-2
1:361
and multi-family residential dwellings with discharges consistent with
domestic waste characteristics.
INDUSTRIAL USER PERMIT or INDUSTRIAL USER PRETREATMENT
PERMIT — A discharge permit issued by the Director under this
chapter and the YCUA and DWSD industrial pretreatment programs.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The wastewater discharges from industrial,
manufacturing, trade or business processes, or wastewater discharge
from any structure with these characteristics, as distinct from their
employees' domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
INFILTRATION — That portion of groundwater which is unintentionally
admitted to a sewer.
INSTANTANEOUS MAXIMUM CONCENTRATION — The maximum
concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any instant
in time (independent of the flow rate or duration of the sampling
event). If the concentration determined by analysis of any grab sample,
composite sample, or discrete portion of any composite sample exceeds
the instantaneous maximum concentration, the instantaneous
maximum concentration shall be deemed to have been exceeded. Any
discharge of a pollutant at or above a specific instantaneous maximum
concentration is a violation of this chapter and the YCUA and DWSD
Industrial Pretreatment Programs.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, to which both of the
following provisions apply:
MERCURY REDUCTION PLAN — A plan to ensure that the maximum
allowable mercury loading to the POTW is not exceeded as described in
§ 142-41 of this chapter.
The discharge inhibits or disrupts the publicly owned treatment
works, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge
processes, use or disposal;
(1)
Pursuant to Subsection (1) of this definition, the discharge is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW or the Act or
the State Act, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations
or permits issued thereunder, or more stringent state or local
regulations: Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste
Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq., including Title II, more
commonly referred to as the "Resource Conservation and Recovery
Act," and including state regulations contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid
Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. § 7401 et seq.; the
Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 U.S.C. § 2601 et seq.; the Marine
Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1401 et seq.
(2)
§ 142-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-2
1:362
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD,
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL
STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c)
of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1317, which apply to a specific
category of nondomestic users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N (1990), Parts 405 to 471.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or
NPDES PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the
authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake,
or other body of surface water or groundwater.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility, or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge and for which construction
commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under Section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act will be applicable to the
source if the standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with
Section 307(c), and if any of the following provisions apply:
NONDOMESTIC USER — An industry, commercial establishment, or
other entity that discharges wastewater to a publicly owned treatment
works other than, or in addition to, sanitary sewage.
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE — All work, materials, equipment,
utilities, administration and other effort required to operate and
maintain the sewage works consistent with insuring adequate
treatment of wastewater to produce an effluent in compliance with the
NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations, and
includes the cost of replacement.
OPERATOR — The person responsible for the overall operation of a
facility.
The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located;
(1)
The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(2)
The production of wastewater-generated processes of the building,
structure, facility, or installation is substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. The extent to which the new
facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the
existing source and the extent of integration of the new facility with
the existing plant should be considered in determining whether the
process is substantially independent.
(3)
§ 142-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-2
1:363
OWNER — The person who owns a facility or part of a facility.
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge that exits the WWTP into state waters
in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the Act, the State Act, or the NPDES permit,
including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, limited liability company, association, joint-stock company,
trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or its legal
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include
the feminine and the singular shall include the plural where indicated
by the context.
pH — The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution or expressed in
standard units (SU).
POLLUTANT — Any of the following: substances regulated by
categorical standards; substances discharged to the POTW that are
required to be monitored, are limited in the POTW's permit, or are
or are to be identified in the POTW's permit application; substances
for which control measures on nondomestic users are necessary to
avoid restricting the approved residuals management program of the
POTW; substances for which control measures on nondomestic users
are necessary to avoid operational problems at the POTW; substances
for which control measures on nondomestic sources are necessary to
avoid worker health and safety problems in the POTW.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature
of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging
or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sewage works. The
reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, process changes or other means, except as
prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment
standard, imposed on a nondomestic user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c)
of the Clean Water Act and the State Act. This term includes prohibited
discharges and local limits defined in R 323.2303 and categorical
standards.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — Garbage that has been shredded
to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the
§ 142-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-2
1:364
flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle
greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — The treatment
works owned and/or operated by the YCUA or DWSD and includes
any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and
reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature.
The term also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances if they
convey wastewater to or through the publicly owned treatment works.
The term also means the municipality (Northville Charter Township)
that has jurisdiction over indirect discharges to, and discharges from,
the treatment works.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties
have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority.
QUANTIFICATION LEVEL — The measurement of the concentration
of a contaminant obtained by using a specified laboratory procedure
calculated at a specified concentration above the detection level. It is
considered the lowest concentration at which a particular contaminant
can be quantitatively measured using a specified laboratory procedure
for monitoring of the contaminant.
REPLACEMENT — The replacement in whole or in part of any
equipment in the wastewater transportation or treatment systems to
ensure continuous treatment of wastewater in accordance with the
NPDES permit and other state and federal regulations.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm, surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE — Substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to
become inoperable, or substantial or permanent loss of natural
resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence
of a bypass. "Severe property damage" does not mean economic loss
caused by delays in production.
SEWAGE or WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial
or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface
water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or
untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the sewage
works.
SEWAGE TREATMENT OR WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT — Any
arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS — All municipal facilities for collecting, pumping,
treating and disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE — The sum of any applicable user charges,
surcharges and debt service charges.
§ 142-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-2
1:365
SIGNFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) — Either of the following:
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — Any of the following:
A nondomestic user subject to categorical pretreatment standards
under 40 CFR 403 (1992) and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N
(1990); or
(1)
A nondomestic user that, in the opinion of the POTW or of the
Township, has a reasonable potential to adversely affect the
POTW's operation, or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement or that contributes a process waste stream which
makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or
organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant, or that dischargers
an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process
wastewater to the POTW, excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling,
and boiler blowdown wastewater. Any user designated as
"significant" may petition the Township to be deleted from the
list of significant industrial users on the grounds that it has no
potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or violating
any pretreatment standard or requirement. The Director may
determine that a user that meets the criteria of Subsections (1) and
(2) of this definition above is not currently a significant industrial
user if the Director finds that the user has no reasonable potential
to adversely affect the operation of the POTW, to violate any
pretreatment standard or requirement, or that an industrial user
permit is not required to meet the purposes and objectives of this
chapter. A determination that a user is not a significant industrial
user (or that a permit is therefore not required) shall not be binding
and may be reversed by the Director at any time based on changed
circumstances, new information, or as otherwise determined
necessary by the Director to meet the purposes and objectives of
this chapter.
(2)
Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as
results of analyses in which 66% or more of all of the
measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a sixmonth
period exceed, by any magnitude, a numeric pretreatment
standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined
by 40 CFR 403.3(1);
(1)
Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as results of
analyses in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for
each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or
exceed the product of the pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1)
multiplied by the applicable technical review criteria. (Technical
review criteria equals 1.4 for compatible pollutants and 1.2 for all
other pollutants, except pH.);
(2)
§ 142-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-2
1:366
SLUG, SLUG LOADING, SLUG DISCHARGE — Either:
STATE — State of Michigan.
STATE ACT — Public Act 451 of 1994, the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act (NREPA), as amended, and any
Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1) (daily
maximum, longer-term average, instantaneous limits, or narrative
standard), that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through,
including endangering the health of Township or the POTW's
personnel or the general public;
(3)
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare, or the environment or has
resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under
Rule 323.2306(a)(vi) of the Part 23 Rules under the State Act or
its emergency authority under this chapter to halt or prevent the
discharge;
(4)
Failure to meet, within 90 days after a scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a POTW or other local
control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(5)
Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, a required
report such as, but not limited to, a baseline monitoring report,
ninety-day or other compliance report, periodic self-monitoring
report, or report on compliance with a compliance schedule;
(6)
(7) Failure to timely or accurately report noncompliance; or
Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a
violation of best management practices, that the POTW determines
will affect or has adversely affected the operation or
implementation of the POTW's pretreatment program or operation
of the POTW.
(8)
Any discharge of pollutants at a volume or concentration that
causes upset of or interference with the POTW or causes the passthrough
of pollutants to receiving water; or
(1)
Any discharge of a pollutant(s), measured by a grab sample, at a
concentration exceeding five times the composite or grab sample
discharge limit; or
(2)
Any discharge of wastewater outside the pH range of five to 11
S.U. for either a continuous duration of greater than or equal to 15
minutes or for a sum total of 30 minutes within one day; or
(3)
Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not
limited to an accidental spill or noncustomary batch discharge.
(4)
§ 142-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-2
1:367
administrative rules promulgated thereunder, as amended or revised
from time to time.
STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN — A sewer which carries stormand
surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted
industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SURCHARGE — An extra charge to cover the cost of treating, sampling
and testing extra-strength sewage.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.
TOTAL PCB — The sum of the individual analytical results for each
of the PCB aroclors 1016, 1221, 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, and 1260
during any single sampling event with any arocolor result less than the
quantification level being treated as zero.
TOTAL PHENOLIC COMPOUNDS — The sum of the individual
analytical results for each of the phenolic compounds of 2-chlorophenol,
4-chlorophenol, 4-chloro-3-methylphenol, 2,4-dichlorophenol,
2,4-dinitrophenol, 4-methylphenol, 4-nitrophenol, and phenol during
any single sampling event expressed in mg/l.
TOWNSHIP — The Charter Township of Northville, Michigan, or its
Board of Trustees.
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants which
is or can potentially be harmful to the public health or the environment,
including those listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the
provisions of CWA 307(a)54 or other acts.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the sewage works.
USER CHARGE — A charge levied on users of a treatment works for
the cost of operation and maintenance of sewerage works pursuant to
Section 204(b) of PL 92-50055 and includes the cost of replacement.
USER CLASS — The kind of user connected to sanitary sewers,
including but not limited to residential, industrial, commercial,
institutional and governmental, defined as follows:
RESIDENTIAL USER — A user of the treatment works whose
premises or buildings are used primarily as a domicile for one
or more persons, including dwelling units such as detached,
semidetached and row houses, mobile homes, apartments, or
(1)
54.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a).
55.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1284(b).
§ 142-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-2
1:368
§ 142-3. Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the following meanings:
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials
BMP best management practices
BMPP best management practices plan
BOD biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD chemical oxygen demand
CWA Clean Water Act
DNRE Department of Natural Resources and Environment (State of
Michigan)
DWSD Detroit Water and Sewerage Department
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
FOG fats, oils and grease
L liter
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or
any portion thereof.
YCUA — The Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority.
permanent multifamily dwellings (transient lodging is not included;
it is considered commercial).
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any user who discharges an industrial waste
as defined in this chapter or any nondomestic source who
discharges pollutants to the sewage works or POTW.
(2)
COMMERCIAL USER — An establishment involved in a commercial
enterprise, business or service which, based on a determination
by the POTW, discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or
wastes from sanitary conveniences and which is not a residential
user or an industrial user.
(3)
INSTITUTIONAL USER — Any establishment involved in a social,
charitable, religious, or educational function which, based on a
determination by the POTW, discharges primarily segregated
domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences.
(4)
GOVERNMENTAL USER — Any federal, state or local government
user of the wastewater treatment works.
(5)
B. Shall is mandatory; may is permissive.
§ 142-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-3
1:369
mg milligrams
mg/L milligrams per liter
MRP mercury reduction plan
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
O&M operation and maintenance
POTW publicly owned treatment works (owned by either YCUA or
DWSD)
SIC standard industrial classification
SS suspended solids
USC United States Code
WEF Water Environment Federation
WWTP wastewater treatment plant
YCUA Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority
§ 142-4. Protection from damage.
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to maliciously, willfully, or
negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works
or POTW.
§ 142-3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-4
1:370
ARTICLE II
Administration and Enforcement
§ 142-5. Permit or authorization required.
It shall be unlawful to discharge to the waters of the state within the
Township, or in any area under the jurisdiction of such Township, and/or to
the sewage works, any wastewater except as provided by an NPDES permit
and/or as authorized by the Township and the POTW in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 142-6. Information required prior to connection to system.
All industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the sewage
works shall submit information on the use, processes and wastewater to
the Director before connecting to or contributing to the sewage works.
The information submitted must be sufficient for the Director and POTW
to determine the impact of the user's discharge on the sewage works
and the need for pretreatment. The user shall submit, in units and terms
appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
A. The name, address and location of the user.
B. The SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended, and the industrial
category subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, 40
CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Part 403, Appendix C,56 if applicable.
C. Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not limited
to those pollutants mentioned in §§ 142-37 through 142-48 of this
chapter, when required by the Director, as determined by a reliable
analytical laboratory. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 (March
26, 2007), as amended from time to time. Where 40 CFR Part 136
(March 26, 2007) does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for
the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part
136 (March 26, 2007) sampling and analytical techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall
be performed by using validated analytical methods of any other
applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures
suggested by the publicly owned treatment works or other parties,
approved by the EPA.
D. The time and duration of contribution.
E. The average daily wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and
seasonal variations, if any.
F. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to
show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size,
56.Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 142-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-6
1:371
location and elevation, if the user is a SIU or as required by the
Director.
G. A description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged.
H. The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which
are limited by any Township, POTW, state, or federal pretreatment
standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether
additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is
required by the industrial user to meet applicable pretreatment
standards.
I. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will
provide such additional pretreatment shall be provided. The completion
date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following
conditions shall apply to this schedule:
(1) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events
leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable
pretreatment standards.
(2) No increment referred to in Subsection I(1) of this section shall
exceed nine months.
(3) Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to
the Director including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied
with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not,
the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of
progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the
user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no
event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the Director.
J. Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate
of production.
K. The type and amount of raw materials processed, average and
maximum per day.
L. The number and type of employees, hours of operation of plant and
proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system.
M. Any other information as may be deemed by the Director to be
necessary to evaluate the impact of the discharge on the sewage works.
§ 142-6 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-7
1:372
§ 142-7. Reporting required after promulgation or revision of
pretreatment standard and reporting from new source.
Within 180 days or the promulgation or revision of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision
made upon a category determination submission under R 323.2311(2) of the
Part 23 Rules promulgated under the State Act, whichever is later, existing
nondomestic users subject to the categorical pretreatment standards and
currently discharging, or scheduled to discharge, to the POTW shall submit,
to the Director and the POTW, a report that contains all of the information
listed in this section. Where reports containing this information already
have been submitted to the YCUA or EPA in compliance with the
requirements of 40 CFR 128.140(b) (1977), the nondomestic user will not
be required to submit the information again. Not less than 90 days before
the commencement of a discharge, sources that become nondomestic users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard and
new sources shall be required to submit, to the Director and the POTW,
a report that contains the information listed in Subsections A to E of
this section. New sources shall also be required to include in this report
information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to
meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall give estimates
of the information requested in Subsections D and E of this section. All of
the following information shall be submitted pursuant to this section:
A. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator
and owners.
B. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
C. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and
standard industrial classification of the operation or operations carried
out by the nondomestic user. The description shall include a facility
drawing and schematic process diagram that indicates points of
discharge to the POTW and from which processes the discharges
originate.
D. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily
flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW for each of the following:
(1) Regulated process streams.
(2) Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula specified in R 323.2311(6). Director or POTW may
allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost
or feasibility considerations.
E. All of the following information shall be provided with respect to the
measurement of pollutants:
(1) The identity of the pretreatment standards, including state or local
standards, applicable to each regulated process.
§ 142-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-7
1:373
(2) The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration or mass, where required by the standard Director, or
POTW, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated
process. Both daily maximum and average concentration or mass,
where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be
representative of daily operations.
(3) A minimum of four grab samples shall be used for pH, cyanide, total
phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other
pollutants, twenty-four-hour composite samples shall be obtained
through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques. The
Director or POTW may waive flow-proportional composite sampling
for any nondomestic user that demonstrates that time-proportional
sampling is representative of the discharge during the sampling
period. Samples obtained through time-proportional composite
sampling techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples
may be approved by the Director or designee when the user
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the
effluent being discharged.
(4) With the exception of the pollutants specified in Subsection E(3) of
this section, the user shall take a minimum of one representative
sample to compile the data necessary to comply with the
requirements of this section.
(5) Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
pretreatment facilities if the facilities exist or immediately
downstream from the regulated process if pretreatment facilities
do not exist. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater before pretreatment, the nondomestic user should
measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the
combined waste stream formula specified in R 323.2311(7) to
evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an
alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in
accordance with R 323.2311(5), the adjusted limit and supporting
data shall be submitted to Director or POTW.
(6) Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 (March 26, 2007). Where
40 CFR part 136 (March 26, 2007) does not contain sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the
EPA determines that the Part 136 (March 26, 2007) sampling and
analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using
validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and
analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by Director
or POTW or other parties, approved by the EPA.
(7) The Director or POTW may allow the submission of a baseline
report that utilizes only historical data if the data provides
§ 142-7 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-7
1:374
information sufficient to determine the need for industrial
pretreatment measures.
(8) The baseline report shall indicate the time, date, and place of
sampling and the methods of analysis and shall certify that the
sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and
expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.
F. A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the
nondomestic user and certified by a qualified professional, indicating
whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis
and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance or additional
pretreatment is required for the nondomestic user to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.
G. If additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by
which the nondomestic user will provide such additional pretreatment
or operation and maintenance. The completion date in the schedule
shall not be later than the compliance date established for the
applicable pretreatment standard. All of the following conditions shall
apply to compliance schedules:
(1) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events
leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the nondomestic user to meet the
applicable categorical pretreatment standards. The events may
include any of the following: the hiring of an engineer; completing
preliminary plans; completing final plans; executing contracts for
major components; commencing construction; completing
construction; or other similar major events.
(2) An increment referred to in this subsection shall not be more than
nine months.
(3) Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the
final date for compliance, the nondomestic user shall submit a
progress report to Director and POTW, including, at a minimum,
whether or not the user complied with the increment of progress to
be met on a particular date and, if not, the date on which the user
expects to comply with the increment of progress, the reason for
delay, and the steps being taken by the nondomestic user to return
the construction to the schedule established. Not more than nine
months shall elapse between progress reports to Director and
POTW.
H. Where the nondomestic user's categorical pretreatment standard has
been modified by a removal allowance under R 323.2311(7) or a
fundamentally different factors variance under R 323.2313(b) at the
time the nondomestic user submits the report required by this rule, the
§ 142-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-7
1:375
§ 142-8. Additional reporting required and periodic report
requirements.
information required by Subsections F and G of this section shall
pertain to the modified limits.
I. Any changes to information requested under Subsections A to E of this
section shall be submitted by the nondomestic user to Director and
POTW within 60 days.
A. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source,
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the
sewage works, POTW or the WWTP, any nondomestic user subject to
pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the Director
and/or POTW a report containing the information required in
Subsections D through F, inclusive, of § 142-7 of this chapter. For
industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established by YCUA in accordance with the procedures in R
323.2311(5) of the Part 23 Rules promulgated under the State Act or
otherwise established by the Act or the State Act or rules promulgated
thereunder, the report shall contain a reasonable measure of the
nondomestic user's long-term production rate. For all other
nondomestic users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production, or other measure of operation, the report shall include the
nondomestic user's actual production during the appropriate sampling
period.
B. The Director or POTW may impose mass limitations on users which are
using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements or in other cases in which the imposition of mass
limitations is appropriate.
C. All of the following provisions shall apply to periodic reports on
continued compliance:
(1) Any nondomestic user subject to a categorical pretreatment
standard after the compliance date of the pretreatment standard
or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the
discharge into the publicly owned treatment works shall submit, to
the Director and POTW semiannually, unless required more
frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the Director or
POTW, a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the effluent that are limited by the categorical
pretreatment standards. In addition, the report shall include a
record of measured or appropriately estimated average and
maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the discharge
reported in § 142-7D or this chapter, except that Director or POTW
may require more detailed reporting of flows.
§ 142-7 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-8
1:376
(2) Where Director or POTW has imposed mass limitations on
nondomestic users as provided for by R 323.2311(5) of the Part 23
Rules promulgated under the State Act or where such limitations
are otherwise established by the Act or the State Act or rules
promulgated thereunder, the report required by Subsection A
immediately above shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated
by pretreatment standards in the discharge from the nondomestic
user.
(3) For nondomestic users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established by the Director or POTW or under the Act or the
State Act or rules promulgated thereunder, the report required by
Subsection C(1) immediately above shall contain a reasonable
measure of the nondomestic user's long-term production rate. For
all other nondomestic users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge
per unit of production, or other measure of operation, the report
required by Subsection C(1) immediately above shall include the
nondomestic user's actual average production rate for the
reporting period.
D. All categorical and noncategorical nondomestic users shall notify the
Director and POTW immediately of all discharges that could cause
problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings.
E. All of the following provisions apply to significant industrial users that
are categorical industrial users or noncategorical industrial users in
regards to monitoring and analysis to demonstrate continued
compliance:
(1) The reports required in § 142-7 of this chapter or in this section
shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge,
including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production
and mass where requested by the Director or POTW, of pollutants
contained in the discharge that are limited by the applicable
pretreatment standards. The sampling and analysis may be
performed by the POTW instead of the nondomestic user. Where
the POTW elects to perform the required sampling and analysis
instead of the nondomestic user, the nondomestic user will not be
required to submit the compliance certification required under
§ 142-7F and Subsection A of this section. In addition, where the
POTW collects all the information required for the report, including
flow data, the nondomestic user will not be required to submit the
report. The POTW shall provide, to the nondomestic user, within 10
days after the results are available, the results of any sampling the
POTW performs for nondomestic user self-monitoring that show a
violation of any pretreatment standard. Any certification required
by a categorical pretreatment standard shall be included with the
semiannual compliance reports.
§ 142-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-8
1:377
(2) If sampling performed by a nondomestic user indicates a violation
of pretreatment standards, the nondomestic user shall notify the
Director and POTW within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The nondomestic user shall also repeat the sampling and
analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW
within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation; however, the
nondomestic user is not required to resample if the POTW performs
sampling at the nondomestic user at a frequency of at least once
per month or if the POTW performs sampling at the nondomestic
user between the time when the nondomestic user performs its
initial sampling and the time when the nondomestic user receives
the results of the sampling.
(3) The reports required in Subsection C(l) of this section shall be
based upon data obtained through appropriate sampling and
analysis performed during the period covered by the report, which
data is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting
period. The Director or POTW may require a frequency of
monitoring that is necessary to assess and assure compliance by
nondomestic users with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements.
(4) All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(h) of the Clean
Water Act and contained in 40 CFR Part 136 (March 26, 2007) or
with any other test procedures approved by the EPA. Sampling
shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by
the EPA. Where the provisions of 40 CFR Part 136 (March 26, 2007)
do not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants
in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 (March
26, 2007) sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for
the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed
using validated analytical methods or any other sampling and
analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the
POTW or other parties and approved by the EPA.
(5) If a nondomestic user monitors any pollutant more frequently than
required by the Director or POTW using the procedures prescribed
in Subsection E(4) immediately above, the results of the monitoring
shall be included in the report.
(6) A minimum of one grab sample shall be used for pH, cyanide, total
phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other
pollutants, a twenty-four-hour composite shall be obtained through
flow-proportional composite sampling techniques. The Director
may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any
nondomestic user that demonstrates that time-proportional
sampling is representative of the discharge during the sampling
period. Samples obtained through flow-proportional composite
sampling techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples
may be approved by the Director or designee when the user
§ 142-8 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-8
1:378
§ 142-9. Powers of Director.
Wastewater discharges shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this
chapter, the Act and State Act and all other applicable regulations
established by the Director. The Director may:
demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the
effluent being discharged.
F. The Director or POTW may require appropriate reporting from
nondomestic users that have discharges which are not subject to
categorical pretreatment standards. Significant industrial users shall
submit, to the Director, at least semiannually, a description of the
nature, concentration, and flow of the pollutants required to be
reported by the Director or POTW. The reports shall be based on
sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report
and performed in accordance with the techniques described in 40 CFR
Part 136 (March 26, 2007). Where the provisions of 40 CFR Part 136
(March 26, 2007) do not contain sampling or analytical techniques for
the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part
136 (March 26, 2007) sampling and analytical techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall
be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other
applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures
suggested by the Director or POTW or other persons and approved by
the EPA. The sampling and analysis may be performed by the POTW
instead of the significant industrial user. Where the POTW collects all of
the information required for the report, the significant industrial user
will not be required to submit the report. The POTW shall provide, to
the nondomestic user, within 10 days after the results are available, the
results of any sampling it performs for nondomestic user selfmonitoring
that show a violation of any pretreatment standard. Where
the POTW performs sampling for a significant industrial user, the POTW
must perform any required repeat sampling and analysis within 30 days
of becoming aware of a violation.
G. All periodic compliance reports shall be certified and signed by an
authorized representative of the industrial user. The authorized
representative shall state the following certification when submitting
reports to the POTW: "I certify under penalty of law that this document
and all attachments were prepared under my direction and supervision
in accordance with a system designed to assure that quality personnel
properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my
inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those
persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties
for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations."
§ 142-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-9
1:379
§ 142-10. Sampling and monitoring facilities.
The POTW shall, when determined necessary by the Director, require to
be provided and operated, at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities
to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer
and/or internal drainage systems. The facility, sampling, and measuring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition at the expense of the user. Whether constructed on public or
private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in
accordance with plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the
POTW and all applicable local construction standards and specifications.
Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written
notification by the POTW.
§ 142-11. Right to access.
The Director or POTW shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain
whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are
being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is
created or discharged shall allow the Director or POTW or its representative
ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, records copying or
A. Limit the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics.
B. Limit the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or make
requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
C. Require the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling
facilities.
D. Establish specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule.
E. Establish compliance schedules.
F. Require submission of technical reports or discharge reports.
G. Require the maintaining, retaining and furnishing of plant records
relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the POTW, and
affording POTW access thereto, and copying thereof.
H. Require notification of slug discharges and accidental spills.
I. Require other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW to ensure
compliance with this chapter, the Act and the State Act. The POTW shall
require notification of the POTW for any new introduction of
wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or
character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system.
§ 142-9 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-11
1:380
in the performance of any of their duties. The Director, POTW, DNRE and
EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property, at the user's
expense, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection,
compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has
security measures in force which would require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary
arrangements with its security guards or other appropriate personnel so
that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the
Director, POTW, DNRE and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for
the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
§ 142-12. Compliance with article provisions required.
§ 142-13. Confidentiality of information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections
shall be available to the DNRE and the EPA without restriction and shall
be available to the public without restriction unless the user specifically
requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director that
the release of such information would divulge information, processes or
A. Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as
required to comply with this chapter, the Act and the State Act and shall
achieve compliance with all pretreatment standards within the time
limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations and as
required by the Director, POTW, the Act or the State Act. Any industrial
user that qualifies as a new source is required to have pretreatment
equipment installed and operational before discharging and shall be in
full compliance within 90 days of initial discharge. Any facilities
required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the POTW shall
be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed
plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures
shall be submitted to the POTW for review and shall be approved by the
POTW before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and
operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
effluent acceptable to the POTW under the provisions of this chapter,
the Act or the State Act. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment
facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable
to the POTW prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
B. As required by Section 403.8(D)(viii) of the Federal Register, the POTW
shall publish at least annually in a newspaper(s) of general circulation
that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction(s) served
by the POTW, of the Industrial Users which, during the previous 12
months, were in significant noncompliance with any applicable
pretreatment requirements. All records relating to compliance with
pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA
or DNRE upon request.
§ 142-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-13
1:381
methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user, in
accord with applicable provisions of the State Freedom of Information Act,
Public Act 442 of 1976, as amended, and Rule 323.2314 of the Part 23 Rules
promulgated under the State Act.
§ 142-14. Enforcement by Township.
All orders, directives, legal and/or equitable actions which are necessary
and appropriate to enforce this chapter, the Act and the State Act shall
be carried out by POTW and/or the Township. Nothing contained in this
section shall preclude the Township or POTW from instituting, maintaining
or joining any legal and/or equitable actions to enforce this chapter, the Act
and the State Act.
§ 142-15. Records; accounts; audits; classification of users;
insurance.
§ 142-16. Powers and authority of inspectors.
The Director and other duly authorized employees of the Township or
POTW bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted
A. The POTW will maintain and keep proper books of records and
accounts, separate from all other records and accounts, in which shall
be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the
POTW. The POTW will cause an annual audit of such books of record
and account for the preceding operating year to be made by a
recognized independent certified public accountant and will supply
such audit report to authorized public officials on request.
B. In conjunction with the audit there shall be an annual review of the
sewer charge system for adequacies meeting expected expenditures for
the following year.
C. Classification of old and new industrial users may also be reviewed
annually.
D. The POTW will maintain and carry insurance on all physical properties
of the system, of the kinds and in the amounts normally carried by
public utility companies and municipalities engaged in the operation of
sewage disposal systems.
E. Retention of records. A user shall retain records of all monitoring
information, including all calibration and maintenance records and all
original strip chart recordings for continuous monitoring
instrumentation, copies of all reports required by this chapter, an order,
or a permit, all documentation associated with best management
practices, and the records of all data used to complete the application
for a permit, for a period of at least three years from the date of a
sample, measurement, report application or orders. This period may be
extended by the POTW at any time.
§ 142-13 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-16
1:382
to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, the Act and the State Act.
§ 142-17. Enforcement process.
A. Emergency suspension. The Director may suspend the wastewater
treatment service and/or any permit issued under this chapter when
such a suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the Director, in order
to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present
an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons or
the environment or the POTW or constitutes a violation of any condition
of a NPDES or other permit, this chapter, the Act or the State Act. Any
user notified of a suspension of wastewater treatment services or a
permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its discharge into a Township
or POTW sanitary sewer. If a user fails to immediately comply with such
a suspension order and as required in this section, the Director shall
take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate termination
or severance of the user's sewer connection to prevent or minimize
damage to any person, the POTW or the environment. The Director
shall allow the user to recommence its discharge upon receipt of proof
of compliance with this chapter and the elimination of the discharge
and/or identified danger. A user whose wastewater treatment service or
permit has been suspended under this chapter shall submit, within 15
days of the suspension, a written statement to the Director describing
the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent
future harmful discharges in addition to other information required by
this chapter or otherwise required by the Act or the State Act under
such circumstances.
B. Notice letter: the minimum enforcement response that the Director or
his/her designee will use to notify a user that a violation of the local
applicable sewer use ordinance or POTW Industrial Pretreatment
Program has occurred or is occurring.
C. Notification of violation. Whenever the Director finds that any user has
violated or is violating any provision of this chapter or a wastewater
discharge permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or the
State Act, the Director may serve upon said user written notice of the
violation. Within 30 days of receipt of such notice, the user shall submit
to the Director or designee an explanation of the violation and a written
plan for satisfactory correction. Submission of this plan does not relieve
the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of
the notice of violation or as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Act
or the State Act.
D. Show cause order. The Director may order any user violating this
chapter or the IPP, a permit, an order issued under this chapter, the Act,
or the State Act to show cause why a proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. The show cause notice shall require the user to
appear before the Director for a show cause meeting within a
§ 142-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-17
1:383
reasonable amount of time, not less than 10 days after first-class
mailing of the order to the user's recorded or last known address.
Enforcement action may be pursued whether or not a user appears at
a show cause meeting and issuance of a show cause order does not
relieve the user of liability for any violation occurring before or after
receipt of the notice or as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Act or
the State Act.
E. Consent order. The Director is empowered to enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance and other similar documented
agreements establishing an agreement with a user responsible for
noncompliance with an order, permit, this chapter, the Act or the State
Act. Such a document may include compliance schedules, stipulated
fines or penalties, the amount of which shall not be limited by the civil
fine assessment provision of this chapter, remedial actions and
signatures of the Director and user. Consent orders or similar
documented agreements prepared and executed under this section
shall have the same force and effect as other orders issued under this
chapter.
F. Compliance order. When the Director finds that a user has violated or
continues to violate this chapter, a permit, an order issued under this
chapter, the Act or the State Act, an order may be issued to the user
directing that, following a specified time period, sewer service shall be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other
related appurtenances have been installed and are properly operated
and compliance is otherwise achieved. Such an order may contain other
requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to
address the noncompliance, including, but not limited to, the
installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and
new management practices. Issuance of a compliance order does not
relieve the user of liability for any violation occurring before or after
receipt of the notice or as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Act or
the State Act.
G. Cease and desist order. When the Director finds that a user has violated
or continues to violate this chapter, a permit, an order issued under this
chapter, the Act or the State Act, an order may be issued to the user
responsible for the violation directing that such violations cease and
desist immediately. In an emergency, the order to cease and desist may
be given by telephone. In a nonemergency situation, the cease and
desist order may be used to suspend or permanently revoke an
industrial wastewater discharge permit or permits. A cease and desist
order may require the user to take such appropriate remedial or
preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or
threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the
discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order does not relieve the
user of liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of the
order or as otherwise provided in this chapter.
H. Termination of wastewater discharge permit.
§ 142-17 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-17
1:384
(1) Any user who has a permit who violates the following conditions of
a wastewater discharge permit or violates this chapter, the Act or
the State Act or any applicable state or federal law or regulation is
subject to permit termination:
(a) Failure to accurately report wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
(b) Failure to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater constituents and characteristics;
(c) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises or records
for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling or for
any other purpose permitted under this chapter, the Act or the
State Act;
(d) Failure to comply with an order issued under this chapter; or
(e) For those reasons stated in § 142-22 or for any other reason
permitting such termination as provided in this chapter, the
Act or the State Act.
(2) Such users shall be notified of the proposed permit termination and
shall be offered an opportunity to show cause, under the provision
of Subsection D of this section, why the proposed action should not
be taken.
I. Administrative assessments. Notwithstanding any other section of this
chapter, any user who violates any provision of this chapter, a permit,
an order issued under this chapter, the Act or the State Act shall be
liable to the POTW and/or Township for any expense loss or damage
occasioned by reason of such violation, including but not limited to
reasonable attorney's fees, and may be subject to an administrative
assessment by the POTW in an amount of $1,000 per violation, per day.
Each day on which noncompliance shall occur or is continued shall be
deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such expense, loss, damage
or assessments may be added to a user's sewer service charges, and the
POTW and the Township shall have such other collection rights and
remedies as designated by law, the Act, the State Act and this chapter
to collect these sewer service charges.
J. Judicial remedies. A person who violates any provision of this chapter, a
permit, an order issued under this chapter, the Act or the State Act is
subject to the judicial remedies described below in addition to being
responsible for a civil fine assessment or a misdemeanor or any
administrative remedy or enforcement action provided for in this
chapter:
(1) Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions
of this chapter, a permit, an order issued under this chapter, the Act
or the State Act, the Director, through counsel, may petition the
Circuit Court for issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction,
§ 142-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-17
1:385
or both, to restrain or compel certain activities on the part of the
user.
(2) Any user who has violated or continues to violate any order or
permit issued hereunder may be liable to the POTW or Township in
such judicial proceedings for a civil fine assessment of $1,000, plus
actual damages, direct or indirect, incurred by the POTW, per
violation, per day, for as long as the violation continues.
Additionally, the POTW or Township may recover reasonable
attorney's fees, court costs and other expenses associated with any
enforcement activities, including sampling, monitoring and
analysis expenses.
(3) The Director, through counsel, may petition the Circuit Court to
impose, assess, and recover such assessments and sums. In
determining the amount of liability, the court shall take into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to,
the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude or
duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained by the user
through the violation, corrective actions by the user, the
compliance history of the user and any other relevant factor.
K. Liens. Any fine or other assessment issued or imposed under this
chapter or other costs or charges imposed under this chapter may be
added to the user's sewer service charges, and the POTW and Township
shall have such other collection rights and remedies as designated by
law and this chapter to collect said charges, and all unpaid charges,
fines, assessments, penalties and service charges shall constitute and
may be recorded as a lien against the user's property if not paid within
the time frame allocated by POTW and Township or a court for
payment.
L. Appeals. Any person or user subject to enforcement action under the
provisions of this chapter, the Act or the State Act, except for civil fine
assessment notices, consent orders, emergency actions under this
chapter or judicial actions by POTW or Township, may request a
hearing before the Director within 10 days of receipt of notification of
the proposed enforcement action. A hearing shall then be held by the
Director concerning the violation, the reasons why the enforcement
action has been taken, the proposed enforcement action, and the user's
explanation or other relevant evidence. An appeal may be taken from
the Director's final decision. The following rules shall apply to the
hearing and appeal:
(1) The Director may issue notices of such a hearing requiring the
attendance and testimony of witnesses or the production of
evidence relative to the hearing.
(2) In the event a request for hearing is not filed within 10 days of the
user's notice of an enforcement action, failure to file such a request
§ 142-17 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-17
1:386
shall be deemed a waiver of any and all hearing or appeal rights
established under this chapter.
(3) A request for hearing shall state the basis for the request, the
reasons in support of the request and any alternative relief which
the aggrieved party seeks.
(4) During the pendency of any hearing process or appeal, the user
must comply with the enforcement action or POTW order from
which the appeal is taken.
(5) At the hearing, testimony may be taken under oath and recorded
stenographically. A transcript of the hearing shall be made
available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing
upon payment of usual and reasonable charges.
(6) After the Director has held such a hearing and reviewed the
evidence, he may issue an order affirming, modifying or
withdrawing the enforcement action.
(7) Within 15 days from receipt of the Director's final decision, the
aggrieved party may appeal the decision to the Board stating the
grounds on which the appeal is based together with all documents,
evidence, transcripts and information in support of the aggrieved
party's position. In addition, the aggrieved party shall file five
copies of the appeal and supporting documentation with the Board
and serve an additional copy on the Director.
(8) The Director shall have 30 days to respond to the appeal and to
submit all evidence, documents and information in support of the
Director's decision and shall file five copies with the Board and
shall serve an additional copy on the aggrieved party.
(9) Within 30 days of receiving the Director's response, the Board shall
meet and review all documents and evidence pertaining to the
appeal and shall issue an order affirming the Director's order,
affirming the Director's order in part and reversing in part, or
reversing the Director's order in full. The Board shall forward a
copy of its decision to all interested parties.
M. Industrial Pretreatment Program (IPP) and enforcement response plan
(ERP). This chapter, the Act and the State Act shall also be enforced by
the Director pursuant to a written industrial pretreatment program
adopted by the POTW as required by the Act and State Act, which plan
shall include those plan elements required by the Act and State Act,
including, but not limited to, an enforcement response plan designed to
achieve enforcement of that program. That enforcement response plan
shall provide for, at minimum, those powers of enforcement granted by
this chapter, the Act and State Act.
N. Time limits. The POTW's failure to strictly comply with and/or to meet
an enforcement procedure time deadline or other time deadline
§ 142-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-17
1:387
§ 142-18. Surcharges and fees due to additional cost for violations.
The Director shall also establish appropriate surcharges or fees to
reimburse the POTW for the additional cost of operation and maintenance
of the sewage works or POTW due to the violations of this chapter, the Act
or the State Act.
§ 142-19. Permit requirements for nondomestic users.
specified in this chapter, the Act, the State Act, or the enforcement
response plan shall not prohibit or prevent the POTW from taking
enforcement or other action outside of or not in compliance with such
a time deadline, unless the user or permittee in question has been and
is able to demonstrate that it has been materially prejudiced by action
taken by the POTW outside of or not in compliance with such a time
deadline.
A. All nondomestic users must notify the Director of the nature and
characteristics of their wastewater prior to commencing their
discharge. The Director is authorized to prepare a form for this
purpose.
B. It shall be unlawful for significant industrial users to discharge
wastewater, either directly or indirectly, into the sewage works or
POTW without first obtaining an industrial user pretreatment permit
from the POTW. Any violation of the terms and conditions of an
industrial user pretreatment permit shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter. Obtaining an industrial user pretreatment permit does not
relieve a permittee of its obligation to obtain other permits required by
federal, state or local law.
C. The Director may require that other industrial users, including liquid
waste haulers, obtain industrial user pretreatment permits as
necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
D. Any industrial user located beyond the Township limits shall submit a
permit application within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance
from which this chapter is derived. New industrial users located beyond
the Township limits shall submit such applications to the Director 60
days prior to discharging into the sewage works or POTW. Upon review
and approval of such application, the Director may enter into a contract
with the user which requires the user to subject itself to, and abide by,
this chapter, including all permitting, compliance monitoring,
reporting, and enforcement provisions contained in this chapter, the
Act or the State Act.
E. Any significant industrial user which discharges nondomestic waste
into the sewage works or POTW prior to the effective date of the
ordinance from which this chapter is derived and who wishes to
continue such discharges in the future shall, within 90 days after such
date, apply to the POTW for an industrial user pretreatment permit and
§ 142-17 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-19
1:388
§ 142-20. Industrial user permit application requirements.
§ 142-21. Industrial user permit conditions.
Pretreatment permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably
deemed necessary by the Director to prevent pass-through or interference,
shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 180
days from and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this
chapter is derived except in accordance with a permit issued by the
Director.
F. Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence
discharging nondomestic wastes into the sewage works or POTW must
obtain a pretreatment permit prior to beginning or recommencing such
discharge. An application for this permit must be filed at least 60 days
prior to the anticipated start-up date.
A. In order to be considered for a pretreatment permit, all industrial users
required to have a permit must submit the information required by
§ 142-6 on an application form approved by the Director.
B. When required, plans must be certified for accuracy by a state
registered professional engineer.
C. All applications must contain the following certification statement and
be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user: "I
certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a
system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person
or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly
responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is,
to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I
am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for
knowing violations."
D. The Director will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and
may require additional information. After evaluation of the data
furnished, the Director may issue an industrial user pretreatment
permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein.
E. At the time an application for a permit is made, the user shall pay to the
Township a permit fee in an amount established from time to time by
the Board, which fee shall be refunded to the user in the event the
permit is denied. In addition to the above-stated permit fee, the user
shall pay to Township a nonrefundable permit application fee equal to
the POTW's expenses, and the POTW's expenses incurred in hiring
laboratories, engineers, or other consultants, for the purpose of
evaluating the permit application submitted by the user to the POTW.
§ 142-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-21
1:389
protect the quality of the water body receiving the POTW's effluent, protect
worker health and safety, facilitate POTW sludge management and disposal,
protect ambient air quality, and protect against damage to the POTW
collection system or plant and ensure compliance with this chapter, the
Act and State Act. Permits shall contain a statement of the duration of
the permit which shall not be more than five years; a statement of permit
nontransferability without prior notification to the POTW and provision
of a copy of the existing permit to the new owner or operator; effluent
limits based on applicable general pretreatment standards, categorical
pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law; selfmonitoring,
sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping
requirements, including identification of the pollutants to be monitored,
sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based on the
applicable general pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment
standards, local limit, and state and local law; and a statement of applicable
civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and
requirements and any applicable compliance schedule. The schedule may
not extend the compliance date beyond applicable federal or state
deadlines. Permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following:
A. Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
B. Limits on the average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other
measure of identified wastewater constituents or properties.
C. Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or
construction of appropriate containment devices, or similar
requirements designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the
introduction of pollutants into the sewage works or POTW.
D. Development and implementation of spill-control plans or other special
condition, including additional management practices necessary to
adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routing discharges.
E. The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the sewage works or
POTW.
F. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities.
G. Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for
tests, and reporting schedules.
H. Compliance schedules.
I. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports.
§ 142-21 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-21
1:390
§ 142-22. Industrial user permit issuance process.
J. Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the Director and affording the
Director, or his representatives, access thereto.
K. Requirements for notification of any new introduction of wastewater
constituents or of any substantial change in the volume or character of
the wastewater being introduced in the sewage works or POTW.
L. Requirements for the notification of any change in the manufacturing
and/or pretreatment process used by the permittee.
M. Requirements for notification to the Director and POTW of excessive,
accidental, or slug discharges.
N. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Director to ensure
compliance with this chapter and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations, including the Act and State Act.
O. A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the
permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal,
state or local pretreatment standards or limits, including those which
become effective during the term of the permit.
A. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five
years. A permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the
discretion of the Director.
B. The Director will provide all interested persons with notice of final
permit terms. Upon notice by the Director, any person, including the
industrial user, may petition to appeal the terms of the permit within 30
days of the notice.
(1) Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be
a waiver of the appeal.
(2) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the permit
provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to be placed in the permit.
(3) The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending
reconsideration by the Board. If, after considering the petition and
any arguments put forth by the Director, the Board determines that
reconsideration is proper, it shall remand the permit back to the
Director for reissuance. Those permit provisions being
reconsidered by the Director shall be stayed pending reissuance.
(4) A Board's decision not to reconsider a final permit shall be
considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial
review.
§ 142-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-22
1:391
C. The Director may modify or terminate the permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following:
(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
(2) Material or substantial alterations or additions to the discharger's
operation processes, or discharge volume or character which were
not considered in drafting the effective permit.
(3) A change in any condition in either the industrial user or the POTW
that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or
elimination of the authorized discharge.
(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the sewage works or POTW or POTW personnel or the receiving
waters.
(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit.
(6) Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in
the permit application or in any required reporting.
(7) Revision of or a grant of variance from such categorical standards
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the permit.
(9) To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a
new owner/operator.
(10) Upon request of the permittee, provide that such request does not
create a violation of any applicable requirements, standards, laws,
or rules and regulations.
(11) Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
(12) Tampering with monitoring equipment.
(13) Refusing to allow timely access to the facility premises and
records.
(14) Failure to meet effluent limitations.
(15) Failure to pay fines.
(16) Failure to pay sewer charges.
(17) Failure to meet compliance schedules.
(18) As provided in § 142-17.
D. The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit modification,
revocation and reissuance, or termination, or a notification of planned
§ 142-22 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-22
1:392
§ 142-23. Penalties for violations; liability of user.
changes or anticipated noncompliance, does not stay any permit
condition.
E. Permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or
operator with prior approval of the Director if:
(1) The permittee must give at least 30 days' advance notice to the
Director; and
(2) The notice must include a written certification by the new owner
which:
(a) States that the new owner has no immediate intent to change
the facility's operations and processes.
(b) Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur.
(c) Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the
existing permit.
F. The user shall apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete
permit application a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the
user's existing permit. An expired permit will continue to be effective
and enforceable until the permit is reissued if:
(1) The industrial user has submitted a complete permit application at
least 90 days prior to the expiration date of the user's existing
permit; and
(2) The failure to reissue the permit, prior to expiration of the previous
permit, is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the
industrial user.
G. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the POTW and any user whereby
wastewater of unusual strength or character is accepted into the POTW
and specially treated and subject to any payments or user charges, as
may be applicable. However, no discharge which violates pretreatment
standards will be allowed under the terms of such special agreements.
If, in the opinion of the Director, the wastewater may have the potential
to cause or result in any of the following circumstances, no such special
agreement will be made:
(1) Pass-through or interference; or
(2) Endanger municipal employees or the public.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, a permit, an
order issued under this chapter, the Act or the State Act shall become
liable to the Township for and may be subject to a civil fine assessment
of $1,000 per violation, per day, plus any costs, damages and expenses,
§ 142-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-23
1:393
§ 142-24. Fees.
direct or indirect, incurred by the Township or POTW in connection
with the violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate and distinct violation.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter that is listed
below shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is subject
to a fine of not more than $500, exclusive of any civil fine assessment or
other costs, damages and expenses, or imprisonment for not more than
90 days, or both. Misdemeanor violations include:
(1) Intentional unpermitted discharge;
(2) Falsification of a monitoring report or the making of any false
statement, representation or certification in any application,
record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be
maintained pursuant to this chapter;
(3) Improper sampling, with evidence of intent to falsify or mislead;
(4) Intentional failure to install monitoring equipment after a deadline
established by an order issued under this chapter or the tampering
with or knowingly rendering inaccurate any monitoring device or
equipment or method required under this chapter;
(5) Intentional recurring violation of a compliance schedule in a permit
or a violation of a compliance schedule in an order issued under
this chapter; or
(6) Illegal discharge when the discharge causes harm and there is
evidence of intent.
A. The purpose of this section is to provide for the recovery of costs from
users of the POTW. The applicable charges or fees established by the
Board shall be sufficient to meet the costs of the operation,
maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system, or as
provided by law or by Board action.
B. The Board shall adopt charges and fees which shall include, but are not
necessarily limited to:
(1) Fees for reimbursement of costs establishing, operating,
maintaining or improving the POTW's industrial pretreatment
programs and enforcement response plan.
(2) User fees based upon volume of waste and concentration or
quantity of septic pollutants in a discharge and to cover other
treatment costs, including sludge handling and disposal; and
(3) Reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs for enforcement
hearings or other enforcement action, including, but not limited to,
§ 142-23 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-24
1:394
expenses regarding hearing officers, court reporters,
transcriptions, attorney fees; and
(4) Other fees which the Board may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein and contained in other IPP and ERP,
or as may be required by law.
§ 142-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-24
1:395

ARTICLE III
Building Sewers and Connections
§ 142-25. Permit required.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
or any part of the sewage works or POTW without first obtaining a written
permit from the Director.
§ 142-26. Classes of permits; application; fees.
There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: for residential and
commercial service and for service to establishments producing industrial
wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the Township or POTW. The permit application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information
considered pertinent, in the judgment of the Township or POTW. A permit
and inspection fee for a residential or commercial building sewer permit
and for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the Township at
the time the application is filed.
§ 142-27. Costs of connection to be borne by owner; indemnification
of Township and POTW.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify
the Township and the POTW from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
§ 142-28. Separate building sewer for each building required;
exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to
the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building
and the whole considered as one building sewer.
§ 142-29. Use of old building sewers with new buildings.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when they are found, on examination and test by the Township or POTW, to
meet all requirements of this chapter.
§ 142-30. Construction specifications.
The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of
§ 142-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-30
1:397
the Building and Plumbing Codes or other applicable rules and regulations
of the Township or POTW. In the absence of the code provisions or in
amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the ASTM and WEF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply.
§ 142-31. Elevation.
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and
discharged to the building sewer.
§ 142-32. Prohibited connections.
§ 142-33. Connection specifications.
§ 142-34. Inspection; supervision of connection.
The contractor installing the building sewer shall notify the Township when
the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of Township.
§ 142-35. Guards for excavations; restoration of public property.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Township.
A. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which, in turn, is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer or combined
sewer.
B. The POTW shall not allow any connection to the sanitary sewer unless
there is sufficient capacity in the sewage works to convey and
adequately treat the additional wastewater from the proposed
connection.
A. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Codes or
other applicable rules and regulations of the Township or the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the
WEF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made
gastight and watertight.
B. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the Township before installation.
§ 142-30 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-35
1:398
ARTICLE IV
Use of Public Sewers
§ 142-36. Objectionable waste and discharges; septic tanks
prohibited; connection to sewer required.
§ 142-37. Unpolluted discharges.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property
within the Township, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any human or
animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
B. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any sanitary
sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted water, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of
this chapter.
C. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
D. The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose situated within
the Township and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which
there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary
sewer or combined sewer of the Township is hereby required at his
expense to install suitable sewage facilities therein, and to connect such
facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after the date of official notice
to do so, provided that such public sewer is within 200 feet of the
property line.
A. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, water from footing drains, roof water, or
other unpolluted water to any sanitary sewer or sewer connection
except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Any premises connected
to a storm sewer shall comply with county, state and federal
requirements as well as those by the Township and the POTW.
B. Stormwater, groundwater, water from footing drains and all other
unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into such sewers as are
specifically designated as combined sewers, or to a natural outlet,
except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon application and
approval of the POTW and the appropriate state agency to a storm
sewer or natural outlet.
§ 142-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-38
1:399
§ 142-38. Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) and sand interceptors.
Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) and sand interceptors shall be provided when,
in the opinion of the Director, they are necessary for the proper handling
of liquid wastes containing fat, oil, or grease discharges in which the
concentration in a grab sample exceeds 100 mg/l limit, or any flammable
wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors
shall not be required for single-family or multiple-family dwelling units. All
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Director and
shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and
equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted into place shall
be gastight and watertight. When installed, all fats, oils and grease, oil
and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense,
in continuously efficient operation at all times. A user may petition the
Director for an exception from having to install a fats, oils, and grease
(FOG) interceptor in accordance with provisions specified in the POTW FOG
Mitigation Program Policy, as amended from time to time.
§ 142-39. Prohibited discharges.
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly,
any pollutant or wastewater which will pass through or interfere with the
operation or performance of the sewage works. A user may not contribute
the following substances to the sewage works:
A. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity
are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to
the sewage works or to the operation of the sewage works.
B. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in
a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater
treatment facilities.
C. Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than 11.0, or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the sewage
works.
D. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants or of high chlorine demand
in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect
in the receiving waters of the sewage works, or exceed the limitation
set forth in the EPA categorical pretreatment standard or any other
federal, state or county standards.
§ 142-38 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-39
1:400
E. Pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes
within the POTW in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety
problems. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, wastewaters
that contain liquids, solids or gases that cause gases, vapors or fumes
from the discharge to exceed 10% of the immediately-dangerous-to-lifeand-
health (IDLH) concentration. Discharges that contain more than
one pollutant which may contribute to fume toxicity shall be subject to
more restrictive limitations, as determined necessary by the Director.
The more restrictive discharge limits shall be calculated based on
additive fume toxicity of all compounds identified or reasonably
expected to be present in the discharge.
F. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly
or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public
nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the
sewers for maintenance and repair.
G. Any substance, which may cause the sewage, works such as residues,
sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for land application or reclamation
and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process.
H. Any substance which will cause the sewage works to violate its NPDES
permit or the receiving water quality standards.
I. Any wastewater with color of sufficient light absorbency to interfere
with treatment plant process, prevent analytical determinations, or
create any aesthetic effect on the treatment plant effluent, such as, but
not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
J. Daily maximum concentration or mass loading shall not be exceeded on
any calendar day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in
terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetical
measurement of the pollutant concentration, derived from all
measurements taken that day. Where daily maximum limitations are
expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass
discharged during the day. If a composite sample is required for a
parameter, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for
that parameter has been exceeded on a single calendar day shall be
based on the composite sample collected for that parameter on that
calendar day. If grab samples are required for a parameter, the
determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter
has been exceeded on a calendar day shall be based on the average of
all grab samples collected for that parameter on that calendar day. If
only one grab sample is collected for a parameter on a given day, the
determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter
has been exceeded for the day shall be based on the results of that
single grab sample. If the pollutant concentration in any sample is less
than the applicable detection limit, that value shall be regarded as zero
when calculating the daily maximum concentration.
§ 142-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-39
1:401
K. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the sewage works, resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the sewage
works which exceeds 60° C. (140° F.) or is lower than 0° C. (32° F.)
L. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by applicable
state or federal regulations.
M. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public
nuisance.
N. Organic-solvent-extractable substances such as fats, wax, grease, or
oils of petroleum origin, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/
l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32° F. 0° C. and 140° F. 60° C.
O. Freon-extractable substances such as fats, wax, grease, or oils of
petroleum origin, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or
containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between 32° F. (0° C. and 140° F. 60° C.).
P. Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquids, solids or gases or other pollutants which cause the wastewater
to have a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60° C.) or which
cause an exceedance of 10% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) at any
point within the collection system or containing gasoline, benzene,
xylene or toluene which causes the wastewater to exceed the state
surface water quality standard.
Q. Any garbage that has not been ground by household type or other
suitable garbage grinders.
R. Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch, manure or any other solids or
viscous substances capable of causing obstructions or other
interferences with the proper operation of the sewer system.
S. Toxic or poisonous substances in sufficient quantity to injure or
interfere with any wastewater treatment process, to constitute hazards
to humans or animals, or to create any hazard in waters which receive
the POTW effluent, which shall include, but are not limited to, wastes
containing cyanide, chromium, cadmium, mercury, copper, and nickel
ions.
T. Solids of such character and quantity that special and unusual attention
is required for their handling.
U. Any substance which would cause the treatment plant to be in
noncompliance with sludge use, recycle or disposal criteria pursuant to
guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Federal
Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
§ 142-39 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-39
1:402
§ 142-40. Promulgation of more stringent standards.
Upon the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment standards,
alternative discharge limits, or other federal or state limitations, for a
particular industrial subcategory, the pretreatment standard, if more
stringent than limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that
subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under
this chapter and shall be considered part of this chapter. The POTW shall
notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements.
§ 142-41. Prohibited concentrations of certain pollutants and
mercury reduction plan.
Substances Control Act or other regulations or criteria for sludge
management and disposal as required by the state.
V. Any medical or infectious wastes prohibited from being discharged
under federal or state law and regulations.
W. Material considered a hazardous waste under the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA).
X. Any commercial or industrial waste that may cause pass-through of
pollutants or interference with the wastewater treatment plant
operations or that violates federal, state, or local restrictions.
Y. Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference with the POTW.
Z. Trucked and hauled waste, except at discharge points designated by
the POTW.
AA. Pollutants causing toxic gases, vapors, and fumes.
BB. Any leachate from a hazardous waste landfill.
CC. Any landfill leachate, unless permitted and authorized under a written
contract, within the POTW's sole discretion, between the POTW and the
user.
DD. Any pollutant discharge which constitutes a slug.
A. No person shall discharge wastewater such that the concentration of
pollutants in one grab sample exceeds the following limits for oil and
grease, pH, total cyanides and total phenolic compounds:
(1) Oil and grease: 100 mg/l.
(2) Less than five or more than 11 standard units pH.
(3) Total cyanides: 1.0 mg/l.
(4) Total phenolic compounds: 1.0 mg/l.
§ 142-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-41
1:403
B. No person shall discharge wastewater such that the concentration of
pollutants contained in a representative composite sample is at or
above the following surcharge threshold, except as otherwise permitted
in writing by the Director and on payment of a surcharge fee, and no
person shall discharge wastewater such that the concentration of
pollutants contained in a representative composite sample exceeds the
following upper limits, with respect to the following compatible
pollutants:
Compatibles
Pollutant
Surcharge
Threshold
(mg/l)
Upper Limits
(mg/l)
5-day BOD (biochemical oxygen
demand)
300 1,000
Total suspended solids (TSS) 350 2,500
COD (chemical oxygen
demand)
600 2,000
Total phosphorus 15 75
Ammonia-nitrogen 30 700
C. Unorganic or organic pollutants or phenolic compounds.
(1) No person shall discharge wastewater such that the concentration
of pollutants contained in a representative composite sample shall
exceed the following limits with respect to the following inorganic
or organic pollutants or phenolic compounds:
Inorganics
Pollutant/Phenolic
Compound
Concentration Limit
(mg/l)
Arsenic (As) 1.0
Beryllium (Be) 0.002
Cadmium (Cd) 0.50
Chromium (total) (Cr) 4.0
Copper (Cu) 3.0
Lead (Pb) 0.3
Mercury (Hg) Nondetectable
Nickel (Ni) 3.0
Silver (Ag) 0.15
Zinc (Zn) 3.0
§ 142-41 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-41
1:404
Organics
Pollutant/Phenolic
Compound
Concentration Limit
(mg/l)
Polychlorinated biphenyls Nondetectable per U.S. EPA
Method 608 (Any detectable
sample exceeds this limit.)
(2) The local discharge limitation for polychlorinated biphenyls is
established at the level of detection in accordance with the
following: There shall be no detectable amounts of polychlorinated
biphenyls discharged to the sanitary sewer. Polychlorinated
biphenyls sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and
analytical protocol for compliance monitoring, shall be in
accordance with EPA Method 608. The level of detection,
developed in accordance with the procedure specified in 40 CFR
136, shall not exceed 0.2 ug/L for polychlorinated biphenyls, unless
higher levels are appropriate due to matrix interference.
D. The total phenols limit is based on the discharge of any or all of the
following phenolic compounds: 2-chlorophenol, 4-chlorophenol,
2,4-dichlorophenol, 2,4-dimethylphenol, 2,4-dinitrophenol,
2-methyphenol, 3-methylphenol, 4-methylphenol, 2-nitrophenol,
4-nitrophenol, and phenol. Discharge of other phenolic compounds is
prohibited except as specifically authorized by the Director.
E. The Director shall annually review the quantities of industrial
pollutants listed above which are discharged or proposed to be
discharged to the sewage works. The Director shall recommend any
revisions to these limits necessary to insure that the NPDES permit,
federal pretreatment standards and water resources limits are met and
to insure that the industrial discharge will not interfere with the
treatment process of sludge disposal. At such time as the previously
cited limits are changed by the Township or POTW, the unit authorizing
such change shall notify the remaining units of such change.
F. The local discharge limitation for mercury is established at the level of
detection in accordance with the following:
(1) There shall be no detectable amounts of mercury discharged to a
Township or POTW sanitary sewer. Mercury sampling procedures,
preservation and handling, and analytical protocol for compliance
monitoring, shall be in accordance with EPA Method 245.1. The
level of detection, developed in accordance with the procedure
specified in 40 CFR 136, shall not exceed 0.2 ug/L for mercury,
unless higher levels are appropriate due to matrix interference.
(2) The evaluation of potential matrix interference(s) shall include, at a
minimum, the following:
§ 142-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-41
1:405
(a) A demonstration that the laboratory conducting the analysis is
capable of achieving the level of detection of 0.2 ug/L in
reagent water;
(b) A demonstration that the level of detection of 0.2 ug/L cannot
be achieved in the effluent; and
(c) A demonstration that an attempt has been made to resolve the
matrix interference(s).
(3) In cases where true matrix interference(s) can be demonstrated, a
discharge-specific level of detection will be developed in
accordance with the procedure in 40 CFR 136. Discharge-specific
levels of detection will be incorporated into the wastewater
discharge permit of the nondomestic user.
(4) To ensure that the maximum allowable mercury loading to the
POTW is not exceeded, the POTW may require any nondomestic
user with a reasonable potential to discharge mercury to develop,
submit for approval and implement a mercury reduction plan
(MRP). The MRP may be required by permit if the nondomestic
user has not violated the local limit for mercury but the POTW has
determined that a reasonable potential for such violation may exist.
MRPs may be required in notices of violations, orders or other
enforcement actions when the nondomestic user has violated the
mercury local limit. At a minimum, an approvable MRP shall
contain the following:
(a) A written commitment by the nondomestic user to reduce all
nondomestic discharges of mercury to levels below the level of
detection within three years of the MRP's original approval
date.
(b) Within 60 days of notification by the POTW that an MRP is
required, the nondomestic user shall supply an initial
identification of all potential sources of mercury which could
be discharged to the sanitary sewer system.
(c) Specific strategies for mercury reduction with reasonable time
frames for implementation, capable of ensuring that mercury
discharges will be below the specified level of detection within
three years.
(d) A program for quarterly sampling and analysis of the
nondomestic discharge for mercury in accordance with EPA
Method 245.1.
(e) A demonstration of specific, measurable and/or otherwise
quantifiable mercury reductions consistent with the goal of
reducing mercury discharges below the specified level of
detection. Where such reductions cannot be demonstrated
through normal effluent monitoring (e.g., mercury discharges
§ 142-41 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-41
1:406
are already near level of detection), the demonstration should
incorporate the following:
[1] Internal process monitoring, documenting the results of
mercury reduction strategies at sampling locations within
the facility (e.g., a program of regular monitoring of sink
traps where mercury-containing reagents had previously
been disposed but have since been substituted by
nonmercury-containing compounds).
[2] Internal and/or effluent sampling utilizing clean and/or
ultraclean sampling and analytical methods as referenced
by EPA Federal Register. The results of such monitoring
will not be used for compliance purposes unless performed
in accordance with EPA Method 245.1 and collected at the
appropriate compliance measurement location.
[3] Loading calculations wherein the nondomestic user
calculates the total mass of mercury reduced from the
sanitary sewer discharge through reagent substitutions,
changes in disposal practices and/or other approved MRP
strategies implemented.
(5) A semiannual report on the status of the mercury reduction efforts.
(a) At a minimum, these reports shall identify compliance or
noncompliance with specific reduction commitments in the
MRP; summarize the analytical, mass-based or other
quantifiable demonstrations of mercury reductions performed
to date; provide all applicable analytical data; provide an
evaluation of effectiveness of actions taken to date; provide
updates to the initial list of mercury-containing compounds
discharged to the sanitary sewer and propose for approval new
strategies and/or modifications to the current MRP to continue
and improve mercury reduction efforts; and
(b) Any other conditions that the POTW deems necessary to
ensure that mercury reduction efforts are effective in
achieving the goals of this section.
(6) Failure to submit an approvable MRP within 30 days of the required
due date shall constitute significant noncompliance in accordance
with this section and will result in publication as a significant
violator.
(7) An MRP may be evaluated for adequacy at any time by the POTW. If
such an evaluation determines that the mercury reduction plan is
inadequate or the nondomestic user has not complied with its
approved MRP, the nondomestic user will be notified. Failure to
comply with the MRP requirement constitutes noncompliance. The
POTW will follow its enforcement response plan (ERP) to ensure
that corrective actions are taken.
§ 142-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-41
1:407
(8) A nondomestic user may request a release from MRP requirements
if all samples of the discharge for a period of one year are less than
the specified level of detection; the nondomestic user has complied
with the minimum monitoring frequency of quarterly sampling
events; and the POTW deems that MRP commitments have been
fulfilled sufficiently to ensure continued compliance with the
mercury limitation. The POTW shall notify the nondomestic user of
any release from MRP requirements in writing.
(9) If the MRP requirement is waived by the POTW, the nondomestic
user remains subject to the local limitation for mercury in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
(10) Rediscovery of mercury in the nondomestic user discharge subjects
said user to the submission of a new MRP or escalation of
enforcement in accordance with the ERP.
G. Implementation of best management practices or best management
practices plan.
(1) The Director may require any user to develop and implement best
management practices (BMP) to control, contain, treat, prevent, or
reduce the discharge of wastewater, pollutants, or other
substances from the user's premises to the POTW, as determined by
the Director.
(2) In addition, the Director may require a user to develop and
implement a best management practices plan (BMPP), including an
enforceable implementation schedule, for review and approval by
the Director. The BMPP shall be submitted within 30 days after
notification by the Director or as otherwise required by the user
permit. The BMPP shall be directed at preventing the entrance of
pollutants, directly or indirectly, into the POTW. The BMPP shall be
available for inspection at all times at the user's premises. At a
minimum, a user's BMPP shall contain all of the following elements,
as determined necessary by the Director, at a level of detail and in
units and terms as determined necessary by the Director to
adequately evaluate the plan:
(a) A statement of the purpose and objectives of the plan.
(b) A description of the strategies, methods, policies and
procedures to prevent, minimize or reduce the introduction of
pollutants into the user's discharge and to minimize waste
generation.
(c) A description of the options available to the user to control
accidental spillage, leaks and drainage.
(d) A description of the best available or practical control
technologies available for the user's specific circumstances.
§ 142-41 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-41
1:408
(e) A detailed facility layout and site diagram showing points of
entry into the POTW.
(f) A description of the waste handling, treatment and discharge
disposal facilities, including flow diagrams and process
schematics.
(g) A description of operating and maintenance processes and
procedures.
(h) An inventory of raw materials and a list of waste sources,
including a list of all chemicals used or stored at the facility.
(i) A description of employee training programs; policies and
procedures; continuing education programs; and participation.
(j) A description of the user's documentation, including
recordkeeping and forms.
(k) A description of monitoring activities.
(l) An information log of facility personnel, organizational chart,
emergency phone numbers, contact persons, and maintenance
or service representatives.
(m) A certification by a qualified professional that the plan is
adequate to prevent spills, leaks, slug loads, or noncustomary
discharges of regulated substances, directly or indirectly, to
the POTW.
(n) Such other information, documents or diagrams as required by
the Director, including, but not limited to, any of the
information required under this chapter, the Act, or state law.
(3) The BMPs or BMPP required of a user or approved for a user shall
be incorporated in a user permit issued to the user. If the user
already has a user permit, the existing permit may be modified to
incorporate the BMP requirements. If the user does not currently
have a user permit, a permit shall be issued for that purpose.
(4) The Director may require revisions to a user's BMPP if the Director
determines that the plan contains elements that are inadequate, or
as otherwise determined necessary by the Director to ensure
compliance with applicable requirements of this chapter, the Act or
state law. Review of the BMPP by the Director shall not relieve the
user from the responsibility to modify its facility as determined to
comply with this chapter, the Act, or state law.
(5) The user reports to the Director must include best management
practices compliance information. The user reports must be
certified and signed by the user's authorized representative.
§ 142-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-41
1:409
§ 142-42. Sampling, measurements, tests and analyses.
Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 (March 26, 2007). Where 40
CFR Part 136 (March 26, 2007) does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that
the Part 136 (March 26, 2007) sampling and analytical techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be
performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable
sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the
POTW or other parties, approved by the EPA.
§ 142-43. Surcharge for discharges of unusual strength.
§ 142-44. Special agreements authorized.
With respect to compatible pollutants only, no statement contained in this
chapter shall be construed as preventing any agreement between the
Director and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual
(6) The user shall retain all documentation associated with best
management practices for a period of at least three years from the
date an activity associated with the practices. This period may be
extended by the POTW at any time.
A. If the character of the wastewater from any manufacturing or industrial
plant or any other building or premises exceeds the limits for
compatible pollutants established in § 142-41 or shall be such as to
impose any unreasonable burden upon the sewers of the system or
upon the sewage works or POTW in excess of a maximum limit
prescribed in this chapter, then an additional charge shall be made over
and above the regular rates, or the Director shall require that such
sewage be treated by the person, firm or corporation responsible for
the sewage being emptied into the sewer or the right to empty such
sewage shall be denied, if necessary, to protect the system or any part
thereof. Surcharges required shall be computed as the weight of excess
compatible pollutant in pounds multiplied by the cost per pound
specified in the applicable Township rate ordinance. The strength of
such wastes shall be determined by composite samples taken over a
sufficient period of time to insure a representative sample. The cost of
sampling and testing shall be borne by the industry or establishment,
whether owner or lessee. Tests shall be made by the user, at an
independent laboratory, or at the POTW wastewater treatment plant.
B. Any wastewater discharged into the sewage works having a compatible
pollutant in excess of those prescribed in § 142-41 may be permitted by
the Director, provided that payment by the industrial concern for the
full cost of treating such excess constituents in the wastewater is made
and acceptance of the waste does not cause violation of EPA guidelines,
NPDES requirements, the Act or the State Act.
§ 142-41 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-44
1:410
strength or character may be accepted, subject to payment therefor by
the industrial concern, provided that such agreement shall not violate EPA
guidelines or NPDES requirements and provided that user charges and
surcharges as provided in this chapter are agreed to in the agreement.
§ 142-45. Dilution of discharge.
No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, alternative discharge limits,
or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the POTW or the
state.
§ 142-46. Accidental discharges.
A. Where required, a user shall provide protection from accidental
discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this
chapter, the Act or the State Act. Facilities to prevent accidental
discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at
the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing
facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be
submitted to the Director for review and shall be approved by the
Director before construction of the facility. All required users shall
complete such a program within 90 days of notification by the Director.
If required by the Director, a user who commences contribution to the
sewage works after the effective date of the ordinance from which this
chapter derives shall not be permitted to introduce pollutants into the
system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by
the Director. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility
to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of
this chapter, the Act or the State Act. In the case of any discharge,
whether accidental or not, that could cause problems to the POTW,
including any slug loadings by the user, it is the responsibility of the
user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The
notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste,
concentration and volume, and corrective actions.
B. Within five days following any discharge, whether accidental or not,
that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings by
the user, the user shall submit to the Director a detailed written report
describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by
the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall
not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of damage to the sewage works or
POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property, nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other
liability which may be imposed by this chapter, the Act or the State Act,
§ 142-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-46
1:411
or other applicable law. Failure to file a report shall be a separate
violation of this chapter.
C. Slug control plan.
(1) Each significant industrial user shall prepare and implement an
individualized slug control plan when, in the opinion of the
Director, a slug control plan is required. Existing significant
industrial users that do not have a POTW-approved slug control
plan shall provide an approvable slug control plan to the Director
within 90 days of being notified by the POTW that a slug control
plan is required. New sources that are significant industrial users
shall submit a slug control plan to the Director for approval before
beginning to discharge. Upon written notice from the Director,
users that are not significant industrial users may also be required
to prepare and implement a slug control plan, and the plan shall be
submitted to the Director for approval as specified in the notice.
Slug control requirements must be included in the SIU control
mechanism (industrial user's permit).
(2) All slug control plans shall contain at least the following elements:
(a) A description of discharge practices, including nonroutine
batch discharges;
(b) A description of stored chemicals;
(c) The procedures for immediately notifying the Director of slug
discharges, including any discharge that would violate any
discharge prohibition, limitation or requirement under this
chapter, and procedures for follow-up written notification
within five days of the discharge;
(d) The procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental
spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas,
handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading
operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training,
building of containment structures or equipment, measures for
containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and
measures and equipment for emergency response.
(3) If a user has submitted to the Director plans or documents
pursuant to other requirements of local, state or federal laws and
regulations which met all applicable requirements of this chapter,
the Director may, in its discretion, determine that the user has
satisfied the slug plan submission requirements of this section.
(4) Significant industrial users must immediately notify the Director of
any changes at their facilities affecting their slug control plan or
spill/slug potential.
D. Secondary containment requirements.
§ 142-46 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-46
1:412
(1) Each user, when in the opinion of the Director it is required, must
provide and maintain at the user's sole expense secondary spill
containment structures (including diking, curbing or other
appropriate structures) adequate to protect all floor drains from
accidental spills and discharges to the POTW of any pollutants or
discharges regulated by this chapter, the Act or state law.
(a) The containment area shall be constructed so that no liquid
polluting material can escape from the area by gravity through
the building sewers, drains, or otherwise directly or indirectly
into the POTW.
(b) The containment or curbing shall be sufficient to hold not less
than 10% of the total volume of the tanks or containers within
the secondary containment structure or provide a capacity of
100% of the largest single tank or container within the
secondary containment structure, whichever is larger, unless a
lesser containment area or alternate control measures are
approved in advance by the Director.
(c) The containment structure must accommodate "squirt
distance." Containers within the containment structure must
be able to be placed sufficiently back from the edge of the
structure so if punctured, the resulting leak will be contained.
(d) The containment structure must be designed or operated to
prevent run-on or infiltration, rain, or other liquids into the
secondary containment system unless the containment system
has sufficient excess capacity to contain run-on, infiltration,
rain, or other liquids. Excess capacity, when such prevention is
not provided in the system, must be sufficient to contain rain
precipitation from a twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour rainfall
event.
(e) The containment structure shall be constructed with chemicalresistant
water stops in place at all joints (if any) to be free of
cracks or gaps.
(f) The containment structure shall be designed and installed to
completely surround the tank or containers and to cover all
surrounding earth likely to come into contact with the waste if
released form the tank(s) or containers (i.e., capable of
preventing lateral as well as vertical migration of the material).
(g) All floor drains found within the containment area must be
plugged and sealed.
(2) Spill troughs and sumps within process areas must discharge to
appropriate pretreatment tanks.
§ 142-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-46
1:413
§ 142-47. Determination of sewage flow.
To determine the sewage flow from any establishment, the POTW may use
one of the following methods:
(3) Emergency containment shall also be provided for storage tanks
that may be serviced by commercial haulers and for chemical
storage areas.
(4) Solid pollutants shall be located in security areas designed to
prevent the loss of materials to the POTW.
(5) Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to
provide the protection required by this chapter shall be submitted
to the Director for review and shall be approved by the Director
before construction. Construction of approved containment for
existing sources shall be completed within the time period specified
by the Director.
(6) No new source shall be permitted to discharge to the POTW until
emergency containment facilities have been approved and
constructed as required by this chapter.
(7) The Director may order a user to take interim measures for
emergency containment as determined necessary by the Director
under the circumstances.
A. The amount of water supplied to the premises by the public water
system as shown upon the water meter if the premises are metered.
B. If the premises are supplied with river water or water from private
wells, the amount of water supplied from such sources may be metered
at the source or metered at its point of discharge prior to entry into the
public sewer.
C. If such premises are used for an industrial or commercial purpose of
such a nature that the water supplied to the premises cannot be entirely
discharged into the sewer system, the estimate of the amount of sewage
discharged into the sewer system made by the utilities authority from
the water, gas or electric supply, or metered at its point of discharge
prior to entry into the public sewer.
D. The volume of sewage discharged into the sewer system as determined
by measurements and samples taken at a manhole installed by the
owner of the property served by the sewer system at his own expense in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit issued by the
POTW pursuant to this chapter.
E. A figure determined by the POTW by any combination of the foregoing
or by any other equitable method.
§ 142-46 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-48
1:414
§ 142-48. Disposal at sewage treatment plant.
Waste from industrial sewage disposal systems shall be disposed of at the
sewage treatment plant or at any other refuse or disposal site approved by
the Director. No waters or wastes described in § 142-39 shall be disposed of
at the sewage treatment plant.
§ 142-49. Bypass.
§ 142-50. Report of violation.
If the results of any sampling performed by the user indicate that any
violation of this chapter, a permit, an order issued under this chapter, the
Act or the State Act has occurred, the user shall notify the POTW within
24 hours of becoming aware of the violation and shall repeat the sampling
and pollutant analysis and shall submit, in writing, the results of this repeat
A. An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is
for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. If an industrial
user knows in advance of the need for bypass, it shall submit prior
notice to the Director, if possible at least 10 days before the date of the
bypass. An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated
bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the Director
within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes aware of the
bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of
the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written
submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the
duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the
bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass.
B. Bypass is prohibited, and the Director may take enforcement action
against an industrial user for bypass, unless:
(1) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or
severe property damage;
(2) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use
of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This
condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should
have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering
judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal
periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and
(3) The industrial user submitted notice as required under this section.
The Director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects, if the Director determines that it will meet the
three conditions listed in this Subsection B(2).
§ 142-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-50
1:415
analysis within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. A written
follow-up report shall be filed by the user with the POTW within 30 days of a
user becoming aware of the violation. The report shall specify the following:
§ 142-51. Notification of authorities upon discharge of hazardous
waste.
All industrial users shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste
management division Director and the DEQ in writing of any discharge to
the POTW of a substance that would be a regulated hazardous waste under
any federal statute if disposed of otherwise. Such notice shall be given in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(p).
A. A description of the violation, the cause thereof, and the violation's
impact on the user's compliance status.
B. Duration of the violation, including exact dates and times of the
violation, and if not corrected, the anticipated time the violation is
expected to continue.
C. All steps taken or intended to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent
reoccurrence of such a violation.
§ 142-50 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-51
1:416
ARTICLE V
Private Sewage Disposal
§ 142-52. Authorized under certain conditions.
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of § 142-36D, the building sewer shall be connected to a private
sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 142-53. Permit required; application; fees.
§ 142-54. Specifications.
The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the County Health
Department. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal
system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of
the lot is less than 10,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be
permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet.
§ 142-55. Connection with public sewer.
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in § 142-54, a direct connection
shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any
septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall
be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
§ 142-56. Sanitary maintenance required.
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the Township or the
POTW.
A. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the
Plumbing Inspector. The application for such a permit shall be made on
a form furnished by the Township or POTW and shall include
specifications and other information deemed necessary by the
Township and POTW. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the
Township Treasurer at the time the application is filed.
B. Inspection by Township and POTW. A permit for a private sewage
disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is
completed to the satisfaction of the Township and POTW. The Township
and POTW shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction, and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify
the Township and POTW when the work is ready for final inspection and
before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be
made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the Township or POTW.
§ 142-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 142-57
1:417
§ 142-57. Other requirements.
No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with
any additional requirements that may be imposed by the state or County
Health Department or DNRE.
§ 142-57 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 142-57
1:418
Chapter 143
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Signs — See Ch. 145. Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 143-1. Purpose and findings.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented
businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general
welfare of the citizens of the Township, and to establish reasonable and
uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and
concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the Township. The
provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this ordinance to restrict or
deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the
First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors
of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is
it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the
distribution of obscene material.
B. Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects
of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports
made available to the Township Board, and on findings incorporated in
the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41
(1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50(1976); and
Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); Arcara v. Cloud
Books, Inc., 478 U.S. 697, (1986); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109
(1972); Iacobucci v. City of Newport, Ky, 479 U.S. 92 (1986); United
States v. O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367 (1968); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga,
107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir.1997); Kev, Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793 F. 2d 1053
(9th Cir. 1986); Hang On, Inc. v. City of Arlington, 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir.
1995); and South Florida Free Beaches, Inc. v. City of Miami, 734 F.2d
608 (11th Cir. 1984), as well as studies conducted in other cities
including, but not limited to Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota;
Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove,
California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California; Austin, Texas;
Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and
Beaumont, Texas; and findings reported in the Final Report of the
Attorney General's Commission on Pornography (1986), the Report of
the Attorney General's Working Group On the Regulation of Sexually
Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), and statistics
obtained from the U. S. Department of Health and Human Services,
§ 142-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-1
1:419
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Township Board finds
that:
(1) Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful
and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the
operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no
mechanism to make owners of these establishments responsible for
the activities that occur on their premises.
(2) Crime statistics show that all types of crimes, especially sex-related
crimes, occur with more frequency in neighborhoods where
sexually oriented businesses are located. See, e.g., studies of the
cities of Phoenix, Arizona; Indianapolis, Indiana; and Austin, Texas.
(3) Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at
sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide
private or semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos,
or live sex shows. See, e.g., California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109, 111
(1972); see also Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission
on Pornography (1986) at 377.
(4) Offering and providing such booths and/or cubicles encourages
such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. See, e.g., Final
Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography
(1986) at 376-77.
(5) Persons frequent certain adult theaters, adult arcades, and other
sexually oriented businesses, for the purpose of engaging in sex
within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. See, e.g.,
Arcara v. Cloud Books, Inc., 478 U.S. 697, 698 (1986); see also Final
Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography
(1986) at 376-77.
(6) At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in sexually oriented businesses including, but not limited
to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection
(HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B amebiasis,
salmonella infections, and shigella infections. See, e.g., study of
Fort Meyers, Florida.
(7) For the period of 1985 through 1995, the total number of reported
cases of AIDS in the United States caused by the immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) was 523,056. See, e.g., statistics of the U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention.
(8) Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing
cumulative number of persons testing positive for HIV antibody
test in State of Michigan.
(9) The total number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in
the United States reported during the ten-year period 1985
§ 143-1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 143-1
1:420
through 1995 was 367,796. See, e.g., statistics of the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention.
(10) The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported
annually remains at a high level, with a total of 1,250,581 cases
reported during the period 1993 through 1995. See, e.g., statistics
of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention..
(11) The Surgeon General of the United States in his report of October
22, 1986, advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection
may be transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug use,
exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an
infected mother to her newborn.
(12) According to the best scientific evidence available, AIDS and HIV
infection, as well as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally
transmitted by sexual acts. See, e.g., findings of the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention.
(13) Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are
unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the
activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the
facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those
facilities. See, e.g., Final Report of the Attorney General's
Commission on Pornography (1986) at 377.
(14) Numerous studies and reports have determined that bodily fluids,
including semen and urine, are found in the areas of sexually
oriented businesses where persons view adult-oriented films. See,
e.g., Final Report of the Attorney General's Commission on
Pornography (1986) at 377.
(15) Nude dancing in adult establishments encourages prostitution,
increases sexual assaults, and attracts other criminal activity. See,
e.g., Barnes v. Glen Theatre, 501 U.S. 560, 583 (1991).
(16) Nude dancing in adult establishments increases the likelihood of
drug dealing and drug use. See, e.g., Kev, Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793
F.2d 1053, 1056 (9th Cir. 1986).
(17) The findings noted in paragraphs numbered (1) through (16) raise
substantial governmental concerns.
(18) Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics
which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those
substantial governmental concerns.
§ 143-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-1
1:421
§ 143-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of consideration, or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion-picture
machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing
(19) A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and
the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a
licensing procedure will place a heretofore nonexistent incentive
on the operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in
a manner consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of its
patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is
appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is
the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in
possession and control of the premises and activities occurring
therein.
(20) Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting
on the premises with adult booths advances a substantial
governmental interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual
activity occurring in adult establishments.
(21) The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the
sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially
related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of
such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted
diseases and criminal activity.
(22) It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable
diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding
certain employees who may engage in the conduct this chapter is
designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such
activity.
(23) The fact that an applicant for a sexually oriented business license
has been convicted of a sex-related crime leads to the rational
assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in
contravention to this chapter.
(24) The barring of such individuals from operation or employment in
sexually oriented businesses for a period of 10 years for a previous
felony conviction serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct
which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
(25) The general welfare, health, morals, and safety of the citizens of
this Township will be promoted by the enactment of chapter.
§ 143-1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 143-2
1:422
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine
at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE
— A commercial establishment having 10% or more of all usable interior,
retail, wholesale, or warehouse space devoted to the distribution, display,
or storage of books, magazines, and other periodicals and/or photographs,
drawings, slides, films, videotapes, recording tapes, and/or novelty items
which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas (as defined herein), or an establishment with a segment or
section devoted to the sale or display of such material. Such establishment
or the segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material in
an establishment is customarily not open to the public generally, but only to
one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age.
ADULT CABARET — An establishment which features any of the following:
topless dancers and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers, male
and/or female impersonators or similar entertainers, or topless and/or
bottomless waitpersons or employees.
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER OR ADULT LIVE STAGE
PERFORMING THEATER — An enclosed building used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas (as defined herein) for observation by patrons therein.
Such establishment is customarily not open to the public generally, but only
to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age.
ADULT PHYSICAL CULTURE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment, club,
or business by whatever name designated, which offers or advertises or is
equipped or arranged so as to provide as part of its services, massages,
body rubs, alcohol rubs, physical stimulation, baths, or other treatment by
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and has
a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of this adult type of photographic reproduction;
A.
Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than 10
hours; or
B.
Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for
a period of time that is less than 10 hours.
C.
§ 143-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-2
1:423
any person. The following uses shall not be included within the definition of
an adult physical culture establishment:
EMPLOYEE — A person who performs any service on the premises of
a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis,
whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid
a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business.
Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premise for repair
or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the
delivery of goods to the premises.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
ESTABLISHMENT — Includes any of the following:
LICENSEE — A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually
oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an
applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a
person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in
a sexually oriented business.
Establishments which routinely provide such services by a licensed
physician, a licensed chiropractor, a licensed osteopath, a licensed
physical therapist, a licensed practical nurse, or any other similarly
licensed medical professional;
A.
B. Electrolysis treatment by a licensed operator of electrolysis equipment;
Continuing instruction in marshal or performing arts or in organized
athletic activities;
C.
D. Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics, or medical offices; and
Barber shops or beauty parlors and/or salons which offer massages to
the scalp, the face, the neck or shoulders only.
E.
The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
A.
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
B.
The additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing
sexually oriented business; or
C.
D. The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
§ 143-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 143-2
1:424
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears
seminude, in a state of nudity, or who displays specified anatomical areas
and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any
form of consideration. A nude model studio shall not include a proprietary
school licensed by the State of Michigan or a college, junior college or
university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college
or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
NUDITY or a STATE OF NUDITY — The showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less
than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less
than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of
the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. Nudity or a state of
nudity does not include the following:
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
SEMINUDE or in a SEMINUDE CONDITION — The showing of the female
breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest
point or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall
include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not
include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited
by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel,
provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. Seminudity or a state
of seminude condition does not include the following:
That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other
advertising that indicates a nude or seminude person is available for
viewing; and
A.
Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least
three days in advance of the class; and
B.
Where no more than one nude or seminude model is on the premises at
any one time.
C.
A woman's breastfeeding of a baby whether or not the nipple or areola
is exposed during or incidental to the feeding.
A.
Material as defined in Section 2 of Act No. 343 of the Public Acts of
1984, being Section 752.362 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
B.
Sexually explicit visual material as defined in Section 3 of Act No.
33 of the Public Acts of 1978, being Section 722.673 of the Michigan
Compiled Laws.
C.
A woman's breastfeeding of a baby whether or not the nipple or areola
is exposed during or incidental to the feeding.
A.
§ 143-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-2
1:425
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult
motion-picture theater or adult live stage performing theater, adult physical
culture establishment, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual
encounter center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Portions of the human body defined as
follows:
SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY — Any of the following offenses:
Material as defined in Section 2 of Act No. 343 of the Public Acts of
1984, being Section 752.362 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
B.
Sexually explicit visual material as defined in Section 3 of Act No.
33 of the Public Acts of 1978, being Section 722.673 of the Michigan
Compiled Laws.
C.
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex; or
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminude.
B.
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the
top of the areola; and
A.
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
B.
Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity;
sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual
performance by a child; possession or distribution of child
pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a
child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault,
molestation of a child; gambling; or distribution of a controlled
substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under the
criminal or penal code of other states or countries; for which:
Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor
offense;
(1)
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever
is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
(2)
A.
§ 143-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 143-2
1:426
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — The explicit display of one or more of
the following:
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
— The increase in floor areas occupied by the business by more than 25%,
as the floor areas exist on the date this chapter takes effect.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS — Includes any of the following:
§ 143-3. Classification.
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the
conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two
or more misdemeanors or combination of misdemeanor offenses
occurring within any twenty-four-month period.
(3)
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
B.
A. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, or female breast.
C.
A. The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
C.
A. Adult arcades;
B. Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores;
C. Adult cabarets;
D. Adult motels;
E. Adult motion-picture theaters or adult live stage performing theaters;
F. Adult physical culture establishment;
G. Escort agencies;
H. Nude model studios; and
§ 143-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-3
1:427
§ 143-4. License required.
I. Sexual encounter centers.
A. It is unlawful.
(1) For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a
valid sexually oriented business license issued by the Township
pursuant to this chapter.
(2) For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to
employ a person to work for the sexually oriented business who is
not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the
Township pursuant to this chapter.
(3) For any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented
business without having secured a sexually oriented business
employee license pursuant to this chapter.
B. An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
Township.
C. All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide
such information (including fingerprints) as to enable the Township to
determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in
this chapter.
D. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, the person must sign the application for a license as
applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented
business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20% or
greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license
as applicant, and each such applicant must provide all of the
information required under the following section. Each applicant must
be qualified under the following section and each applicant shall be
considered a licensee if a license is granted.
E. The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall
contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the
following documents:
(1) If the applicant is:
(a) An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and
any aliases and submit proof that he/she is 18 years of age;
(b) A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name
and the names of all partners, whether the partnership is
general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if
any;
§ 143-3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 143-4
1:428
(c) A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in
good standing under the laws of its state of incorporation, the
names and capacity of all officers, directors and principal
stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent
and the address of the registered office for service of process.
(2) The name under which the establishment is to be operated and a
description of the services to be provided. If the applicant intends
to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than
that of the applicant, he or she must state the sexually oriented
business's fictitious name and submit the required registration
documents.
(3) Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has
been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending charges, of a
specific criminal activity as defined in this chapter, and, if so, the
specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction
of each.
(4) Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has
had a previous license under this chapter or other similar sexually
oriented business ordinances from another municipality or county
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of
the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension
or revocation, and whether the applicant or a person residing with
the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer,
director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed
under this chapter whose license has previously been denied,
suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the
sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or
revocation.
(5) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds
any other licenses under this chapter or other similar sexually
oriented business ordinance from another municipality or county
and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed
businesses.
(6) The single classification of license for which the applicant is filing.
(7) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a
legal description of the property, street address, and telephone
number(s), if any.
(8) The applicant's mailing address and residential address.
(9) A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
§ 143-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-4
1:429
(10) The applicant's driver's license number, social security number,
and/or his/her state or federally issued tax identification number.
(11) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises,
including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business.
The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it
must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches.
(12) A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30
days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting
the property lines and the structures containing any existing
sexually oriented businesses within 1,000 feet of the property to be
certified and the property lines of any established religious
institution/synagogue, school, or public park or recreation area
within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of
this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if it is
in existence at the time an application is submitted.
(13) If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business,
other than an adult motel, which shall exhibit on the premises, in a
viewing room or booth of less than 150 square feet of floor space,
films, videoscassettes, other video reproductions, or live
entertainment which depict specified sexually activities or
specified anatomical areas, then the applicant shall comply with
the application requirements set forth in § 143-14.
F. Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business
employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by
the Township the following information:
(1) The applicant's name or any other name (including stage names) or
aliases used by the individual;
(2) Age, date, and place of birth;
(3) Height, weight, hair and eye color;
(4) Present residence address and telephone number;
(5) Present business and address and telephone number;
(6) Date, issuing state and number of driver's permit or other
identification card information;
(7) Social security number; and
(8) Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
G. Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business
employee license, as provided above, shall be the following:
§ 143-4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 143-4
1:430
§ 143-5. Issuance of license.
(1) A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's
face, and the applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the
Police Department. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints
shall be paid by the applicant.
(2) A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the
five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application, including whether such applicant previously operated
or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, municipality, or
state, a sexually oriented business, or has ever had a license,
permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or
suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit
denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial,
revocation, or suspension, state the name, the name of the issuing
or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason for the
denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial,
revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application.
(3) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted, or is
awaiting trial on pending charges, of a specified criminal activity as
defined in this chapter and, if so, the specified criminal activity
involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each.
A. Upon the filing of said application for a sexually oriented business
employee license, the Township shall issue a temporary license to said
applicant. The application shall then be referred to the appropriate
Township departments for an investigation to be made on such
information as is contained on the application. The application process
shall be completed within 45 days from the date the completed
application is filed. After the investigation, the Township shall issue a
license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that
one or more of the following findings is true:
(1) The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form;
(2) The applicant is under the age of 18 years;
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity as
defined in this chapter;
(4) The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for
employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute,
rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this
chapter; or
(5) The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee
license revoked by the Township within two years of the date of the
current application. If the sexually oriented business employee
§ 143-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-5
1:431
license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is
immediately deemed null and void. Denial, suspension, or
revocation of a license issued pursuant to this subsection shall be
subject to appeal as set forth in § 143-10.
B. A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to annual
renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by
the Township that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified
criminal activity as defined in this chapter or committed any act during
the existence of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny
the initial license application. The renewal of the license shall be
subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in § 143-6.
C. Within 45 days after receipt of a completed sexually oriented business
application, the Township shall approve or deny the issuance of a
license to an applicant. The Township shall approve the issuance of a
license to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of
the evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
(1) An applicant is under 18 years of age.
(2) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing is
overdue in payment to the Township of taxes, fees, fines, or
penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in relation to
any business.
(3) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form.
(4) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has
been denied a license by the Township to operate a sexually
oriented business within the preceding 12 months or whose license
to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the
preceding 12 months.
(5) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has
been convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this
chapter.
(6) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not
been approved by the Health Department, Fire Department, and
the Building Official as being in compliance with applicable laws
and ordinances.
(7) The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
(8) An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
D. The license, if granted shall state on its face the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the
sexually oriented business and the classification for which the license is
§ 143-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 143-5
1:432
§ 143-6. Fees.
§ 143-7. Inspection.
§ 143-8. Expiration of license.
issued pursuant to § 143-3. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that
they may be easily read at any time.
E. The Health Department, Fire Department, and the Building Official
shall complete their certification that the premises is in compliance or
not in compliance within 45 days of receipt of the application by the
Township.
F. A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one
classification as found in § 143-3.
A. Every application for a sexually oriented business license (whether for a
new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable application and investigation fee. These fees are
used to help offset the costs associated with processing and awarding
these licenses. The fee shall be $1,200, and may be changed by
resolution of the Township Board of Trustees.
B. In addition to the application and investigation fee required above,
every sexually oriented business that is granted a license (new or
renewal) shall pay to the Township an annual nonrefundable license fee
within 30 days of license issuance or renewal. The license fee shall be
$150, unless modified by resolution of the Township Board of Trustees.
C. Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license
(whether for a new license or for renewal of an existing license) shall be
accompanied by an annual nonrefundable application, investigation,
and license fee; the amount of said fee shall be $150, unless modified by
resolution of the Township Board of Trustees.
D. All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the Clerk of the
Township.
A. An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Police
Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Zoning
Department, or other Township departments or agents to inspect the
premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring
compliance with the law, at any time occupied or open for business.
B. A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or
employee commits a misdemeanor if he refuses to permit such lawful
inspection of the premises at any time it is open for business.
A. Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in § 143-4. Application
§ 143-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-8
1:433
§ 143-9. Suspension.
The Township shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it
determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
§ 143-10. Revocation.
for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date,
and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the
expiration of the license will not be affected.
B. When the Township denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not
be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent
to denial, the Township finds that the basis for denial of the renewal
license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a
license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became
final
A. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter; or
B. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter.
A. The Township shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in § 143-9
occurs and the license has been previously suspended within the
preceding 12 months.
B. The Township shall revoke a license if it determines that:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
(2) A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of
controlled substances on the premises;
(3) A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
(4) A licensee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business
during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
(5) Except in the case of an adult motel, a licensee has knowingly
allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed
premises; or
(6) A licensee is delinquent in payment to the municipality, county, or
state for any taxes or fees past due.
C. When the Township revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for
one year, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented
business license for one year from the date the revocation became
effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the Township finds that the basis
for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be
§ 143-8 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 143-10
1:434
§ 143-11. Transfer of license.
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee
operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address designated in the application.
§ 143-12. Location of sexually oriented businesses.
§ 143-13. Adult motels.
§ 143-14. Exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live
entertainment in viewing rooms.
granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the
revocation became effective.
D. After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application,
or suspension or revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee
may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in any
court of competent jurisdiction. The administrative action shall be
promptly reviewed by the court.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a
sexually oriented business other than in a district, location and manner
permitted, defined and described in the Township of Northville Zoning
Code.57
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the operation, the
substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a
sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually
oriented business.
A. Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial
establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a
period of time that is less than 10 hours creates a rebuttal presumption
that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this
chapter.
B. A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of a
sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment
that does not have a sexually oriented license, he rents or subrents a
sleeping room to a person and, within 10 hours from the time the room
is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again.
C. For purposes of Subsection B of this section, the terms "rent" or
"subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any
form of consideration.
A. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a
57.Editor's Note: See Ch. 170, Zoning.
§ 143-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-14
1:435
viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film,
videocassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction which
depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall
comply with the following requirements:
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented license, the application
shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations
and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating
any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted.
A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area.
The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will
be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared
diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall
not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the
north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn
to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show
the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The Township
may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the
applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and
certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered
since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station
may be made without the prior approval of the Township.
(4) It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least
one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's
station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of
every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
for any purpose, excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain
video-reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more
manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises
shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations.
The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight
from the manager's station.
(6) It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area
specified in Subsection A(5) remains unobstructed by any doors,
curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted
access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an
§ 143-14 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 143-14
1:436
§ 143-15. Escort agencies.
§ 143-16. Nude model studios.
area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed
pursuant to Subsection A(1) of this section.
(7) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any
time.
(8) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than five footcandles
as measured at the floor level.
(9) It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present in the premises.
(10)No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between
viewing rooms or booths.
(11)No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind
between viewing booths or rooms.
(12) The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the
walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or
holes exist.
(13) The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be
nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
(14) The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in
viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by,
nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood,
composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48
inches of the floor.
B. A person having a duty under subsections (1) through (14) of
Subsection A above commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly fails to
fulfill that duty.
A. An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
B. A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to
act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years.
A. A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18
years.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to appear
seminude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model
§ 143-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-16
1:437
§ 143-17. Public nudity.
§ 143-18. Prohibition against children in sexually oriented
business.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly allow a person under the
age of 18 years on the premises of a sexually oriented business.
§ 143-19. Hours of operation.
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open
at any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 am. on weekdays and
Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sundays.
§ 143-20. Exemptions.
It is a defense to prosecution under § 143-17 that a person appearing in a
state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person
under 18 years was in a rest room not open to public view or visible to
any other person.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to appear in a state of nudity, or to
knowingly allow another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a
nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public rightof-
way.
D. A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in
any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a
reception room open to the public.
A. It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly and intentionally,
in a sexually oriented business, appears in a state of nudity or depicts
specified sexual activities.
B. It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly or intentionally
in a sexually oriented business appears in a seminude condition unless
the person is an employee who, while seminude, shall be at least 10 feet
from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet from the
floor.
C. It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while seminude in a sexually
oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or
customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to
any employee, while said employee is seminude in a sexually oriented
business.
D. It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while seminude, to touch a
customer or the clothing of a customer.
§ 143-16 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 143-20
1:438
§ 143-21. Penalties.
Any person, corporation, partnership or any other legal entity who violates
the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be
fined not more than $500 and/or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or
both, in the discretion of the Court.
Chapter 145
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 58.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 60.
Design and construction standards — See Ch.
72.
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 145-1. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all persons, firms, partnerships, associations and
corporations owning, occupying or having control or management of any
premises located within the Charter Township of Northville.
§ 145-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to regulate outdoor advertising and all signs
within the Township. These regulations are intended to enhance the
physical appearance of the Township, to preserve scenic and natural beauty,
and to create an attractive economic and business climate. The following
objectives are accomplished by establishing the minimum amount of
A. By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of Michigan or a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
B. By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
C. In a structure:
(1) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for
viewing;
(2) Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class; and
(3) Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
§ 143-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-2
1:439
regulation necessary regarding the size, placement, construction,
illumination and other sign aspects in order to:
§ 145-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ABANDONED SIGN — An obsolete sign that exists for a period of 180
consecutive days.
AWNING/CANOPY SIGN — A nonrigid fabric, Plexiglas or similar material
attached to a building by a supporting framework, and includes a business
identification message, symbol and/or logo.
BANNER — A piece of cloth, canvas, plastic or other nonrigid material used
to display any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs, artwork, graphics
or trademarks used to convey a message or attract attention to an individual
firm, profession, business, product or message and is visible to the general
public.
A. Recognize the proliferation of signs is unduly distracting to motorists
and nonmotorized travelers, reduces the effectiveness of signs
directing and warning the public, causes confusion, reduces desired
uniform traffic flow and creates potential for accidents.
B. Eliminate potential conflicts between business signs and traffic control
signs, which could create confusion and hazardous consequences.
C. Recognize the principal intent of commercial signs is for identification
of an establishment on the premises, not for advertising special events,
brand names or off-premises activities.
D. Enable the public to locate goods, services and facilities without
excessive confusion by restricting the number and placement of signs.
E. Prevent placement of signs which will conceal or obscure signs of
adjacent uses.
F. Protect the public right to receive messages, especially noncommercial
messages such as religious, political, economic, social, philosophical
and other types of information protected by the First Amendment of the
U.S. Constitution.
G. Prevent off-premises signs from conflicting with land uses.
H. Maintain and improve the image of the Township by encouraging signs
of consistent size which are complementary to related buildings and
uses and are harmonious with their surroundings.
I. Prevent signs that are potentially dangerous to the public due to
structural deficiencies or disrepair.
J. Prohibit certain types of signs due to the negative impact on traffic
safety and aesthetics.
§ 145-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 145-3
1:440
BOX, CAPSULE OR PANEL SIGN — An internally illuminated sign enclosed
within a cabinet or cover encompassing the sign.
BUILDING FRONTAGE — When used to determine the permitted area of a
sign, the length of the building on which the sign will be located, or amount
of the facade occupied by a tenant, as measured parallel to the ground.
Recessed or projecting building elements shall not constitute the building
frontage.
CONSTRUCTION/MARKETING SIGN — A temporary ground or wall sign
listing the name of the project, developer, contractors, engineer or
architects and located on a site being developed.
FACADE — The exterior walls of a building exposed to public view.
FESTOON SIGN — A sign where incandescent light bulbs, banners,
pennants or other such features are hung overhead and are not an integral,
physical part of the building or structure they are intended to serve.
FLASHING, ANIMATED OR MOVING SIGNS — A sign that intermittently
reflects lights from an artificial source, or the sun; a sign which has
movement of any illumination such as intermittent, flashing, scintillating
or varying intensity; a sign that has any visible motion caused by either
artificial or natural sources.
GROUND SIGN — A freestanding sign, not attached to any building,
supported by more than one brace or a single base.
HOME OCCUPATION SIGN — A sign used to advertise an occupation
customarily conducted in a dwelling unit that is clearly an incidental and
secondary use of a residential dwelling.
ILLUMINATED SIGN — A sign illuminated by a direct or indirect source of
light.
INFLATABLE SIGN — A sign that is expanded to its full dimension or
supported by gases contained within the sign or sign parts, at a pressure
greater than the atmospheric pressure.
MARQUEE SIGN — A sign which is attached to or hung from a rooflike
structure and projects over a building entrance. A canopy or awning sign
shall not be considered a marquee sign.
NATURAL MATERIALS — For the purpose of this chapter, substances
determined to be natural materials include, but are not limited to, wood,
stone and brick. Plywood, pressed board, drywall, concrete block, poured
concrete, wood or metal paneling, steel, aluminum or alloys thereof, sheet
metal, or similar substances synthetically created in a manufacturing
process are generally excluded by this definition, although consideration
will be given to synthetic materials which simulate the appearance of
natural materials through the manufacturing process and meet the intent of
this chapter.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any advertising structure or sign which was
lawfully erected and maintained prior to the effective date of this chapter,
§ 145-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-3
1:441
and any amendments thereto, and fails to conform to all applicable
regulations and restrictions of this chapter.
OBSOLETE SIGN — A sign which does not meet the provisions of this
chapter or does not identify or advertise a bona fide business, tenant, owner,
activity conducted or product available on the premises where the sign is
displayed.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which is not accessory to the principal use
of the premises.
ON-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which pertains to the principal use of the
premises.
PAINTED WALL SIGN — A sign, containing any words, numeral, figures,
devices, designs, artwork, graphics or trademarks, painted directly on any
outside wall, roof or glass surface of any building.
POLE (PYLON) SIGN — A sign located in the ground and having at least 10
feet between the bottom of the sign face and the established grade.
PORTABLE SIGN — Any sign which is not permanently affixed to a building,
structure or the ground, including, but not limited to, sandwich board signs,
A-frame signs, inverted "T" signs and signs attached to a mobile vehicle
or person. This does not include temporary, real estate, construction, and
similar signs defined herein.
PROJECTING SIGN — A sign attached to a building or other structure and
extending more than 12 inches beyond the building line or extending into
the right-of-way.
REAL ESTATE DEVELOPMENT SIGN — A temporary sign placed on the
premises of a residential or nonresidential development to indicate a
proposed project or information relative to availability.
REAL ESTATE/MARKETING SIGN — A temporary sign placed upon a
property and advertising it for sale, rent or lease.
REGULATORY SIGN — A sign that complies with the Michigan Manual
of Uniform Traffic Control Devices to direct traffic flow, regulate traffic
operations and provide information.
RESIDENTIAL ENTRY SIGN — A sign located on a major thoroughfare and
serving as the entrance marker to a residential development.
SIGN — Any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs, artwork, graphics
or trademarks used to convey a message or attract attention to an individual
firm, profession, business, product or message and is visible to the general
public.
SIGN AREA — Measured as the total area of a sign included within the
rectangle caused by encompassing the outermost edges of letters or
symbols and including the area within any illuminated border.
SNIPE SIGN — A sign with advertising that is not applicable to the present
use of the premises upon which the sign is located, such as a sign tacked,
§ 145-3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 145-3
1:442
nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to the ground, trees,
poles, stakes, or fences or to other objects.
SWINGING SIGN — A sign that is not rigidly attached to an arm, mast, spar
or building overhang.
TEMPORARY SIGN — A sign with or without letters or numerals such
as marketing signs, construction signs, signs related to an election or to
identify seasonal events, public and semipublic functions.
TIME-TEMPERATURE SIGN — A sign used to display the current time and
outdoor temperature.
VEHICLE SIGN — A sign that is painted or attached to a vehicle, trailer
or other similar device and parked or placed primarily for advertising
purposes.
WALL SIGN — A sign erected or fastened to the wall of a building and
having the exposed face of the sign parallel to the plane of the wall; not
extending more than 12 inches beyond the surface of the portion of the
building wall on which it is erected or fastened.
WINDOW SIGN — Any sign or display that is visible from the exterior of any
building window.
WINDOW SIGN, TEMPORARY — Any sign which is not permanently applied,
affixed or attached to the interior or exterior of any building window and is
constructed of lightweight cardboard, cloth, plastic or paper materials and
intended to be displayed for special events, sales and notices.
§ 145-4. General prohibitions.
A. No signs shall constitute a traffic hazard or interfere with the visibility
of any traffic control device due to its size, location, context, color or
manner of illumination.
B. No sign shall have any visible moving parts, visible mechanical
movement or any other apparent visible movement achieved by
electrical, electronic, or kinetic means, intermittent electrical
pulsations or wind currents.
C. A sign that does not meet the provisions of this chapter or does not
identify or advertise a bona fide business, tenant, owner, activity
conducted or product available on the premises where the sign is
displayed shall be considered an obsolete sign. When such a sign exists
for a period of 180 consecutive days, it shall conclusively be presumed
to be abandoned and shall be removed.
D. No sign shall be placed so as to obstruct any fire escape, required exit,
window or door opening used as a means of passage from one part of a
roof to another or as access for fire-fighting purposes.
E. The following signs shall not be permitted and are subject to removal.
(1) Festoon signs.
§ 145-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-4
1:443
§ 145-5. Exemptions.
The following nonilluminated signs shall be permitted in all sign districts
without obtaining a permit prior to installation:
(2) Flashing, animated or moving signs.
(3) Inflatable signs.
(4) Portable signs.
(5) Projecting signs.
(6) Snipe signs.
(7) Pole/pylon signs.
(8) Off-premises signs.
(9) Temporary window signs.
(10) Marquee signs.
(11) Obsolete and abandoned signs.
(12) Banners.
(13) Sandwich board signs.
(14) Internally illuminated awnings or canopies.
(15) Internally illuminated panel and box signs with light reflective
backgrounds.
(16) Home occupation signs.
(17) Vehicle signs.
(18) Awning/canopy signs.
(19) Swinging signs.
(20) Painted wall signs.
(21) Signs on gas station canopies.
(22) Billboards.
(23) Time-temperature signs.
(24) Any other sign not specifically permitted.
A. Regulatory and street signs.
B. Decorative displays for holidays, public demonstrations, promotions,
civic welfare or charitable purposes when authorized by the Township
§ 145-4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 145-5
1:444
Board, provided that the display does not contain any advertising
material.
C. Name plates or directory signs, defined as a sign located at the
pedestrian entry of a building listing occupants and tenants inside a
building or the address, provided that:
(1) Signs are limited to one per building unless the building has more
than one entrance or direct frontage on more than one public
thoroughfare, in which case two signs are permitted.
(2) Signs shall not be larger than two square feet in area.
(3) For developments with multiple buildings, the style of the name
plate or directory sign shall be consistent.
(4) See Chapter 60 of the Northville Charter Township Code of
Ordinances, Buildings, Numbering of.
D. Municipal signs installed or approved by the Township Board. This may
include legal notices, emergency signs, special events or other signs
sanctioned by the Township.
E. Flags bearing the official design of the United States, State of Michigan,
a public educational institution, or official design of a corporation or
award flags provided:
(1) No more than three different flags are permitted on any single lot
of record.
(2) In Sign Districts C, E and all other areas not identified below, flags
are limited to a maximum size of 40 square feet and flagpoles are
limited to 30 feet tall.
(3) In Sign Districts A, B and D, flags are limited to a maximum size of
60 square feet, and flagpoles are limited to 35 feet tall.
F. Flags to market new developments, or homes within residential
districts, shall not contain any advertisement, names of individual firms,
builders, etc., but may state "open," "model" or other similar message.
Such flags shall be limited to two per driveway or development
entrance and may only be displayed during business hours.
G. Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when
signs are cut into a masonry surface or constructed of bronze or other
noncombustible material.
H. Institutional bulletin boards used to display the name and
announcements of a religious institution, school, library, community
center or similar institutions, provided that:
(1) Total sign area is less than 16 square feet.
§ 145-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-5
1:445
(2) The sign is located at least 20 feet from any property line or rightof-
way.
I. Real estate signs advertising the sale, rental or lease of the property in
residential districts provided that:
(1) The sign is located on the lot or in front of the unit for sale.
(2) One sign is permitted.
(3) The sign shall not exceed six square feet in area.
(4) The sign shall be placed at least 10 feet from the edge of the road
right-of-way or easement.
(5) Signs shall be removed within seven days after the property has
been sold, rented or leased.
(6) For signs advertising the general availability of units for sale, rent
or lease within multiple-family development projects, signs
advertising such may be added to the approved ground/entrance
sign as a changeable message, provided that the following
standards are met:
(a) The changeable message component of the sign must be
complementary, in terms of materials and color, to the ground
sign upon which it is attached.
(b) The sign may not be internally illuminated.
(c) The sign shall not occupy more than 10% of the permanent
sign area.
(d) The area devoted to the changeable message component may
be in addition to the allowable sign area.
(7) Temporary signs for the purpose of advertising residential open
houses, provided that the following standards are met:
(a) Sign area shall not exceed six feet in area.
(b) Signs shall be located outside of the public right-of-way or
easement and shall not create a traffic hazard to motorists or
pedestrians.
(c) Signs are permitted for one day.
J. Informational signs, attached to a building and of a size and scale
intended to be viewed by pedestrians, such as but not limited to menus,
hours of operation, etc., provided that:
(1) One sign is permitted.
(2) Signs are limited to eight square feet in area.
§ 145-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 145-5
1:446
§ 145-6. Standards for signs in any sign district.
(3) Signs shall not exceed six feet in height.
K. Garage sale signs in residential districts, provided that:
(1) Signs are permitted for a maximum of three days.
(2) Sign area shall not exceed a total of six square feet.
(3) Signs shall be located outside of the public right-of-way or
easement and shall not create a traffic hazard to motorists or
pedestrians.
L. Temporary now-hiring signs for new businesses, provided that:
(1) Sign area complies with the sign area permitted for the sign
district.
(2) Signs are not erected more than 60 days before the store is opened
and removed seven days after the store opening.
(3) Signs are located on the inside of the window.
M. Temporary signs related to an election, to identify seasonal events or
civic functions, provided that:
(1) Signs shall not be placed more than 60 days before the event or
cause it advertises or supports and must be removed seven days
after the event advertised or supported has occurred.
(2) Signs shall not be located within a public right-of-way.
(3) In Sign Zones A, B, C, D and E, the sign shall not exceed 16 square
feet in area or four feet in height.
(4) In all other sign zones, the sign shall not exceed six square feet in
area or 2 1/2 feet in height.
A. No signs, except those established by Northville Township, Wayne
County, state or federal governments, shall be located in, project into,
or overhang a public right-of-way or dedicated public easement.
B. Sign area.
(1) Sign area for wall and window signs shall be measured as the total
area of a sign included within the rectangle created by
encompassing the outermost edges of letters or symbols and
including the area within any illuminated border. An area so
created shall include all solid surfaces as well as openings.
(2) The sign area for ground signs shall include the entire face upon
which copy can be located. Uprights or supports shall not be
included in the area calculation.
§ 145-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-6
1:447
(3) Sign area is the total permitted, not per side of the sign, unless
otherwise noted.
C. Panel or box signs must have dark backgrounds with light reflecting
letters.
D. No more than four colors shall be used for letters and logos. Graduated
color changes within a single color range, black and white are not
considered additional colors.
E. Illumination.
(1) Unless otherwise noted herein, signs may be lighted. Lighting shall
comply with the lighting standards contained in Chapter 170,
Zoning.
(2) Signs may be either internally illuminated or indirectly illuminated,
not both.
(3) Illumination levels of externally illuminated signs shall not exceed
30 footcandles as measured at the sign.
(4) Illumination levels of internally illuminated signs shall not exceed
20 footcandles as measured five feet from the face of the sign.
(5) Lights shall be stationary and of reasonable intensity, shielded and
directed solely to illuminate the sign.
(6) Light sources shall be shielded from all adjacent residential
districts, buildings and streets and shall not be of such brightness
as to cause glare that is hazardous to pedestrians or vehicles or
create a nuisance.
(7) Ground-mounted luminaries, when used for externally illuminated
signs, shall have internal or external light control louvers. Louvers
shall be designed and installed to confine 90% of the light to the
sign. Additional external louvers or barn-door-style louvers shall be
specified, if required to control light spill.
(8) Luminaries shall be located so they do not block the sign.
(9) Metal halide, fluorescent, compact fluorescent or LED light sources
shall be used for sign lighting. Incandescent or halogen lamps are
not permitted.
(10) Exposed, uncovered neon tubing, an open spark or flame are not
permitted.
F. Ground signs.
(1) Signs shall be located at least 10 feet from the road right-of-way or
easement.
§ 145-6 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 145-6
1:448
(2) Signs must be at least 50 feet from an adjacent residential zoning
district.
(3) Signs must maintain a clear vision triangle measured 25 feet from
the intersection of the right-of-way or easement. Ground signs shall
not inhibit the vision of motorists and pedestrians. In the case of an
internal access drive or private road, the twenty-five-foot clear
vision triangle shall be measured from the edge of the pavement.
(4) The sign area shall include the entire face upon which copy can be
located and including the area within any illuminated border.
Uprights or supports shall not be included in the area calculation.
(5) Internally illuminated signs must contain individual letters, except
panel or box signs may be permitted for multiple tenant signs
which include signs for three or more businesses or tenants.
(6) Indirect illumination is preferred by means of backlighting or
provided from the side or top of the sign. If ground lights are used,
the height shall not exceed 12 inches and not interfere with the
content of the sign. Ground-mounted lights must be screened from
view by vegetation or other means.
(7) The material used for the sign base, and/or supports, must match
or be complementary to the building materials used on the site. The
base or supports must comprise at least 75% of the sign width.
(8) The base of all ground signs must be planted with a combination of
low shrubs and flowers.
(9) The height of a ground sign is measured from the level of the
ground at the nearest property line to the highest point of the sign
structure, including any supportive or decorative appendages.
Signs shall not be located on top of a berm or other elevations to
artificially increase the height.
(10) For multiple tenant developments within Sign Districts A, B, C and
D, the ground sign may contain the name of the development and
individual tenants, provided that:
(a) The sign area complies with the sign area permitted for the
sign district.
(b) Signs shall consist of individual letters, except signs
advertising three or more businesses or tenants may utilize
panel- or box-style signs.
(c) Panel- or box-style signs shall be the same color and style and
have dark backgrounds with light-colored letters.
(11) For multiple-tenant developments within District E, the area of the
ground sign shall not exceed 48 square feet and may contain the
name of the development and individual tenants, provided that:
§ 145-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-6
1:449
(a) Signs shall consist of individual letters, except signs
advertising three or more businesses or tenants may utilize
panel- or box-style signs.
(b) Panel- or box-style signs shall be the same color and style and
have dark backgrounds with light-colored letters.
(12) Additional ground signs may be permitted in accordance with the
following standards:
(a) A corner lot may have two ground signs, provided that the total
lineal frontage of the lot is at least 300 feet.
(b) An additional sign shall be allowed for each 300 lineal feet of
frontage, after the first 300 feet, along a major public
thoroughfare.
(c) If more than one sign is used, each sign shall be no greater
than 80% of the size permitted for one sign. For example, if 90
square feet is permitted for one sign, the size for multiple signs
shall not exceed 72 square feet per sign.
(13) Building addresses must be provided on each nonresidential
ground sign. The portion of the sign allocated for the address shall
not be counted against the allowable sign area.
G. Wall signs.
(1) Signs must be installed at least eight feet above the ground level or
sidewalk, whichever is higher.
(2) Signs shall not extend more than 12 inches beyond the surface of
the portion of the wall on which it is erected or fastened.
(3) Signs shall not extend higher than the roofline. If a sign is proposed
to be mounted to a mansard roof, the center line of the wall sign
shall correspond with the center line of the mansard roof.
(4) Signs mounted on a building shall not project above the highest
point used to measure the height of the building.
(5) Signs shall be located within the building's architectural elements,
such as a gabled roof.
(6) Signs shall be located on the front of the building and used only to
display the name of the firm, the address or a symbol or type of
business.
(7) Signs shall utilize individual internally illuminated letters. Box or
panel signs are not permitted, except a box or panel "capsule" may
be permitted, provided that the size does not exceed 15% of the
allowable sign area and is included in the total allowable sign area
calculation.
§ 145-6 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 145-6
1:450
(8) If the sign letters are attached to an exposed electrical raceway, the
raceway must match the color of the wall to which it is fastened.
(9) For the purpose of measuring sign area, the frontage shall be
defined as the plane of the building, or tenant space, in which the
sign will be located. Recessed or projecting building elements shall
not constitute the building frontage.
(10) One wall sign is permitted per zoning lot or per tenant of a
multiple-tenant building. An additional wall sign may be permitted
at the discretion of the Planning Commission, for the following
circumstances:
(a) Where a nonresidential building is oriented such that more
than one side of the building can be seen from a road, provided
that the sign is less than 60% of the maximum sign area
allowed or each sign is no greater than 80% of the size
permitted for the sign district in which it is located.
(b) Where a nonresidential property abuts the I-275 right-of-way,
provided that the sign does not exceed the maximum area
permitted for the sign on the front of the building. Perspective
or section drawings may be required to demonstrate visibility.
(11) The maximum allowable wall sign area may be increased in
accordance with the table below. The distance is calculated based
on the closest point of any portion of the building, or tenant space,
to the right-of-way. The maximum increase using this provision
shall be 250 square feet.
Distance From the Future ROW
(feet) Allowable Increase
200 to 300 25%
301 to 400 30%
401 to 500 35%
Greater than 501 feet 40%
H. Window signs (permanent).
(1) Permanent window signs are permitted in addition to allowed wall
or ground signs.
(2) Except as noted below, window signs shall not be illuminated.
(3) Interior window signs designating a business establishment as
"open" and having exposed neon, or the appearance of exposed
neon, shall be permitted as part of the allowable window sign area.
The size of the "open" sign shall not exceed three square feet.
I. Directional signs, used to direct vehicular and pedestrian traffic within
the interior of a site, provided that:
§ 145-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-6
1:451
(1) The number of signs shall be limited to two per lot, unless
otherwise granted as determined by the traffic engineer.
(2) Signs shall be planned, coordinated and approved for an entire site,
not at the requests of individual tenants.
(3) The sign is placed behind the front yard parking setback.
(4) Signs are not used as driveway identification markers, except in the
case of a one-way drive as determined by the traffic engineer.
(5) The sign is less than four feet tall.
(6) The sign does not exceed three square feet per side.
(7) Signs are not used solely for advertising.
(8) Signs are not illuminated.
J. Menu and/or order boards intended to serve patrons using drivethrough
facilities, provided that:
(1) Signs shall be located on the interior of the lot and shall not be
legible from the exterior of the site.
(2) Signs shall be intended only to service the public utilizing the drivethrough
facility.
(3) The placement, size, color or illumination shall not constitute a
traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular or pedestrian
traffic.
K. Residential entrance signs shall not exceed a total of 60 square feet and
must be illuminated by indirect illumination.
L. Real estate/marketing signs for nonresidential properties and signs
identifying new development or construction, provided that:
(1) Sign shall be limited to one sign per entrance or street frontage for
ground signs.
(2) Ground signs shall not exceed 32 square feet per side.
(3) Ground signs shall not exceed eight feet in height.
(4) Ground signs shall be set back at least 10 feet from the road rightof-
way or easement.
(5) For window signs, the sign area shall comply with the sign area
permitted for the sign district.
(6) Signs advertising the sale, rent or lease of nonresidential buildings
shall be permitted for a maximum of 60 days and must be removed
within seven days after the property has been sold, rented or
leased. Signs removed then reinstalled or signs that become used
§ 145-6 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 145-6
1:452
§ 145-7. Schedule of Sign Regulations.
The Schedule of Sign Regulations is included at the end of this chapter.
NOTE: The standards for signs in any district are located in § 145-6.
§ 145-8. Nonconforming signs.
If, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, a lawful
sign exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this
chapter as enacted or amended, such signs may be retained in use, so long
as it remains otherwise lawful. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed
to prevent the normal maintenance or repair of a nonconforming sign. A
nonconforming sign:
§ 145-9. Permits and application procedures.
as permanent signs shall not be permitted and will be required to
be removed.
A. Shall not be changed to another type of sign which is not in compliance
with this chapter.
B. Shall not be structurally altered in any way so as to prolong the life of
the sign or to change the shape, size, type, face or design of the sign.
C. Shall not be reestablished after the sign becomes an abandoned sign.
D. Shall not be reestablished after damage or destruction if the estimated
expense of reconstruction exceeds 50% of the appraised replacement
cost, as determined by the Chief Building Official.
A. No person shall alter, relocate, erect, or construct a sign without a
permit issued by the Township Building Department pursuant to the
following procedures. Signs that are exempt from the regulations of this
chapter do not require permits.
B. Application for permit.
(1) Copies of the application, plans and supplemental information shall
be filed with the Township Building Department, together with the
permit and inspection fees as established by resolution of the
Township Board.
(2) Applications shall include following requirements:
(a) A site plan drawn to a scale not greater than one inch equals
fifty feet.
(b) The location of existing and proposed sign(s) and all existing
and proposed structures within 200 feet of the sign(s).
§ 145-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-9
1:453
§ 145-10. Appeals and variances
(c) Dimensions, including the lettering, spaces and overall height,
width and area of the sign surface.
(d) A color representation of the sign.
(e) Method and color of illumination, if any.
(f) A photometric plan to illustrate light levels on, and around, the
sign.
(g) The total building wall and dimension, for wall signs.
(h) The total window dimensions for window signs.
(i) A landscape plan that identifies shrubs and flowers around the
base of the sign.
(j) Additional information the Planning Department, Planning
Commission or Chief Building Official deems necessary and/or
pertinent to the application.
C. Upon receipt of all necessary submissions, the Planning Department
shall review the application for conformity with the requirements of this
chapter. A permit shall be issued by the Building Department for a sign
that meets the requirements set forth in this chapter. Approval may be
conditioned upon compliance with reasonable regulations or limitations
having regard to the character of the sign, the surroundings in which it
is to be displayed, and the purposes of this chapter. A permit shall not
be assigned or transferred in any manner, whatsoever, if the sign or
signs covered by the permit are to be altered.
D. Any permit may be suspended by the Chief Building Official or the
Director of Community Development for the following reasons:
(1) Any provision of this chapter is being violated.
(2) Any condition of the permit is not being observed.
(3) It is necessary to preserve or protect public health, safety, or
welfare.
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have power to hear and decide
appeals resulting from the enforcement of this chapter where it is
alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Chief Building Official or any
other administrative official. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall take
action after a public hearing. A written notice of the time and place of
such public hearing shall be mailed to the owners of all lots or parcels of
land, or portion thereof, lying within 300 feet of the property in
question. Such notice shall be served by regular mail, at least seven
days prior to the date of the hearing.
§ 145-9 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 145-10
1:454
§ 145-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
B. A variance may be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals only in cases
involving practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships when the
evidence supports all the following affirmative findings:
(1) The alleged hardships or practical difficulties, or both, are
exceptional and peculiar to the property of the person requesting
the variance and result from conditions which do not exist
generally throughout the township.
(2) The alleged hardships and practical difficulties, or both, which will
result from a failure to grant the variance, include substantially
more than mere inconvenience or mere inability to attain a higher
financial return.
(3) Allowing the variance will result in substantial justice being done,
considering the public benefits intended to be secured by this
chapter, the individual hardships that will be suffered by a failure of
the ZBA to grant a variance, and the rights of others whose
property would be affected by the allowance of the variance, and
will not be contrary to the public purpose and general intent and
purpose of this chapter.
A. When, in the opinion of the Chief Building Official, Director of
Community Development or the ordinance officer, a violation of this
chapter exists, the township shall issue a written order to the alleged
violator. The order shall specify those sections of this chapter which the
individual has violated. If the violator desires to appeal the decision, a
request for a hearing from the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be made
within 30 days. If the board of appeals upholds the determination of the
Chief Building Official, Director of Community Development or the
Ordinance Officer, the individual must correct the violation within 30
days of the decision by the ZBA.
B. If the Chief Building Official finds that a sign is abandoned or
structurally, materially or electrically defective, or in any way
endangers the public, the Chief Building Official shall issue a written
order to the sign owner and occupant of the premises stating the nature
of the violation and requiring the sign to be repaired or removed within
30 days of the date of the order.
C. In cases of emergency, the Chief Building Official may cause the
immediate removal of a dangerous or defective sign without notice.
Signs removed in this manner must present a hazard to the public
safety as provided in the Township's Building Code.58
D. Any person who violates a provision of this chapter or who fails to
comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 58, Building Construction.
§ 145-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-11
1:455
Chapter 149
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hazardous waste cleanup — See Ch. 90.
Landfills — See Ch. 101.
Littering — See Ch. 106.
construct, alter or repair a sign in violation of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction. Each day that a violation
continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense subject to the following penalties:
(1) The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination
of responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different
fine is specified in connection with a particular section:
(a) First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be
in the amount of not less than $150, plus costs and other
sanctions, for each offense.
(b) Repeat offense. The fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $300, plus costs
and other sanctions of each offense.
(2) In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible
for a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages
and expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue
any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or enjoin violation
of this chapter.
(3) Each act of violation, and on each day upon which any such
violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
(4) In addition to any remedies provided for by the Code of Ordinances,
any equitable or other remedies available may be sought.
§ 145-11 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 145-11
1:456
ARTICLE I
Collection and Recycling
[Adopted 7-11-1991 as Subchapter F of Ch. 61 of the Code of
Ordinances]
§ 149-1. Purpose and findings:
§ 149-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in the interpretation of this article:
APPLICANT — An individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation
or association.
ASHES — The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, refuse,
wastewater sludge or other combustible material.
CLERK — The duly elected or acting Clerk of the Charter Township of
Northville.
COMPOSTABLES — Leaves, grass clippings, brush, wood debris under 2 1/
2 inches in diameter, lumber, pallets, vegetative pruning, garden waste,
yard waste, Christmas trees and wreaths.
CURBSIDE COLLECTION — The collection of solid waste which has been
placed for pickup in appropriate solid waste receptacles at the side of a
public or private road adjacent to the abutting private property.
GARBAGE — Rejected food wastes, including waste accumulation of animal,
fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that attends the
preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or
vegetable.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health and
welfare by assuring the timely and lawful collection of solid waste from
owners of private property within the Township; and to implement well
articulated public policies regarding the recycling and composting of
certain portions of the waste stream and collection thereof; to provide
for a reasonable system of user fees to defray the costs incurred by the
Township in administering the system. (See Article II, Composting.)
B. Findings. The Board of Trustees of the Charter Township of Northville
finds that regulation of the collection and disposal of solid waste is
necessary to protect the public health and safety; that, under current
circumstances, it is feasible to implement curbside pickup and disposal
of residential recyclable materials, compostables and solid waste and
that such implementation will be most efficiently accomplished by the
Township entering into a contract for provision of such services; and
that, at this time, it is not feasible to require separation of recyclable
materials and compostables from other solid waste for persons using
commercial receptacles for collection of their solid waste.
§ 149-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-2
1:457
PRIVATE COLLECTOR — Any person, persons, firm, partnership or
corporation to whom has been issued a private collector's license. This term
shall not refer to the Charter Township of Northville's contractor.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those items listed in § 149-5B.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible waste, including paper, cardboard, metal
containers, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, demolished building materials
or litter of any kind that may be a detriment to the public health and safety.
SOLID WASTE HAULER — A person who owns or operates a solid waste
transporting unit.
SOLID WASTE TRANSPORTING UNIT — A mechanical collection and
storage facility capable of transporting solid waste from two or more
residential dwelling units, which may be an integral part of a truck or other
piece of equipment used for the transportation of solid waste.
SUPERVISOR — The duly elected or acting supervisor of the Charter
Township of Northville
TOWNSHIP CONTRACTOR — A private individual, firm, partnership or
corporation collecting and disposing of municipal solid waste pursuant to
a duly authorized and executed agreement or contract with the Charter
Township of Northville, to provide such services at a certain rate or price.
§ 149-3. Administration.
The operation and administration of this article shall be under the direction
of the Township Board.
A. Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Supervisor of the Township,
through their proper agents and officers, to enforce the provisions of
this article, and to make rules and regulations for the administration of
the same.
B. Township contract for solid waste collection; authority of Township to
contract for solid waste collection. Whenever in the judgment of the
Township Board such action may be necessary or advisable, they may
determine to have the Township enter into a contract or contracts, and
to grant a license or licenses to such persons as they may deem best
able to collect solid waste, separated between recyclable and non
recyclable materials, in the Township in accordance with the best
interest of the Township and its citizens. The contract shall be for such
terms as they may determine, but not to exceed in any instance five
years for an nonexclusive contract and two years for an exclusive
contract, and such contract may be, but need not be, exclusive, and the
Township Board may authorize the making on the part of the Township
of one or more contracts and if they determine it necessary, may limit
such contract to a certain part of the Township, or to certain types of
premises, such as residential, commercial, industrial and the like.
§ 149-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 149-3
1:458
C. Contract; award by Board; basis. The contract or contracts shall be
awarded on a competitive basis, and the Board shall be responsible for
the control of lettering and making such contract or contracts. The
procedures established by the Township policies and all ordinances in
connection with the awarding of contracts shall be observed.
D. Contract; bond requirements. Each person entering into a contract with
the Township for the collection and disposal of solid waste shall furnish
the Township with a performance bond in an amount established by the
Township Board and in such form as may be approved by the Township
Attorney, which bond shall be signed by an approved corporate surety
authorized to do business in this state and which bond shall be
conditioned on the satisfactory performance of all obligations assumed
under the particular contact, and further conditioned on the due
observance during the term of the contract of all laws of the state or
ordinances of the Township and all legal rights of all persons who are
served by or injured by the contractor.
E. Contract insurance requirements.
(1) Each Township contractor shall procure and maintain during the
life of the contract owner's and contractor's protective public
liability and property damage insurance, in the name of the
Township, in an amount not less than $3,000,000 for injuries,
including accidental death, to each person; and subject to the same
limit for each person, in an amount not less than $3,000,000 on
account of each accident, and $1,000,000 aggregate for damage to
property.
(a) Such insurance includes motor vehicle exposure and specific
coverage, by endorsement, as required by the Supervisor:
(b) Each Township contractor shall deposit with the Clerk
certificates of insurance indicating this coverage prior to the
execution of the contract.
(2) The Township may require of Township contractors other bonds
and insurance, including worker's compensation insurance, to
insure the Township that the obligations of the contractor will be
sufficiently performed and/or discharged and to protect the
Township in the event that they are not.
F. Contractor's license insurance. The Township Clerk shall issue to the
contractor immediately after the execution of the contract a license,
without charge, to collect solid waste as required by the terms and
conditions of the contract for the period of the contract.
G. License and contact not assignable. No license or contract issued,
granted or entered into, to any Township contractor, under the
provisions of this article, shall be transferable, assignable or sublet
without the express permission of the Township Board in the form of a
resolution, unless otherwise expressly provided in the contract.
§ 149-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-3
1:459
§ 149-4. License required to collect solid waste.
§ 149-5. Recycling of solid waste.
H. Frequency and extent. Except as otherwise provided in this article and
other ordinances, and except in the case of an emergency arising from
an act of God, or under circumstances over which the Township
contractor has or had no control, solid waste shall be collected,
removed and disposed of no less frequently than once each week from
premises to be served by the Township contractor.
I. User charge. If the Township enters into a contract pursuant to this
section, a user charge shall be established by resolution of the
Township Board, and imposed on all residents of the Township, to be
served by such contract reasonably calculated to defray the cost of
providing the service. The charge shall be assessed to each resident
served, and the Township Board has the discretion to include said
charge as part of said residents' water and sewer billing.
A. License required. All solid waste shall be collected from persons or
property within the Township only by a person licensed as a solid waste
hauler by the Township. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as
a solid waste hauler in the Charter Township of Northville without first
obtaining a license as herein provided.
B. Interference with collection. It shall be unlawful for any person other
than Township licensed solid waste haulers, or other authorized
persons to interfere with solid waste haulers, or other authorized
persons to interfere with solid waste placed in the streets, alleys, and
public places of the Charter Township of Northville for collection by
licensed solid waste haulers, or to interfere in any way with solid waste
receptacles in the Charter Township of Northville.
A. General rule. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, possesses,
controls, supervises or occupies private property within the Township
which has available curbside collection of solid waste to commingle
recyclable materials with other solid waste, or to place it out for
collection other than as provided in this section.59
B. Recyclable solid waste. All recyclable material shall be separated from
other garbage and refuse and grouped together and placed for
collection. Recyclable material shall consist of, and be contained as
follows:
(1) Brown, green and clear glass bottles, jars and containers; Ferrous
and nonferrous cans and bottles; and polyethylene terephtalate
(PET) and high-density polyethylene plastics (HDPE) as listed in
Michigan Public Act 414 of 1988, MCL 299.481 et seq., whether or
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 149-3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 149-5
1:460
§ 149-6. Solid waste hauler duties and responsibilities.60
It shall be unlawful for any licensed solid waste hauler to accept from
private property within the Township, which has available curbside
collection of solid waste, recyclable materials commingled with other solid
waste, and to transport recyclable materials to a licensed disposal area
other than a facility for their processing. The solid waste hauler shall
establish and implement a recycling program consisting of weekly curbside
collection of recyclable, transportation and delivery to a materials recovery
facility, and an educational program to advise customers of the benefits of
recycling. The curbside collection of recyclable material shall include the
following:
not labeled in accordance with said Act, are recyclable and shall be
placed together in the approved recycling container and placed out
for collection.
(2) Newsprint. All newsprint shall be bundled or bagged and placed
out for collection. Newsprint shall not be mixed with any other solid
waste.
(3) Compostables shall be placed in approved bags and placed out for
collection.
C. Collection.
(1) Placement for collection. Recyclable materials shall be made
accessible for collection in the same locations as non-recyclable
solid waste.
(2) Time of placement for collection of recyclable refuse. All recyclable
refuse shall be placed for collection at the same time as other solid
waste is placed for collection.
(3) Donation to others. Nothing in this article is intended to prevent
any person from donating or selling recyclable materials to any
person, club, business, civic organization, charitable organization
or any other organization.
A. Providing storage containers. The solid waste haulers shall provide an
in-home recycling container to each customer for the storage of
recyclable materials. The container shall be plastic, and manufactured
using at least 25% recycled materials.
B. Collection of recyclable materials. The solid waste hauler shall collect
all recyclable materials as defined in this article and shall be
responsible for delivering all recyclable materials other than
compostables to a material recovery facility (MRF), or similar recovery
facility other than a landfill or incinerator. Compostables shall be
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 149-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-6
1:461
§ 149-7. Owner responsibility.
No person who is a resident of the Township or who owns, possesses,
controls, supervises or occupies land or premises within the Township
shall cause or permit any solid waste, including recyclable materials, to be
collected from such person or persons' premises by any person other than a
solid waste hauler licensed by the Township.
§ 149-8. Hours of collection.
No solid waste shall be collected from persons or property within five
hundred feet of a residential unit between the hours of 11:00 p.m. of
one day and 6:30 a.m. of the next succeeding day unless the Township
Supervisor has issued written authorization for such collection after having
duly considered the means and location of such collection and determined
no offensive noise or nuisance will be occasioned adjacent residences.
§ 149-9. Storage of solid waste.
Every person who owns, possesses, controls, supervises or occupies land or
premises with the Township shall be responsible for placing and keeping
solid waste arising from the use or occupation of such property in
receptacles designed and constructed for such purpose and which prevent
the emission of odors and the broadcasting of pieces. Further, such
receptacles shall be impervious to weather, safe from destruction by
animals and hygienic, provided that plastic bags with a thickness not less
than 1.5 millimeters shall be deemed to meet the requirements of this
sentence.
delivered to a composting facility. Recyclable materials shall not be
disposed of in a licensed disposal area, unless delivered to a material
recovery facility or a composting facility within such a disposal area.
A. Rubbish that is larger than can be conveniently contained in
receptacles shall be securely tied in compact bundles not to exceed 50
pounds in weight and placed in location convenient for collection. Parts
of trees shall not exceed four feet in length nor shall they exceed four
inches in diameter.
B. Solid waste resulting from the operation of commercial, industrial or
other business enterprise may be placed and kept in commercial
receptacles of a size and construction to facilitate pickup by a licensed
solid waste hauler. Such commercial receptacles shall be constructed of
substantial metal, shall be watertight and shall have tight-fitting covers.
C. Solid waste resulting from the usual routine of housekeeping and
residential living may be placed and kept in portable receptacles of
substantial metal or plastic construction with handles and a tight-fitting
cover. Plastic bags of sufficient thickness to meet the purposes of this
section may be used in place of metal or plastic portable receptacles for
§ 149-6 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 149-9
1:462
§ 149-10. Weekly collection.
Every person who owns, possesses, controls, supervises or occupies private
property in the Township shall cause all solid waste to be collected from
such property at least once each week. If the collection is to be provided by
the Township pursuant to contract, such person's responsibility shall be to
place such solid waste at its usual collection point. Every such person shall
limit the time when receptacles are placed on public property or private
property beyond the front line of any residence to the period of 6:00 p.m. on
the day prior to the regularly scheduled solid waste collection day and 12
hours following the act of collection by the licensed solid waste hauler.
§ 149-11. Prohibitions.
such domestic solid waste. No single receptacle or bag shall weigh
more than 65 pounds when filled.
D. In the case of a building housing more than two families, the
receptacles shall be provided by the owner of the premises and shall be
commercial receptacles unless the curbside collection of solid waste is
available.
E. It shall be the duty of the owner, contractor or other person responsible
for construction work to remove from the premises within a reasonable
time after the completion of such construction work all surplus
construction material and building refuse material.
A. Dumping within the Township prohibited; exception. No solid waste
shall be kept in open containers or piled, placed, dumped or disposed of
on any land within the Township, provided that nothing contained in
this article shall prevent the Township from establishing or contracting
for the use of a sanitary landfill site for the exclusive use of the
residents of the Township.
B. Burning prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to burn garbage
or rubbish any place within the Township other than in incinerators
located inside of buildings and approved by the Chief of the Township
Fire Department or some person designated by him. It shall be unlawful
for any person to burn leaves and yard waste any place within the
Township.
C. Safety. No person shall deposit, spill or leave any matter or thing
whatsoever on either public or private property or cause the same to be
done which may result in injury or damage to person, animal or
property.
D. Scattering. It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter or leave any
matter or thing whatsoever on either public or private property or
cause the same to be done, which will result in or contribute toward any
unsightly conditions within the Township.
§ 149-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-12
1:463
§ 149-12. License procedure.
All solid waste haulers collecting solid waste from persons or property
within the Township shall be required to have a duly issued and in effect
license pursuant to the following procedure:
A. The Township Clerk and the office of the Township Clerk shall
administer the issuance of the license.
B. Each license shall be effective for a term expiring on the 31st day of
December next following the date of issuance, unless earlier suspended
or revoked.
C. The fee for a solid waste hauler's license shall be $25 plus $5 for each
solid waste transporting unit and each commercial receptacle owned or
utilized by the licensed solid waste hauler in the Township. The
Township Clerk shall be notified of each additional solid waste
transporting unit and each additional commercial receptacle placed in
service after a new or renewal application has been filed, and
accompanied by the aforesaid unit fee, before the Clerk may issue the
decal for the additional units or receptacles.
D. A license shall be issued to the solid waste hauler applicant and a decal
for each solid waste transporting unit and commercial receptacle of the
applicant. The license shall be displayed at the licensee's principal
place of business and produced for inspection by any representative of
the Township or customer upon request to the licensee. The decal shall
be permanently affixed to and maintained upon the solid waste
transporting unit or commercial receptacle in a clearly visible location.
E. A license shall not be granted to an applicant unless the applicant
submits an application in a form, and containing such information
concerning the identity, experience, officers and employees, equipment,
economic integrity, proof of access to, and use of an adequate and
approved materials recovery facility (MRF), composting facility, and a
licensed disposal area, and pertinent facts of the applicant as the
Township Clerk may from time to time require for the purpose of
determining whether the applicant meets all of the requirements of a
solid waste hauler, and the solid waste transporting units, established
by the Director of the Department of Natural Resources, pursuant to
MCL 324.11501 et seq., and rules promulgated pursuant to MCL
24.201 et seq., as amended, all of which detailed technical regulations
are adopted by reference and incorporated herein by such reference.
F. Each solid waste transporting unit and each commercial receptacle
shall be inspected in accordance with procedures established by the
Clerk to determine that the solid waste hauler has in operation only
units and receptacles which are proper, hygienic and not contributory
to litter. The Clerk may accept as complying with this article any solid
waste transporting unit which meet the standards of the Department of
Natural Resources under Act No. 641, P.A. 1978, and the rules
promulgated pursuant to Act No. 306, P.A. 1969 (MCL 24.201 et seq.),
§ 149-12 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 149-12
1:464
§ 149-13. Regulation and duties of licensees.
as amended, all of which detailed regulations are adopted by reference
and incorporated herein by such reference, for the period of the
effectiveness of such approval.
G. Each application for a year's license shall be accompanied by a bond
running to the Charter Township of Northville in the penal sum of
$100,000 in such form as may be approved by the Township Attorney,
which bond shall be signed by an approved surety duly authorized to do
business in Michigan, and which bond shall be conditioned on the due
observance during the time of the license of all of the laws of the State
of Michigan, the ordinances of the Charter Township of Northville and
the approved rules and regulation of the Supervisor pertaining to the
collection, removal and transportation of solid waste and all legal rights
of all persons who are served by or injured by the licensee. Such bond
shall remain in full force and effect for a period of 90 days after the
expiration or cancellation of any such license. Each licensee shall
maintain for each vehicle, the security required by law, and additional
security sufficient to pay $1,000,000 for one person injured in an
accident, and $1,000,000 for all other persons injured in an accident,
and shall deposit, prior to the issuance of the license, certificates of
insurance with the Township Clerk indicating such coverage. The solid
waste hauler licensee shall obtain and keep in full force and effect
insurance to protect the public against risk of loss from liability,
including damage to property and injury to person, in a sum of not less
than $1,000,000 per occurrence caused by the actions or operations of
the licensee, its officers, employees and agents. Further, the Township
may require of private and Township contractors other bonds of
insurance, including workers' compensation insurance to insure the
Township that the obligations of the contractors will be protected in the
event that they are not.
H. If the applicant meets the requirements of this article, meets the
requirements and rules promulgated pursuant to Act No. 641, P.A.
1978, agrees to abide by this and all other applicable Township
ordinances, including, but not limited to, site plans prepared pursuant
to Chapter 170, Zoning, and pays the applicable fees, then the Clerk
shall issue a license to the applicant and for each acceptable solid waste
transporting unit and commercial receptacle.
I. No license or contract issued, granted or entered into with any
contractor under the provision of this article shall be assignable or
sublet without the express written permission of the Township Board.
A. No solid waste hauler licensee shall require a customer to deposit or
prepay collection charges for a period in advance greater than three
calendar months.
§ 149-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-13
1:465
B. No solid waste hauler licensee shall collect from residential customers
less frequently than weekly (legal holidays, strikes and acts of God
excluded).
C. No solid waste hauler licensee shall dispose of collected solid waste
other than by means of licensed solid waste transporting units and at
disposal areas or facilities licensed pursuant to MCL 324.11501 et seq.,
provided that recyclables shall be transported to materials recovery
facilities and compostables shall be transported to composting
facilities, and that after June 30, 1991, no solid waste hauler licensee
shall transport compostables to a sanitary landfill for disposal.
D. The Township Supervisor shall have the authority to designate from
time to time the streets and highways upon which the solid waste
hauler licensee may transport solid waste transporting units.
E. The Township shall have the authority to designate a particular
property or condition as a public health hazard due to solid waste
generation, accumulation or storage, and upon notice to a solid waste
hauler licensee, the Supervisor may require such licensee to cooperate
and assist in the collection of solid waste for the purpose of reducing or
eliminating the public health hazard, provided that the Township shall
pay the reasonable and customary charges of such licensee related to
providing required collection and the Township shall be entitled to
receive full reimbursement of such charges from the person who owns,
possesses, controls, supervises or occupies the aforesaid particular
property.
F. Each solid waste hauler licensee shall designate an employee or agent
to regularly answer all complaints made, and to properly dispose of
same.
G. Each solid waste hauler licensee shall pay any judgment which may be
obtained against the Charter Township of Northville, whether alone or
with said licensee on account of any injury, or damage to any person or
property by reason of any license granted hereunder, and said licensee
upon demand of the Township shall intervene and defend any such suit
or action thereof upon notice thereof given by the Clerk to said
licensee.
H. Solid waste transporting units used by the licensee in the collection and
disposal of solid waste under the provisions of this article shall have, on
both sides thereof, the name of the licensee and business in plain,
unobscured letters of not less than four inches in height.
I. Each solid waste hauler licensee shall collect solid waste by emptying
the contents of the receptacle into the licensee's solid waste
transporting unit and returning the receptacle to the place on the
customer's property from which it was removed, replacing the cover. All
receptacles shall be so handled and emptied so that no garbage is
spilled on the premises of the customer nor in any street area.
§ 149-13 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 149-13
1:466
§ 149-14. Refusal or revocation of license.
Any applicant for license may be refused and any license issued under this
article may be revoked by the Supervisor when the applicant or licensee has
made a false or fraudulent statement in such application or in the operation
of his business, or whenever such business is conducted in an unlawful
manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a
menace to the health and welfare of the public, or whenever such applicant
or licensee is unable to satisfactorily meet or perform the requirements
and provisions of this article, and the approved rules and regulations of
the Township Board. Upon a written complaint setting forth the reasons for
denial, suspension or revocation of a license filed by the Supervisor with the
Clerk, the Clerk shall call a meeting of the Township Board with notice to
the applicant or licensee in order to consider the complaint and conduct a
hearing thereon. At said hearing, the applicant or licensee may introduce
evidence on its behalf and confront all opposing witnesses. Upon a finding
a majority of the members of the Township Board present as said hearing
of a violation of the provisions of this article, the license may be denied,
suspended or revoked. The applicant or licensee may have a right to appeal
any adverse decision of the Township Board or to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
J. The solid waste hauler licensee shall so load the solid waste
transporting unit that as soon as any compartment of the licensee's
solid waste transporting unit is filled, the same shall be immediately
covered with a metal cover.
K. The transportation of all garbage, offal, rubbish or other waste
materials through the streets, alleys, or thoroughfares of the Charter
Township of Northville shall be conducted in such manner as to create
no nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
transport, cart, carry or convey through or over any of the streets,
alleys, or public places of the Charter Township of Northville any
garbage unwashed refuse, or unwashed food containers without the
written consent of the Township Board. Whenever such permission is
granted, the vehicle used for such purposes shall be watertight and
provided with a suitable covering. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to transport or to otherwise convey through or over
any of the public streets or public places of the Charter Township of
Northville any rubbish or other waste material except under written
regulations or with the written consent of the Township Board, except
rubbish or waste material accumulating on property owned or
controlled by him and then only by approved methods of conveyance.61
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 106, Littering.
§ 149-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-15
1:467
§ 149-15. Penalties
Notwithstanding any language in this chapter to the contrary, any person
who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to the following penalties:
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is
specified in connection with a particular section:
(1) First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of not less than $150, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each offense.
(2) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $300, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of, the
chapter.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
Code of the Charter Township of Northville, any equitable or other
remedies available may be sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses as provided by law.
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
§ 149-15 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 149-15
1:468
ARTICLE II
Composting
[Adopted 7-11-1991 as Subchapter G of Ch. 61 of the Code of
Ordinances]
§ 149-16. Intent.
§ 149-17. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AEROBIC COMPOSTING — Decomposition of organic matter in an
environment with oxygen present. The microorganisms responsible for the
decomposition consume oxygen and produce carbon dioxide. This type of
composting is known to produce litter without offensive odor.
ANAEROBIC COMPOSTING — Decomposition of organic matter in an
environment with little or no oxygen present. The microorganisms
responsible for the decomposition do not need oxygen. This method of
composting decomposes compostables more slowly than aerobic
composting and is known to generate hydrogen sulfide and ammonia-like
compounds which produce offensive odors.
COMMERCIAL COMPOSTING FACILITY — A site, as distinguished from
a landfill, where composting occurs as part of a private business or
government service. Sites of less than one acre in size or with capacity
A. The intent of this article is to regulate the siting of commercial
composting operations, their development and continued use.
Development shall be regulated in such a fashion as to protect natural
resources and the general health, safety, and welfare of the community
as a whole. Regulation is also intended to preserve, protect, and
enhance the social and economic well being of those proposing the use,
in addition to the residents and property owners in the immediate
surrounding area. It is also intended that the regulation ensure
compliance with appropriate state, county and local regulations,
guidelines, and policies.
B. This article is not intended nor shall it be construed to prohibit an
individual from composting yard wastes from the individual's own
household, or upon the individual's own land, as long as the composting
does not create a nuisance or hazard to health. Yard waste and solid
waste accumulated as part of an improvement or the planting of
privately owned farmland may be disposed of on the property if the
method used is not injurious to human life or property, does not
unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life, property, and does
not violate any other state, county, or local act, ordinance or regulation.
C. Activities conducted in accordance with Public Act 240 or 1987 of the
Public Acts of the State of Michigan, Right to Farm Act (MCL 286.472 et
seq.), are exempt from this article.
§ 149-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-17
1:469
not exceeding two cubic yards are not defined as a commercial composting
facility.
COMPOSTING FACILITY OPERATOR — The person or entity responsible for
the operation of a composting facility regulated by this article.
CONTAMINANTS — Material received along with the yard wastes which
can not be composted and, therefore should be removed from the yard
wastes in preparation for composting. Contaminants include but are not
limited to plastic bags, string or wire used to bundle brush, cardboard
boxes, burlap wrapping, etc.
COMPOST — A complex, highly stable material formed as a result of the
breakdown or decomposition of compostable materials, the end product of
the composting process also known as "humus."
COMPOSTING — A yard waste management alternative to burning and/
or landfilling in which compostable yard waste is collected, processed, and
recovered as a resource rather than disposed of. It involves the biological
decomposition of organic matter under controlled conditions characterized
by piles that generate heat under aerobic conditions. Sheet composting
shall not be considered a permitted use.
COMPOSTABLE OR ORGANIC MATTER AND MATERIAL — includes typical
yard wastes and clippings such as and limited to leaves, grass clippings,
vegetable or other garden debris, shrubbery or brush, tree trimmings less
than four feet in length and four inches in diameter, that can be converted
to compost. This term does not include stumps, roots, agricultural wastes,
animal waste, sewage sludge, or garbage.
POSITIVE ODOR CONTROL — An engineered method to mechanically
capture or otherwise eliminate anaerobic odors.
WINDROWS — Heaps for open composting and are used in the open, on
the ground, with no confining structure like a bin, pit or pen. Windrows are
elongated piles which require periodic turning to expose all particles of the
mass to similar conditions.
YARD WASTE — Limited to leaves, grass clippings, vegetable or other
garden debris, shrubbery or brush, tree trimmings less than four feet in
length and two inches in diameter, that can be converted to compost. This
term does not include stumps, roots, agricultural wastes, animal waste,
sewage sludge, or garbage.
§ 149-18. Commercial composting facilities.
Commercial composting facilities may be permitted within the I-1 Industrial
Zoning District with a special use permit. The composting of materials
generated off-site shall also be subject to an annual operational permit as
regulated in Article I, Collection and Recycling, of this chapter as imposed
by the official body(ies) charged with review and approval of the use.
§ 149-17 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 149-19
1:470
§ 149-19. Requirements and standards.
All requirements and standards of the section shall be complied prior
to a special use permit approval. Standards for continued operation of
commercial composting facilities are enumerated in Article I, Collection and
Recycling, of this chapter.
§ 149-20. Site characteristics.
A site plan must be submitted, reviewed and approved in accordance with
Article 33, Site Plan Review, of Chapter 170, Zoning. In addition, a site
plan management plan must be submitted and reviewed during the site
plan approval process and annually, thereafter, as prescribed in Article I,
Collection and Recycling, of this chapter.
A. Parcel size. A parcel to be used for commercial composting shall be a
minimum of two acres in size and shall not exceed 10 acres for a single
operation. The site shall be capable of accommodating a maximum of
3,000 cubic yards of leaves or other yard wastes for every one acre of
land. Individual windrows within the composting facility may not
exceed six feet in height and 10 feet in width as measured from the
base.
B. Setbacks. No decaying/composting organic remains (windrows) or
associated structures, equipment or staging areas shall be located
closer than at least 1,200 feet from the nearest existing residential
property line, and at least 1,500 feet from the nearest residential
dwelling. Where positive odor-control technologies are utilized, the
Township may reduce isolation distances (setbacks), depending upon
the equipment and procedures utilized. When abutting an industrial
zoned lot, standard setbacks shall apply as prescribed in Chapter 170,
Zoning; when abutting surface water, setbacks must be a minimum of
1,000 feet; when abutting an MDNR regulated wetland, setbacks shall
be not less than 50 feet; when abutting potable water supply, setbacks
shall not be less than 200 feet.
C. Frontage. The parcel should have frontage for the entire width of the lot
on a public street; however, applications will be accepted and reviewed
for sites with less than full width frontage. Determinations of
acceptance shall be based upon the characteristics and merits of the
particular site and the ability of the site to comply with the overall
intent of this article as well as protecting the general health, safety, and
welfare of the neighboring properties, the community as a whole, and
the developer.
D. Location. Sites proposed to be located on lands which have been platted
or previously issued a development rights agreement, under the
Farmland and Open Space Preservation Act (MCL 324.36101 et seq.),
are prohibited for the duration of the agreement.
§ 149-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-20
1:471
E. Access. The main service drive for vehicles bringing compostables to a
commercial composting facility must be accessible from a major
thoroughfare as defined in the Master Plan and avoid residential areas.
A commercial composting facility must provide internal accessibility to
all points of the site with a surface capable of supporting rescue
equipment and emergency vehicles and at a minimum, a turnaround at
the terminus of each road. Each internal road, either those open to the
public or service roads, must be elevated to provide adequate drainage
and constructed of stone, gravel or another material deemed
acceptable by the Township Engineer.62
F. Screening/buffering. Screening shall be provided along all property
lines on site in accordance with Article 24, Landscape Standards, of
Chapter 170, Zoning, in addition, commercial composting facilities
must demonstrate:
(1) That no portion of the composting mound, storage areas or
equipment shall be clearly visible from vehicular or pedestrian
traffic or adjacent structures; and
(2) That a six-foot masonry wall or wooden privacy fence shall be
required on property lines adjacent to nonindustrial property.
G. Elimination of public nuisances. A composting facility designed for
anaerobic composting shall not be permitted. Aerobic composting
facilities shall operate in a manner that prevents anaerobic composting
from occurring. In addition:
(1) Storing, discharging or depositing sewage, human waste, wash
water, garbage, or other wastes in such a manner as to make them
a potential agent in the transmission of disease is prohibited.
(2) Storing or disposing of any kind of wastes in a manner that pollutes
a water supply, is located within a one-hundred-year floodplain or
wetland or contaminates surrounding land to the extent public
health is endangered, is prohibited.
(3) Depositing, storing or disposing of garbage, manure or any other
wastes in a manner that attracts vermin, insects or other pests, or
allows the wastes to become a breeding place for mosquitoes, flies,
or other disease-carrying insects is prohibited.
(4) The composting facility operator shall not permit offensive odors to
escape the boundaries of the facility and/or interfere with the
enjoyment of adjacent properties.
(5) Noise and vibration emanating from a commercial composting
facility shall not exceed standards established in ordinances,
statutes and regulations of the Township, the County or the State of
Michigan.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 85, Grading and Drainage.
§ 149-20 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 149-20
1:472
(6) Keeping or leaving bodies of dead animals within a commercial
composting facility is prohibited.
(7) Debris and litter driven by wind or flowing water emanating from a
commercial composting facility shall be collected daily by the
facility operator. In the event the operator is unable to prevent
wind or water driven debris from leaving the site, the enforcement
officials shall direct the facility operator to erect impenetrable
screening to stop the scattering of debris from the site.
(8) Storage of contaminants, as defined herein, which have been
removed from incoming material shall not exceed 10 cubic yards at
any particular time. Contaminants must be stored within an
enclosed container, screened from view according to standards
established herein.
(9) A facility operator shall use only licensed disposal areas for the
disposal of its solid waste, as a result of its normal scoring
operations, and not conduct, manage, maintain, or participate in
the operation of a disposal area not licensed under 1978 P.A. 641,
MCL 299.401 et seq., or to knowingly allow its solid waste to be
disposed of at an unlicensed facility.
H. Parking/dumping. Commercial composting facilities must provide
stacking room for a minimum of five vehicles capable of dumping large
quantities (greater than one ton) of compostables at any particular
time. Additionally, vehicular parking shall be required per Chapter 170,
Zoning, as stated in Article 26 Off-Street Parking and Loading,
§ 170-26.2.
I. Security. Security of the composting site shall be provided to a degree
to prevent illegal dumping and shall include, at a minimum, a six-foot
tall chain link fence placed along each property line with gated/secured
entrances, except at those locations where a masonry wall is required.
J. Signage. Signage shall be consistent with standards provided in
Chapter 145, Signs, as applied to uses within the I-1 Industrial Zoning
District. In addition:63
(1) Each entrance shall have a permanent sign, not to exceed 12
square feet in area, displaying hours of operation and materials
accepted.
(2) Signs, not exceeding one square foot in area, prohibiting illegal
dumping shall be installed at 75 foot intervals along property lines
abutting a public right-of-way.
K. Compliance with all laws. Notes assuring the composting facility
operation shall be conducted in accordance with current standards
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 149-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-20
1:473
§ 149-21. Operation standards.
Operation standards are to ensure the orderly and efficient use of land
for composting off-site yard wastes. Orderly and efficient use of the land
encompasses the mitigation of adverse impacts on the community as a
whole, surrounding land uses, the physical or natural resources common
to this site as well as surrounding lands, the environment, and to ensure
minimal expenditure of public dollars. These standards shall be used as a
tool or guide by the Township Board of Trustees and its designated agents
in objectively assessing continued compliance with Township standards.
established by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the
United States Department of Agriculture, the Michigan Department of
Natural Resources, County of Wayne, and other government regulatory
agencies shall be included within the proposed site plan.
A. An as-built site plan shall be submitted by the developer to the
Township upon completion of all required improvements, as described
in § 149-23. The as-built site plan shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer and clearly illustrate consistency with the
approved site plan and compliance with all requirements of this and
other pertinent ordinances of the Township. A determination of
consistency and compliance shall be made by the Township. A
determination of compliance must be made prior to the release of any
portion of the performance guarantee, submitted by the developer as
required by § 149-23 of this article, and issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, as may be required by Chapter 170, Zoning.
B. Drainage/grading. The site shall be graded in such a fashion as to
eliminate all ponding and have a uniform gradient of 2% to 3% (2.5%
being optimal, 2% minimum). Artificial drainage, surface and
subsurface, shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 72, Design
and Construction Standards. All surface and subsurface drainage shall
be illustrated on the site plan. The site plan shall include both existing
and proposed grades and elevations. These elevations shall be taken at
intervals necessary to insure proper slopes, grading, and surface
drainage will be provided, but in no instance shall contour intervals
exceed two feet.
(1) All stormwater runoff from the surface, as well as that collected
through subsurface drainage systems, shall be retained on site and
designed to be used for watering composting windrows.
Stormwater shall be retained in a retention pond basin and shall
not be released into the local drainage system. This retention pond
or basin shall be clearly illustrated on the site plan as an element of
the stormwater management system designed for the site.
(2) The stormwater management system shall be designated to
prevent runoff from entering the staging, initial processing, curing
and final product storage areas. Ponding of water in these areas,
along access roads, or within that area containing active
§ 149-20 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 149-21
1:474
composting windrows shall be discouraged. Access to these areas
by operational equipment and emergency vehicles shall be
maintained at all times.
C. Protection of soil and groundwater. Prior to any permits being issued,
soil and groundwater from the site must be sampled and analyzed by an
independent laboratory with results forwarded to the Wayne County
Health Department. Samples shall be taken at several locations within
the proposed site and at two levels, one shallow and the second, deeper
and immediately above the first encountered aquifer. These samples
shall be tested to establish a base level for chemical contaminants
which may be present in the soil and groundwater. A second test shall
be performed on soil taken from shallow depths in that area which is
proposed to be used for compost windrows. This second test shall be
used to establish a base level for biological oxygen demand (BOD).
(1) If a site is found to contain chemical contaminants at an
unacceptable level, a permit will not be issued until the source of
the contamination is discovered and the MDNR has made a
determination that the site can be used for the proposed
composting operation.
(2) Once in operation, composting facilities shall have their soil and
groundwater tested and analyzed, for chemical contaminants and
BOD as stated above, by an independent laboratory, with results
forwarded to the Wayne County Health Department, prior to a
change in ownership, and annually, if the composting operational
area and facilities are larger than 10 acres in size.
(3) If soil or groundwater is found to have levels of chemical
contaminants as a level higher than that found in the base sample,
and if BOD levels tested below existing windrows are found to be
elevated, the facility will be required to refuse acceptance of
additional yard wastes. In placing this restriction on the facility, the
Township shall also restrict the removal of finished product from
the site until the finished compost is found not to be contaminated
above acceptable levels. Testing of the finished product shall be
conducted by an independent laboratory with the analyzed results
forwarded to the Wayne County Health Department.
(4) Once a decision has been made that the level of chemical
contaminants is higher than that found in base samples of soil,
groundwater, and BOD levels are found to be at an unacceptable
level, the Township shall revoke the special use permit. In addition,
the annual operational permit, as required in § 149-23 shall not be
renewed. The special use permit and annual operational permit
shall be reissued once a finding has been made by the MDNR that
the site can once again be actively occupied for the use.
D. Inspection. The composting facility shall be open to inspection by the
Township CBO, and Wayne County Health Department officials at all
§ 149-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-21
1:475
§ 149-22. Required operational data to be maintained.
The following data regarding operation of the compost facility shall be
maintained and available at all times for review by the local Fire Chief,
Wayne County Health Department officials, and the Township CBO.
§ 149-23. Application for special use permit; fee; annual
operational permit.
times. The Township may require, an annual summer inspection for
rodents, or upon receipt of a signed complaint of the sightings of
rodents, to be conducted by a licensed pest control company. Copies of
the resulting report shall be transmitted directly to the Township by the
pest control company. If rodents are detected, appropriate measures
shall be taken to capture or exterminate the rodents in an
environmentally safe manner. Any cost related to the inspection and/or
extermination shall be borne by the facility operator(s).
A. The name and address of the company and individual making a delivery
as well as the source of the material (i.e. residential, commercial,
agricultural), and the municipality of origination for the waste
generated.
B. Type and quantity of compostable material received from each delivery
accepted at the facility.
C. Quantity, type and disposition of contaminants received each month.
D. Number of vehicles entering the site each day.
E. List of end-product users.
F. A windrow log shall be kept recording the location of each windrow, the
date or dates that the windrow was established, daily temperature and
moisture content readings taken at several locations in the windrow,
and comments on the presence of odors.
G. The approximate amount of compost and the date compost is
transferred from one stage of the procedure to another, i.e., windrows
to screening, screening to curing piles, and final product produced and
subsequently shipped.
H. Log of complaints received (if any) and response or action.
A. Application.
(1) Applications for special approval use permits shall consist of:
(a) A site plan as described herein. (See § 149-21 for further
clarification.)
(b) A complete site management plan following the guidelines
provided in Subsection B below.
§ 149-21 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 149-23
1:476
(c) Letters of consistency and approval from the Wayne County
Health Department, and the Michigan Department of Natural
Resources, Water Quality and Waste Management Division. In
addition to letters of consistency, the applicant shall submit a
letter of acknowledgment from the Wayne County Department
of Public Services which indicates that they are fully aware of
the proposed project, the potential impact of the proposed
project on the County road system that an understanding has
been reached between the developer and the county
concerning mitigation of potential impacts, and that the county
has no objections to the project as proposed.
(d) The required application fee.
(e) Any other material as may be required by the Township
necessary for making an informed and objective determination
on the ability of the proposed operation/facility to comply with
the intent and standards of the ordinance.
(2) Approval of the special use permit shall not be granted without
receipt of these letters of consistency, approvals and compliance
with this article.
B. Site Management Plan. Applicants shall submit a Site Management
Plan as a component of their application for a special use permit. The
Site Management Plan shall contain, at a minimum the following
information:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number of the owner or owners of
the land of the subject site.
(2) Name, address and telephone number of person, firm or
corporation who, or which, will be managing the actual composting
operation.
(3) An outline of the management structure complete with names,
titles, addresses, and telephone numbers.
(4) Location, size and legal description of the total land area proposed
for such use.
(5) The projected capacity of the facility, including shredded leaves,
grass, and brush. Targeted quantities to be processed, incoming
and outgoing.
(6) A statement on the population intended to be serviced by the
facility.
(a) There will the compostable material be received from.
(b) Evidence of contracts shall be included.
(7) How this material will be brought to the site.
§ 149-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-23
1:477
(8) Types of materials to be composted and what form it will be
accepted in. Procedures for monitoring incoming and outgoing
material, controlling the disposal or refusal of unacceptable
materials.
(9) Method of composting to be used. (Sheet composting is prohibited.)
(10) Types and number of equipment used (i.e., shredders, front-end
loaders, windrow turning machine, screening and shakers, etc.).
(11) The location, type, size and proposed contents of all fuel storage
facilities, and detail on primary and secondary containment
systems for all hazardous materials stored on site.
(12) Personnel: number to be employed and duties of each.
(13) An outline of the operational cycle and timetable beginning with
acceptance of material on-site to the disposal of the final product.
This outline shall include plans for the preprocessing or staging of
material (i.e., chipping, mixing materials windrow formation
material layering, watering), the compost activity (i.e., windrow
turning, monitoring moisture content and temperature, windrow
combining, curing and finishing, including screening), and the
distribution of the final product.
(14) Operational details shall be stated, including the hours of operation
and days of the week that the facility will be open throughout the
year.
(15) List of the chemicals or accelerating agents to be used, including
bacteria, fungi, or nitrogen. Include established guidelines for use
and storage of these agents.
(16) A statement on the methods to be used to monitor and ensure
protection of the environment (odor, dust, noise, blowing trash,
anaerobic problems, methane production). This shall include an
outline of the necessary steps which will be taken to reverse a
breakdown in the composting system or pollution problem.
(17) Plans for the disposition of nonmarketable compost.
(18) Include a plan for the disposition of the final products. This plan
shall encompass targeted users, projected quantities to be
produced and distributed, and the manner of distribution and sales
(i.e., retail, individual bags, truckloads, wholesale). The applicant
shall present to the Township a copy of their registration issued by
the Michigan Department of Agriculture as evidence of compliance
with P.A. 634 of 1976, the Commercial Fertilizer Regulation Act.
(19) Evidence on the previous use, or nonuse, of this site for waste
disposal.
§ 149-23 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 149-23
1:478
§ 149-24. Performance guarantee; required improvements.
(20) Statements indicating that the applicant is aware of, has read, and
understands as it applies to the proposed composting operation,
laws of the State of Michigan, including MCL 324.3103 et seq.,
324.5501 et seq., 324.3601 et seq. and 324.8501 et seq. This plan
shall also include a copy of the applicants soil erosion and
sedimentation control permit, as evidence of compliance with MCL
325.9104 et seq.64
(21) A contingency operations plan which addresses action to be taken
in the event of a natural disaster, equipment failure, extended
adverse weather, storms, unauthorized receipt or dumping of
hazardous material, or a breakdown in the composting process
resulting in odor, dust, or off-site surface of groundwater
contamination. These plans shall address reserve or alternate
equipment, alternative handling methods, agencies to be contacted
or alerted, and alternative operational plans.
C. Review fee. A fee shall be established by the Township for the review of
a special use application. The fee may be sufficient to cover all costs
incurred by the Township in completing its review of the application.
The fee shall be established and periodically reviewed by the Township
legislative body.
D. Annual operational permit. All composting facilities and operations
regulated by this article shall be subject to an annual operational
permit issued by the Township. Any violation of Chapter 170, Zoning, or
any other appropriate state, county or local regulation, or
noncompliance with the conditions of the special approval use permit
shall be grounds for the denial of an operational permit or its renewal.
Renewal of an annual operational permit shall not be given without
receipt of a letter of compliance from the Michigan Department of
Natural Resources Waste Management Division, and from the Wayne
County Health Department, as may be required, and compliance with
and receipt of a performance guarantee as required in § 149-24 of this
article.
A. The Township shall require a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable
bank letter of credit, or surety bond acceptable to the Township
covering the estimated cost of improvements associated with the
project as a guarantee for their completion. These improvements shall
mean those features and actions associated with the project which are
considered necessary, by the body or official granting zoning approval,
to protect natural resources, or the health, safety, and welfare of the
residents of the Township and future users or inhabitants of the
proposed project, or project area. Improvements shall include
roadways, grading on and off-site, utilities, fencing, berming, screening,
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 149-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-24
1:479
§ 149-25. Consistency with state and county planning.
The proposed facility and operation shall be consistent with solid waste
planning efforts of the State of Michigan and County of Wayne. This
consistency shall be evidenced by a letter of consistency issued to the
applicant by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, Waste
Management Division, and from the Wayne County Commission. Approval of
the special use permit and the initial operational permit shall not be granted
without receipt of these letters of review/approval and compliance with of
this article.
§ 149-26. Availability of facility.
The proposed facility must be available for use by all residents of Northville
Township during regular operating hours. The facility shall be open to
county residents each Saturday of the month for a minimum of six hours
from April 1 through December 1. The operator may charge county
residents a fee for tipping and purchase of finished product consistent with
fees paid by out of county users.
§ 149-27. Level One Environmental Assessment.
A Level One Environmental Assessment of the site shall be conducted prior
to the site plan review. There are several phases to a site environmental
assessment. The first phase is called a "Level One Environmental Site
Assessment." During this phase, a team of engineers/scientists walk the
site in a system grid pattern to visually inspect for signs of adverse
environmental activity. This includes a search for stressed vegetation,
strained geologic structures, obvious placement of fill/debris, or the
excavation of earth. Aerial photographs are reviewed from a historical
perspective over the last few decades. Property ownership records and
permit activities from the regulation agencies are researched and reviewed.
Also, selected neighboring landowners are interviewed for their knowledge
drainage, and source of water. Improvements do not include the entire
project which is the subject of zoning approval. This performance
guarantee shall be returned to the developer upon completion of these
improvements and receipt of an as-built site plan, as required by the
chapter.
B. The Township shall also require and establish the amount of a
performance guarantee, such as an irrevocable bank letter of credit, or
surety bond acceptable to the Township to assure zoning and special
use compliance, to correct breakdowns in the composting system, and
to guarantee restoration in the event of abandonment, the presence or
contamination of the site by hazardous wastes, or other environmental
pollution. A minimum amount of $100,000 shall be established and held
as a performance guarantee. This performance guarantee shall be
renewed each year in conjunction with the renewal of the operational
permit.
§ 149-24 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 149-27
1:480
of any activity on the site. Based upon the site inspection and data review, a
chronological description of activity on the site can be established.
§ 149-28. Penalties.
Notwithstanding any language in this chapter to the contrary, any person
who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction, subject to the following penalties:
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fine is
specified in connection with a particular section:
(1) First offense. The civil fine for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of not less than $150, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each offense.
(2) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $300, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of, the
chapter.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
Code of the Charter Township of Northville, any equitable or other
remedies available may be sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses as provided by law.
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
§ 149-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 149-28
1:481
Chapter 151
STORMWATER DETENTION BASIN MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grading and drainage — See Ch. 85. Sewer and water — See Ch. 139.
§ 151-1. Intent.
In the preparation and development of this chapter, on the basis of the
advice of experts and upon independent investigation, it has been
recognized that detention basins, retention ponds or other stormwater
detention facilities pose the risk of malfunction or inadequate maintenance
which could have potentially detrimental effects upon the natural
environment. The Township is obligated to reduce and prevent illicit
discharges into the waters of the state under the Township's National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, and poorly
maintained detention basins pose the risk of causing such discharge into
rivers and streams in the Township. The Township is also committed under
its NPDES permit to carry out a public education program to educate
the citizenry about protection of surface water quality and methods of
protecting water quality. It is necessary for the Township to inspect
detention basins and to require maintenance and repair, in order to
minimize the risk of failing facilities which could cause harm to the
environment, and in order to comply with the Township's NPDES permit and
programs implemented pursuant thereto.
§ 151-2. Purposes.
A. It is the finding of the Board of Trustees of the Charter Township of
Northville that stormwater runoff pollution prevention and protection
of the water quality of the waters of the state is of the utmost
importance. The following legislation has been passed by the state and
federal legislatures in efforts to protect the environment:
(1) Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act
(MNREPA) (1994, P.A. 451), including:65
(a) Goemare-Anderson Wetland Protection Act (1979, PA. 203);66
(b) Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act (1972, PA. 347);67
(c) Inland Lakes and Streams Act (1972), P.A. 346);68
65.Editor's Note: See MCL 324.2101 et seq.
66.Editor's Note: See now MCL 324.30301 et seq.
67.Editor's Note: See now MCL 324.9101 et seq.
68.Editor's Note: See now MCL 324. 30101 et seq.
§ 149-28 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 151-2
1:482
§ 151-3. Scope and effect.
This chapter shall cover retention or detention basins located within the
Charter Township of Northville. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
to limit any right or authority of Northville Township derived from another
source or to limit the governmental immunity enjoyed by Northville
Township.
§ 151-4. Abrogation and conflict of authority; severability.
(2) United States Water Pollution Control Act, § 314 (P.L. 92-55); and
(3) United States Clean Water Act, Section 404 (P.L. 95-217).
B. The Charter Township of Northville is implementing a detention basin
maintenance program. The intent of this program is to manage
stormwater flooding and stormwater pollution prevention.
C. As part of the land use in the Township, certain stormwater pollution
prevention facilities and detention ponds have been constructed in the
Charter Township of Northville. The Township has maintenance
agreements covering various detention basins granting the Township a
license to inspect detention basins, and this chapter is intended to
compliment such maintenance agreements. The maintenance of these
stormwater systems has a direct impact on flood control, stormwater
runoff pollution prevention, and water quality of the waters of the state.
D. The purposes of this chapter are:
(1) To protect public health, safety, and welfare by requiring
stormwater management through inspection and maintenance.
(2) To recognize private responsibility in stormwater management
(3) To ensure that stormwater detention facilities are properly
maintained and to avoid soil erosion.
(4) To avoid degradation of water resources by reducing impacts on
the hydrology of stormwater runoff.
(5) To monitor, inspect and under certain circumstances maintain and
repair these detention basins.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be construed to be consistent with
relevant statutes and regulations. This chapter is not intended to
repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants,
agreements or deed restrictions.
B. If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for
any reason held invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions.
§ 151-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-5
1:483
§ 151-5. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DETENTION/RETENTION BASIN — A structure or facility, natural or
artificial, designed to receive, capture, detain or store stormwater, runoff, or
other surface water, or which performs the function of receiving, capturing,
detaining or storing same, on a temporary basis, releasing it at a controlled
rate, or on a permanent basis, from which stormwater drains off-site or
directly or indirectly drains to the Rouge River Watershed or water of the
state as defined in the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act (MNREPA) (1994, P.A. 451).69
DISCHARGE — Any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater,
or any other substance into the stormwater system or into ground water.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — An agreement that sets forth the terms,
measures and conditions for the maintenance of stormwater systems and
facilities.
NOTICE — Prior written notice to the owner or occupant of property by U.S.
mail, overnight delivery or courier delivery. Notice shall be addressed to the
last known owner or taxpayer of record for the property at issue according
to the Township's records.
NPDES — The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
OWNER OF PROPERTY — Includes any person(s) identified or listed as
owners of property according to Township records, including representative
residential associations.
REPRESENTATIVE RESIDENTIAL ASSOCIATIONS — Includes
homeowners' associations, condominium associations, or a other similar
organization or entity.
RUNOFF — The part of precipitation that flows over land.
§ 151-6. Inspection by Township.
A. Township inspectors shall have the authority to enter at a reasonable
hour a premises in the jurisdiction to inspect a detention basin. Upon
presentation of proper credentials and identification and after stating
the purpose of the inspection, Township inspectors shall be promptly
permitted to enter and inspect a detention basin. Such inspections may
be made periodically. The Township's detention basin management
program shall establish the time periods in which inspections may
occur. Inspections shall be done for the following purposes:
(1) Complying with the Township's NPDES permit and programs
created pursuant thereto;
69.Editor's Note: See MCL 324.2101 et seq.
§ 151-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 151-6
1:484
§ 151-7. Notice of need for maintenance or repair.
If the Township determines that a detention basin is in need of maintenance
or repair, notice shall be given to the owner of the property or to the
representative residential association. The form of such notice shall be
established by the Township's detention basin maintenance program.
§ 151-8. Maintenance or repair by Township; reimbursement.
§ 151-9. Nonexclusivity of rights and remedies.
The rights and remedies authorized to the Township in this chapter are
cumulative and are in addition to such other remedies as may be provided
by law, equity, other ordinance, maintenance agreement, or other source.
(2) Responding to a complaint or request for inspection by an owner of
property within the subdivision, or an owner or occupant of
commercial property on which the basin is located;
(3) Determining whether any detention basin is functioning properly or
in need of repair or maintenance; or
(4) Determining whether a detention basin is in compliance with a
maintenance agreement, a county stormwater permit, or other
applicable plan or regulations the Township is authorized to
enforce.
B. A refusal to permit an inspection shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter and shall be considered a nuisance per se as permitted by law.
A. If the property owner fails to make the required maintenance or repair,
the Code Official or Township Engineer shall make a report to the
Township Board with a request that the maintenance or repairs
specified in the notice be authorized to be performed by the Township
and the costs charged against the property.
B. The Township Board, upon receiving a report that a property owner has
failed to maintain or repair a detention basin, may adopt a resolution
directing the maintenance or repair to be done by the Township. Such
maintenance or repair may also be done by the Township if requested
by the property owner.
C. The owners of property on which a detention basin is located shall
promptly reimburse the Township for costs and expenses of
maintenance and repair by the Township.
D. In the event that the costs and expenses of maintenance and repair
made by the Township are not timely paid, such costs and expenses
shall be charged against the premises consistent with the provisions of
the Charter and laws relating to properly taxes, and shall constitute a
lien upon the property as provided in said provisions.
§ 151-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-9
1:485
Chapter 152
SUBDIVISION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 58.
Construction site maintenance — See Ch. 64.
Design and construction standards — See Ch.
72.
Grading and drainage — See Ch. 85.
Sewer and water — See Ch. 139.
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 151-9 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 151-9
1:486
ARTICLE I
Title and Purpose
§ 152-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Charter Township of
Northville Subdivision Regulations Ordinance."
§ 152-2. Purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as
amended, and Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, being § 560.101 et
seq., and §§ 125.1501 to 125.1531 et seq., respectively, of the Compiled
Laws of the State of Michigan, the Charter Township of Northville, Wayne
County, Michigan, by and through its Board of Trustees, enacts this chapter
regulating and controlling the subdivision of land within the Charter
Township of Northville for the following purposes:
A. Provide means for carrying out the Township's responsibilities relative
to the platting of land under the laws of the State of Michigan.
B. Provide for orderly growth and harmonious development of the
Township, consistent with the Master Plan of Future Land Use, the
Bikepath Transportation Plan, Chapter 170, Zoning, and other plans
and ordinances related to development.
C. Protect the character, the social and the economic stability of all parts
of the Township, and encourage an orderly and beneficial development
of the Township through appropriate control of the timing and phasing
of the development process, promotion of infill development in existing
neighborhoods and areas with adequate public facilities, and protection
of sensitive environmental areas.
D. Establish reasonable standards for design of subdivision lots, streets,
utilities, and landscaping to further the orderly layout and use of land.
E. Provide for adequate light, air, and privacy; to secure safety from fire,
flood, and other danger.
F. Prevent the overcrowding of the land and population.
G. Achieve maximum utility and livability on individual lots.
H. Protect and conserve the value of land, buildings and improvements by
minimizing conflicts among both existing and planned land uses.
I. Provide for efficient traffic circulation through a coordinated
functionally classified street system in order to lessen existing or
potential congestion on the existing or planned street system.
J. Ensure that facilities exist or are provided concurrent with
development; ensure that these facilities safely and efficiently
accommodate traffic associated with the proposed subdivision without
§ 152-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-2
1:487
§ 152-3. Scope of regulations and vested rights.
requiring the Township or Wayne County to bear the cost of providing
said facilities.
K. Provide convenient facilities within the subdivision for pedestrians and
bicyclists; link with other existing or planned nonmotorized
transportation systems.
L. Ensure that public facilities, such as water, sewerage and drainage, are
available concurrent with development, and will have sufficient
capacity to serve the proposed subdivision without requiring the
Township to bear the costs of providing the facilities.
M. Ensure that public services, such as police and fire protection, are
available and adequate to serve the proposed subdivision without
requiring the Township to bear more than its fair share of the cost of
providing the services.
N. Provide opportunities for efficient design and layout of the land in a
manner that retains or provides usable open space, parks, playgrounds
and other recreational facilities within subdivisions.
O. Encourage the wise use and management of natural resources; require
additional tree plantings or landscaping to preserve the integrity,
stability and beauty of the Township, and ensure compliance with the
Township woodlands protection standards.
P. Assist in protecting important wetlands regulated by the Michigan
Department of Natural Resources.
Q. Prevent the pollution of air, surface, and ground water.
R. Ensure proper survey, legal description, and placement of monuments
on subdivided land.
A. These regulations apply to all subdivisions created after the effective
date of this chapter that are located totally or partially within the
boundaries of the Charter Township of Northville including those which
received tentative preliminary plat approval, or were submitted for
review but did not receive, approval under the prior Subdivision
Regulations (Ordinance No. 87).
B. A subdivision which received final preliminary plat or final plat approval
from the Township Board prior to the effective date of this chapter shall
be processed in accordance with the standards and procedures
established in the previous Subdivision Regulations (Ordinance No. 87)
in accordance with all of the following stipulations:
(1) Building permits must be approved, and actual construction of
building footings or foundations must be diligently and
continuously carried on within one year of the effective date of this
chapter.
§ 152-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-3
1:488
(2) If the proprietor proposes a change or changes to the approved
final preliminary plat or final plat for a subdivision or phase of a
subdivision, including any change required by the Township or an
outside agency, such change shall conform to the standards herein
and the applicable regulations of Chapter 170, Zoning, unless the
Planning Commission determines it to be a "major change," as
defined by § 152-12 of this chapter.
(3) The Township may require compliance with the standards
established herein upon a determination that compliance is
necessary for the preservation or protection of health, safety and
welfare.
C. No land may be subdivided or combined through the use of any legal
description unless approved by the Township in accordance with this
chapter (for platted subdivisions) or Chapter 170, Zoning (for unplatted
lands).
D. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any
parcel or plat of land created by subdivision after the effective date of,
and not in substantial conformity with, the provisions of this chapter.
No excavation of land or construction of any public or private
improvements shall take place or be commenced except in conformity
with these regulations.
E. No subdivisions or lots that were nonconforming under the previous
regulations gain any new rights through the adoption of this chapter
unless they become more conforming or conforming.
F. This chapter shall not abrogate or annul any easement, bylaw, deed
restriction, covenant, private agreement or dedicated public right-ofway,
except where the regulations or standards of this chapter are more
restrictive or impose a higher standard.
G. The regulations established herein are considered to be the minimum
necessary to achieve the purposes listed above. Any conflicting
ordinances, regulations, or laws of a more restrictive nature shall
supersede the appropriate provisions of this chapter.
H. Except as otherwise provided above, no vested rights shall accrue to
the owner or proprietor of any subdivision until the actual signing of the
final plat by the Township Clerk.
§ 152-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-3
1:489

ARTICLE II
Rules of Construction and Definitions
§ 152-4. Rules of construction.
The following rules of construction shall apply to this chapter:
A. The particular shall control the general.
B. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, where a regulation
involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected
by a conjunction, the conjunctions shall have the following meaning:
(1) "And" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions, or
events shall apply.
(2) "Or" indicates that all connected items, conditions, provisions, or
events may apply singly or in any combination (i.e., "or" also means
"and/or").
(3) "Either" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
C. The phrase "such as" shall mean "such as, but not limited to."
D. The phrase "including" shall mean "including, but not limited to."
E. Use of "including," "includes," "such as," "additional," or
"supplemental" means that the examples provided are illustrative and
not an exhaustive listing, unless the context clearly indicates to the
contrary.
F. Where an illustration accompanies any provision in this chapter, the
written text shall have precedence over the illustration, unless the
context indicates to the contrary.
G. References to departments, commissions, boards, and other offices are
to those of the Charter Township of Northville, unless otherwise
indicated.
H. A reference to a public official or staff person of the Township is to that
person who performs the function referred to, and may include a
designee of the public official or staff person.
I. A reference to days is to calendar days unless otherwise indicated in
this chapter or specified by state law. If a deadline falls on a weekend or
Township holiday, the deadline shall be extended to the next working
day. A working day is defined as normal business hours of any day that
is not a Saturday, Sunday, or official Township holiday.
J. In computing a period of days, the day of the act or event from which
the designated period of days begins to run shall be excluded, and the
last day of the period is included, unless the last day is not a working
§ 152-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-4
1:491
§ 152-5. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
ABUTTING — Having a common border with, or being separated from such
common border by, an easement.
ADJACENT — See "contiguous."
ALLEY — A public right-of-way or private access easement primarily
designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties
whose principal frontage is on another street. An alley is not intended for
general traffic circulation.
APPLICATION — A tentative preliminary plat, preliminary plat, or final
plat application, submitted for review in one complete package, that
substantially meets all of the submission requirements of this chapter.
BERM — A mound of soil, either natural or man-made, suited to obstruct
views. Unless otherwise indicated or appropriate, required berms shall be
measured from the average grade adjacent to the berm or the grade of the
parking lot adjacent to the berm, and shall be constructed with slopes no
steeper than one foot vertical for each three feet horizontal (slope of 33%),
with at least a four-foot flat area on top. Berms may undulate in height,
subject to review and approval of berm design as shown on the site plan.
The berm area shall be planted with grass or other suitable ground cover
to ensure that it withstands the erosionary forces of wind and weather and
retains its height and shape.
BICYCLE (BIKE) PATH — A pathway, usually separated from the roadway,
designed specifically to satisfy the physical requirements of bicycling
day. If the last day is not a working day, the period runs until the end of
the next working day.
K. Use of "shall," "will" or "must" is mandatory; use of "may" is permissive,
with the decision made by the Township.
L. Words in the present tense include the future tense, words used in the
plural include the singular, and the singular plural, unless the context
clearly indicates to the contrary.
M. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization.
partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual.
N. "Across" or "across from" shall mean "on the opposite side" and shall
not be interpreted as having the same meaning as "adjacent" or
"contiguous" unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary.
O. All measurements shall be to the nearest integer unless otherwise
specified.
P. Words or terms not defined herein shall have the meaning customarily
assigned to them.
§ 152-4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-5
1:492
located in accordance with the Bikepath Transportation Plan of the
Township.
BIKEPATH TRANSPORTATION PLAN — An element of the Township Master
Plan, which illustrates existing and intended location and type of
nonmotorized facilities in the Township.
BLOCK — An area of land, usually bounded on all sides by streets or other
transportation routes such as railroad lines, or by physical barriers such
as water bodies, public open space. unsubdivided acreage, or other barrier
to the continuity of development, and not traversed by a through street or
future through street.
BLOCK LENGTH — The distance between intersections of through streets;
such distance being measured along the longest street bounding the block,
and from right-of-way line to right-of-way line of the two intersection
streets.
BOARD — The Township Board of Trustees of the Charter Township of
Northville.
BOND — Any form of a surety bond in an amount satisfactory to the
Township and in a form satisfactory to the Township Attorney. (See also
"performance guarantee.")
BUFFER or BUFFER ZONE — An area within a subdivision required
adjacent to certain zoning districts to improve views, and reduce noise
impacts between uses which may otherwise be conflicting. The buffer zone
may consist of natural existing vegetation which is preserved, or may be
created or enhanced by trees, shrubs, fences, or berms.
BUILDABLE PORTION OF A LOT — The buildable portion of the lot shall
generally include that portion of the lot on which the principal building may
be constructed in compliance with all ordinances and laws.
§ 152-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-5
1:493
BUILDING — Any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or movable property of any kind.
BUILDING LINE OR FRONT YARD SETBACK LINE — A line, usually fixed
parallel to the street right-of-way, beyond which a building or part thereof
cannot extend unless otherwise permitted under the terms of Chapter 170,
Zoning.
CALIPER — The diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches, six inches
above ground level for trees up to and including four inches in diameter,
and 12 inches above ground level for trees over four inches in diameter.
This measurement is for nursery stock trees only. [See "diameter at breast
height" (dbh) for measurement of existing trees.]
CAPTION — The name by which the plat is legally and commonly known.
CLERK — The Township Clerk of the Charter Township of Northville.
CONCEPT PLAN — See "plat."
CONDOMINIUM — A condominium is a system of separate ownership of
individual units in multiunit projects created according to Public Act 59 of
1978, as amended. In addition to the interest acquired in a particular unit,
each unit owner is also a tenant in common in the underlying fee and in the
spaces and building parts used in common by all the unit owners.
CONSTRUCTION PLANS — The drawings accompanying a subdivision plat
that show the specific location and design of improvements to be installed
in the subdivision.
CONTIGUOUS — Lots are contiguous when at least one boundary line of
one lot shares a boundary line or lines of another lot.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Development other than a planned
unit development or open space community.
CORNER CLEARANCE — A triangular-shaped portion of land established at
an intersection where nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed
§ 152-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-5
1:494
to grow within a specified vertical area that may limit or obstruct the sight
distance of motorists. The corner clearance requirement may apply to the
intersection of a public street or a private road.
CUL-DE-SAC — See "streets."
CULVERT — A structure designed to convey a watercourse not incorporated
in a closed drainage system, under a road or pedestrian walk.
DATE OF FILING — The date on which a plat that complies with all of the
application data requirements in this chapter is submitted to the Township
for review in accordance with procedures outlined in this chapter.
DEDICATION — A conveyance of land by the owner in the nature of a gift
or grant and an acceptance of that land by or on behalf of the public.
DENSITY — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross acre of land
to be developed.
DESIGN FLOOD — The relative size or magnitude of a major flood of
reasonable expectancy, which reflects both flood experience and flood
potential and is the basis of the delineation of the floodway, the flood hazard
area, and the water surface elevations.
DESIGN STANDARDS — Standards that set forth specific improvement
requirements.
DETENTION AREA — A man-made or natural water collector facility
designed to collect surface and subsurface water in order to impede its flow.
DEVELOPMENT — A planning or construction project involving substantial
property improvement and, usually, a change of land use character within
the site the act of using land for building or extractive purposes.
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — The diameter in inches of an
existing tree measured at 4 1/2 feet above the existing grade. Refer to
Article 23, Tree and Woodlands Replacement, of Chapter 170, Zoning, for
additional criteria.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading, or other means.
§ 152-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-5
1:495
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — The system through which water flows from the
land, including all watercourses, water bodies and wetlands.
DRIVEWAY — A private lane, serving one principal building and designed
primarily for use by vehicles, that connects a building with a street.
EASEMENT — A specific area of land over which a liberty, privilege, or
advantage is granted by the owner to the public, a corporation, or some
particular person or part of the public for specific uses and purposes, and
which shall be designated a "public" or "private" easement, depending on
the nature of the user.
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS — Features, natural resources or
land characteristics that are sensitive to improvements. Such constraints
may require conservation measures, the application of creative
development techniques, or limited development to prevent degradation of
the environment.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments, or
the wearing away of the land surface by water, wind, ice, or gravity.
FENCE — An artificially constructed unroofed barrier of wood, masonry,
stone, wire, metal, or similar manufactured material which may or may not
serve as an enclosure.
FLOODPLAIN — That land which can be expected to be inundated and that
is delineated on the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map prepared by the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, as may be
supplemented, amended, or revised from time to time, or as determined by
the MDNR. For specific regulations refer to Article 25, Floodplain Control,
of Chapter 170, Zoning.
FRONTAGE — See "lot frontage."
GOVERNING BODY — The Board of Trustees of the Charter Township of
Northville, Wayne County, Michigan.
GRADE — The slope of a street, other public way, or land specified in
percentage (%) terms.
GROUND COVER — A planting of low-growing plants or sod that in time
forms a dense mat covering the area, preventing soil from being blown or
washed away, and the growth of unwanted plants.
GREENBELT — A strip of land of definite width and location reserved for the
planting of a combination of shrubs, trees and ground cover to serve as an
obscuring screen and buffer for noise or visual enhancement, in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter. In some cases a wall or fence may be
permitted as part of the greenbelt.
§ 152-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-5
1:496
HALF STREET — See "street."
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been compacted or covered
with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
IMPOUNDMENT — An artificially created body of water, such as a pond,
confined by a dam, dike, floodgate, or other barrier.
IMPROVEMENTS — Grading, street surfacing, curbs and gutters,
sidewalks, bikepaths, walkways, water mains, fire hydrants, sanitary
sewers, storm sewers, drains, culverts, bridges and other additions to the
natural state of land which increases its value, utility, habitability, and use
as a subdivision.
ISLAND — In street design, a raised area, usually curbed, placed to guide
traffic and separate lanes, or used for landscaping, signage, or lighting.
LAND DIVISION ACT — The Land Division Act, Michigan Public Act No. 288
of 1967, as amended.70
LOT — A measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described
and fixed in a recorded plat.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot,
excluding any street rights-of-way.
LOT (CORNER) — A lot abutting upon two streets at their intersection or
upon two parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than
135°.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 152-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-5
1:497
LOT DEPTH — The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines,
measured along the median between the side lot lines. (See lot lines figure.)
LOT DEPTH — A lot located behind other lots or parcels that has access to
a public street or private road by means of a narrow strip of land that does
not meet the minimum lot width at the front lot (right-of-way) line.
LOT FRONTAGE — The length of the front lot line measured along the
street right-of-way or easement line.
LOT LINE — The fixed boundaries of a lot described by a survey and
recorded in a plat.
LOT (REVERSE FRONTAGE) — A through lot that is not accessible from one
of the parallel or nonintersecting streets upon which it fronts.
FRONT LOT LINE — The lot line separating a lot from a street right-ofway
or easement line.
A.
REAR LOT LINE — A lot line opposite and most distant from the front
lot line. In the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lot or
parcel, it means an imaginary line 10 feet in length entirely within the
lot or parcel, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot
line.
B.
SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
$TKSLLDIR/images/NO1919/1919-152 Defs. Lot Lines.tif
C.
§ 152-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-5
1:498
LOT (THROUGH) — A lot, other than a corner lot, that fronts upon two
more or less parallel streets or upon two streets that do not intersect at the
boundaries of the lot.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance along a straight line between the
side lot lines at the minimum front yard setback line. (See lot lines figure.)
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be required and
accepted by the Charter Township of Northville to ensure that necessary
improvements will function as required for a specific period of time.
MASTER PLAN — A comprehensive, long-range plan adopted and amended
from time to time by the Planning Commission, that is intended to serve
§ 152-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-5
1:499
as a guide for growth and development of the Township. The Master Plan
consists of maps, text, tables, and graphics with recommendations
concerning economic development, housing, recreation, open space,
transportation, community facilities, and land use. This plan may also be
referred to as the "Master Plan of Land Use," "Future Land Use Plan" or
"Comprehensive Plan" and also includes Bikepath Plans, the Thoroughfare
Master Utility Plan, Corridor Plans, Subarea Plans adopted as part of the
Master Plan, and any other plans that could apply to the above-mentioned
document.
MDNR — Michigan Department of Natural Resources.
MDPH — Michigan Department of Public Health.
MEDIAN — That portion of a divided street separating lanes of traffic
proceeding in opposite directions.
MODEL HOME — A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes which
typifies the type of units that will be constructed in the subdivision and
which will not be permanently occupied during its use as a model.
MULCH — A layer of wood chips, dry leaves, straw, hay, plastic, or other
materials placed on the surface of the soil around plants to retain moisture,
prevents weeds from growing, hold soil in place. or aid plant growth.
OFFSET — The gap or distance between the center lines of driveways or
streets that are across the street from one another.
OFF SITE — Any premises not located within the area of the property to be
subdivided, whether or not in the common ownership of the proprietor for
subdivision approval.
OFF-STREET PARKING — Parking that is provided within a parking lot,
parking structure, or private driveway.
ON-STREET PARKING — Parking that is permitted on a dedicated street
right-of-way or approved private road.
OPEN SPACE — Land within or related to a development which is designed
and intended for the enjoyment and use of residents of the subdivision, and
not owned by an individual, or dedicated for public use. Open space shall
be unoccupied and unobstructed from the round upward except for living
plant material and recreational facilities (such as neighborhood parks, golf
courses, ball fields, sidewalks, bikepaths, pathways and gazebos) permitted
signs, and necessary drives to access open space facilities and utility lines.
OPEN SPACE COMMUNITY — A development of open space community is a
development approach that may be approved by the Township, pursuant to
the provisions of Article 20, Development Options, of Chapter 170, Zoning,
to retain open space in development and is found in.
OPEN SPACE, PUBLIC — An open space area conveyed or otherwise
dedicated to the Township, a school district, a state or county agency, or
other public body for recreational or conservational uses.
§ 152-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-5
1:500
OPEN SPACE, PRIVATE — An open space area that is privately maintained
and has not been accepted for maintenance or ownership by Northville
Township.
OUTLOT — A lot set aside for purposes other than a building site, park or
other land dedicated to public use or reserved to private use, when included
within the boundary of a recorded plat.
PARCEL or TRACT — A continuous area or acreage of land which can be
described as provided for in the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.).
PARKING SPACE — An area provided for the parking of a motor vehicle.
PEDESTRIAN THROUGH-BLOCK CONNECTOR — A pedestrian pathway
located at street level, but off the street, to provide short cuts through
development blocks.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, limited partnership,
association or corporation, or other legal entity and their lessees, trustees
or receivers appointed by any court. In any instance an agent having
apparent authority to control the use or occupation of such persons having
property regulated by this chapter shall be equally liable with his, her or its
principal for any requirements or penalties provided in this chapter.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security that may be accepted by
the Charter Township of Northville as a guarantee that the improvements
required as part of an application for development are satisfactorily
completed.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that permits full or partial absorption of
stormwater.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) — An area that is planned,
developed, operated, and maintained as a single entity containing one or
more structures to accommodate a variety of residential and related uses,
in accordance with regulations in Chapter 170, Zoning.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Charter
Township of Northville.
PLAT — A map or chart of a subdivision of land, prepared in conformance
with the Land Division Act.
CONCEPT PLAN — A preliminary presentation prepared prior to the
tentative preliminary plat in order to enable the proprietor to receive
comment and direction from Township representatives in preparing a
development proposal. The concept plan illustrates general information
about the site and a schematic plan for the proposed layout of the
subdivision streets, lots and other features.
A.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A map showing all salient features of a
proposed subdivision, or phase of a subdivision submitted to the
Township for the purposes of preliminary consideration, and prepared
in accordance with this chapter and the Land Division Act. The
B.
§ 152-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-5
1:501
POTABLE WATER SUPPLY — Water suitable for drinking or cooking
purposes.
PRELIMINARY PLOT APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights prior
to final approval after specific elements of a development plan have been
agreed upon by the Planning Commission, Township Board and the
proprietor.
PRIVATE ROAD — A road that is privately maintained and has not been
accepted for maintenance or ownership by the Wayne County Department
of Public Services or the State of Michigan.
PROPRIETOR — A natural person, firm, association, partnership,
corporation or combination of any of them which may hold any ownership
interest in land whether recorded or not.
PROTECTED TREES — Trees that are protected under Article 23, Tree and
Woodlands Replacement, of Chapter 170, Zoning.
PUBLIC SAFETY DEPARTMENT — The Police and Fire departments of the
Charter Township of Northville.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewerage system as defined in Michigan Public Act 98
of 1913, as amended (MCL 324.4101 et seq.).
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any person, firm or corporation, municipal department,
board or commission, or other public authority duly authorized to furnish
and furnishing under federal, state or Township regulations to the public,
services such as gas, steam, electricity, storm sewers, sanitary sewers,
public water, telephone lines (not cellular phone transmissions, cable
television services or communication antennas), telegraph, transportation,
water or other services to residents of the Township.
PUBLIC WALKWAY — See "sidewalk."
RECORD DRAWINGS — Construction plans that have been revised upon
completion of construction to illustrate the recorded location and details of
improvements.
REPLAT — The process of changing, or the map or plat which changes, the
boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof. The legal dividing
of an outlot within a recorded subdivision plat without changing the exterior
boundaries of the outlot is not a replat.
RETAINING WALL — A structure erected between lands of different
elevation to protect structures and/or prevent the washing down or erosion
of earth from the upper slope level.
preliminary plat review process is separated into tentative preliminary
review and final preliminary review phases.
FINAL PLAT — A map of a subdivision of land, or phase of a subdivision,
which is substantially in conformance with the approved preliminary
plat, prepared in a form that is ready for approval of this chapter
and the Land Division Act, and is suitable for recording by the Wayne
County Register of Deeds.
C.
§ 152-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-5
1:502
RETENTION BASIN — A pond, pool or basin without an outlet for water and
relies on percolation into the ground to dewater.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land reserved and dedicated for a street, alley,
walkway, or other public purpose, and which may be occupied by public
utilities, such as electric transmission lines, gas pipelines, cable television
lines, fiber optics lines, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewer mains,
street trees, or other utility uses. Rights-of-way established and shown
on the final plat are to be distinct and separate from the lots or parcels
adjoining such rights-of-way, and are not to be included in the dimensions
or areas of such lots or parcels.
RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES — The lines that form the boundaries of a right-ofway.
SEDIMENTATION — A deposit of soil that has been transported from its site
of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity, or other natural means as a product of
erosion.
SETBACK — The distance required to obtain the minimum required
distance between the front, side, or rear lot lines and the building line or
parking lot setbacks from a public street or private road shall be measured
from the right-of-way line or easement. Setbacks shall remain as open space
as defined herein, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter.
SIDEWALK — A paved path that provides for pedestrian use and is usually
located at the side of a road within the right-of-way.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of roadway visible to a driver. Generally
related to the distance and time considered to be sufficient for the driver
to safely execute a maneuver (such as complete a left turn for an access
point), under normal weather conditions, as specified by Wayne County
Department of Public Services.
SINGLE MEANS OF ACCESS — A road layout where the circulation system
where, at some point, access to a lot or lots is only provided at one point. A
"single means of access," for example, may be a dead end street or a loop
road system with only one outlet to a public street.
STORMWATER DETENTION — A provision for storage of stormwater runoff
and the controlled release of such runoff during and after a flood or storm.
STORMWATER RETENTION — See "retention basin."
STREETS — Streets and roads are classified as follows:
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE — An arterial street or road with the
principal function to move longer distance travel to and through the
Township. Major thoroughfares are generally the section (mile) roads
with an existing or planned right-of-way of 120 feet. Major
thoroughfares may also be referred to as county primary roads or
arterial roads.
$TKSLLDIR/images/NO1919/1919-152 Defs. Major Thoroughfare.tif
A.
§ 152-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-5
1:503
SUBDIVISION — The partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land
by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators,
legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease
of more than one year, or of building development, where the act of division
creates five or more parcels of land each of which is 10 acres or less in
area; or five or more parcels of land each of which is 10 acres or less
in area are created by successive divisions within a period of 10 years.
"Subdivide" or "subdivision" does not include a property transfer between
two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added
to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a
building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the Land
Division Act and of applicable Township ordinances.
SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENT — A written agreement
between the proprietor and the Township Board whereby the proprietor
COLLECTOR STREETS — Collector streets and roads provide access
to abutting properties and traffic circulation within residential,
commercial, industrial, and public uses. The purpose of a collector road
is to collect traffic throughout the Township and channel it to the major
thoroughfare (arterial) system. Collector roads are typically the quarter
section (quarter or half mile) streets and generally have a right-of-way
of 86 feet.
$TKSLLDIR/images/NO1919/1919-152 Defs. Collectors and
Boulevards.tif
B.
LOCAL STREETS — Local streets and roads that typically have a sixtyfoot
right-of-way and primarily provide direct access to abutting land
and to collector and arterial streets.
$TKSLLDIR/images/NO1919/1919-152 Defs. Local Residential
Streets.tif
C.
CUL-DE-SAC — A local street or road with only one outlet and having
a circular turnaround for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic
movement.
D.
DIVIDED STREET — A street or road having an island, boulevard,
median or other barrier separating moving lanes.
E.
HALF-STREET — A street or road containing less than the required
right-of-way width.
F.
DEAD-END STREET — A street or road that terminates with no current
or proposed thoroughfare to another street or road.
G.
TURNAROUND — A short street or road terminated by a permanent or
temporary vehicular turnaround.
H.
STUB STREET — A portion of a street or road for which an extension
has been proposed and is terminated by a temporary cul-de-sac.
I.
§ 152-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-5
1:504
covenants to complete all required public improvements within a specified
time period following the signing of the final plat by the Township.
SURVEYOR — A land surveyor who is registered in the State of Michigan as
a registered land surveyor or a civil engineer who is registered in the State
of Michigan as a registered professional engineer.
TOPOGRAPHICAL MAP — A map prepared by a surveyor showing existing
physical characteristics, with contour lines at sufficient intervals to permit
determination of proposed grades and drainage.
TOWNSHIP — The Charter Township of Northville, Michigan.
TOWNSHIP ENGINEER or ENGINEER — The staff engineer or consulting
engineer designated by the Township Board, to advise the Township
administration, Township Board, and Planning Commission on items such as
drainage, grading, paving, stormwater management and control, utilities,
and other related site engineering and civil engineering issues. This term
shall include Township specialists on such subjects as traffic and
communications.
TOWNSHIP PLANNER or PLANNER — The Planning Director, staff planner
or consulting planner designated by the Township Board to advise the
Township administration, Township Board, and Planning Commission on
items such as planning, zoning, land use, subdivision, housing and other
related planning and development issues. This term shall include Township
specialists on such subjects as landscaping, woodlands and wetlands.
TRANSITION AREA — An area within a subdivision of a specific width along
the perimeter which is intended to help ensure compatibility with adjacent
land uses. The transition area may be an area where existing woodland
and slopes are not disturbed, or landscaping as provided, or lot sizes are
provided similar to those adjacent to the subdivision.
TREE — A woody plant which has an erect perennial trunk, which at
maturity is 13 feet or more in height, which has a more or less definite
crown of foliage. For purposes of this chapter the following definitions of
types of trees shall apply:
VESTED RIGHT — The right to initiate or continue the establishment of a
use that will be contrary to a restriction or regulation coming into effect
when the project associated with the use is completed (sometimes referred
to as "grandfathered").
WAYNE COUNTY DPS — The Wayne County Department of Public Services.
CANOPY TREE — A deciduous tree which has a mature crown spread of
greater than 15 feet and a mature height of 40 or more feet in southern
Michigan, and which has a trunk with at least five feet of clear stem at
maturity.
A.
STREET TREE — A canopy tree along a public street or approved
private road that is typically located in a street right-of-way or access
easement.
B.
§ 152-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-5
1:505
WALKWAY — See "sidewalk."
WETLAND, STATE-REGULATED — Land characterized by the presence of
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support (and that under
normal circumstances does support) wetland vegetation or aquatic life that
requires saturated or seasonally saturated soil conditions for growth and
reproduction and is commonly referred to as a bog, swamp, fen, pond,
marsh or wet meadow that is five acres or more in area, or is contiguous to
any lake, stream, or other body of water, and is regulated by the Michigan
Department of Natural Resources including:71
WOODLAND AREAS — Areas which are designated on the Northville
Township Woodlands Area Map as regulated woodlands under Article 23,
Tree and Woodlands Replacement, of Chapter 170, Zoning, and which are
characterized by a distinctive assemblage of vegetation which is unique
because of tree size, diversity, density, species, health and vigor, and may
include the presence of landmark or historic trees; because of vegetative
understory species and quality; soil or habitat quality; or because of value
such as a scenic asset, windblock or noise buffer; and including such areas
which were previously existing for a period of three years prior to a site plan
being submitted.
YARDS — The open spaces an the same lot with a main building unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter, and as defined herein:
Wetlands contiguous to any lake, stream, river, pond or other
watercourse, whether partially or entirely contained within the project
site.
A.
Wetlands, regardless of size, which are partially or entirely within the
500 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of any lake, stream, river,
pond, or other watercourse, unless it is determined by the Michigan
Department of Natural Resources that there is no surface water or
groundwater connection between the wetland and the water body.
B.
Wetlands which are five acres or larger in size, whether partially or
entirely contained within the project site, and which are not contiguous
to any lake, stream, river, pond or other watercourse.
C.
Wetlands, regardless of size, which are not contiguous to any lake,
stream, river, pond or other watercourse, if the Department of Natural
Resources determines the protection of the wetland is essential to
the preservation of the natural resources of the state from pollution,
impairment or destruction.
D.
FRONT YARD — An open space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front
lot line and the nearest point of the main building.
A.
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 152-5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-5
1:506
ZONING ORDINANCE — The Charter Township of Northville Zoning
Ordinance (Chapter 170, Zoning, of the Code of the Charter Township of
Northville).
REAR YARD — An open space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot
line and the nearest point of the main building, in the case of a corner
lot, the rear yard may be opposite either street frontage.
B.
SIDE YARD — An open space between a main building and the side lot
line extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which
is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to
the nearest point of the main building.
$TKSLLDIR/images/NO1919/1919-152 Defs. Yards.tif
C.
§ 152-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-5
1:507

ARTICLE III
Submittal Requirements
§ 152-6. Table of Submission Requirements.
The Table of Submission Requirements is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 152-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-6
1:509

ARTICLE IV
Plat Review Procedures
§ 152-7. Summary of review procedures.
The plat review process shall consist of the following steps (See flow chart
at end of chapter.):
§ 152-8. Extension of review deadlines.
Deadlines for the Township to take action on a preliminary or final plat, as
specified in the Land Division Act and reiterated in this chapter, may be
extended by mutual written consent of the proprietor and the Township.
A waiver of the review deadlines may be required to permit concurrent
processing of related review applications (i.e., PUD, HPUD or open space
community). In the absence of written consent for such a waiver, denial of
a plat shall be considered appropriate if the Township has not been given
sufficient time within the deadline to evaluate the impact of a proposed plat
on the public health, safety and welfare, pursuant to the regulations in this
chapter.
§ 152-9. Coordination of rezoning approval or development options
with subdivision.
A. Optional preapplication conference (§ 152-10), involving Township staff
and consultants to achieve an understanding of the subdivision
regulations and procedures; no formal action is taken at this step.
B. Optional concept plan review (§ 152-11), involving Township staff,
consultants and Planning Commission for direction to the proprietor,
but no formal action is taken.
C. Tentative approval of the preliminary plat (§ 152-12).
D. Final approval of the preliminary plat (§ 152-13).
E. Final plat review (§ 152-15).
F. Final plat approval (§ 152-16).
A. Development options. A subdivision review may be conducted
simultaneously with the review process for development options
permitted under Chapter 170, Zoning (open space community, planned
unit development, Haggerty Road planned unit development, and any
similar development options which may be available). The plans
required for the development options shall be submitted in a form to
satisfy both the requirements of these Subdivision Regulations and
Chapter 170, Zoning. In this process, following any public hearing
required for the development option, the tentative preliminary plat may
be processed simultaneously with the concept plan. The final
preliminary plat shall not be processed or approved until the Township
Board has approved the development option. As noted in § 152-8 above,
§ 152-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-9
1:511
§ 152-10. Preapplication conference (optional).
Prior to submitting an application for plat approval, the proprietor may
request a conference with the Township staff and/or consultants to achieve
an understanding of subdivision regulations and procedures. Fees shall be
established by resolution of the Township Board.
§ 152-11. Concept plan review (optional).
in selection of a development option, the petitioner shall waive the
review and approval deadlines for a subdivision plat specified in the
Land Division Act.
B. Issuance of permits. No building permits or certificates of occupancy
shall be issued until the Township has granted final approval of the
zoning application and the final plat has been properly recorded.
A. Purpose. Pursuant to Section 107(1) of the Land Division Act [MCL
560.107(1)], a proprietor may submit a proposed plat for concept
(sketch) plan review. The purposes of the concept plan review are as
follows:
(1) To acquaint the Township staff and consultants with the proposed
plat and to provide the proprietor direction prior to development of
more detailed tentative preliminary plat information. The
proprietor may request review of the concept plan by the Planning
Commission but such an action is optional on the part of the
proprietor.
(2) To inform the proprietor of the submittal requirements, review
procedures and design standards for approval of the plat, and the
concurrent review process if the development is proposed under
one of the development options provided for in Chapter 170,
Zoning.
(3) To determine if the land is appropriately zoned and the ability of
existing infrastructure to accommodate the proposed project.
(4) To determine the possible extent Township regulated woodlands,
floodplains, state-regulated wetlands and other important natural
features may influence the design of the plat, or encourage
consideration of one of the development options provided for in
Chapter 170, Zoning.
(5) To determine the need for a traffic impact study in accordance with
Chapter 170, Zoning, and discuss the general requirements for
such a study if it is needed.
B. Submittal requirements. The proprietor shall submit a concept plan
which illustrates in a schematic form, existing features on the site and
one or more possible layouts for the proposed subdivision (refer to
Table of Submission Requirements included at the end of this chapter).
§ 152-9 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-11
1:512
§ 152-12. Tentative review of preliminary plat.
The procedure for preparation, submittal and tentative approval of a
preliminary plat (herein referred to as a "tentative preliminary plat") in
accordance with Section 112 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.112) shall
be as follows:
C. Review by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may review
the concept plan at the request of the proprietor to obtain input. No
formal action is taken, however, and the Planning Commission is not
bound by the comments made under this review.
A. Summary of review: Tentative review of the preliminary plat involves a
public informational meeting, review of basic street layout and lot
arrangement, the review of additional information required under this
chapter, and a recommendation by the Planning Commission to the
Township Board for approval or denial. The Township Board, within 90
days from the date of filing of an application that is accepted as
complete, shall tentatively approve and note its approval on the copy of
the preliminary plat to be returned to the proprietor, or set forth in
writing its reasons for rejection and requirements for tentative
approval.
B. Filing: The proprietor shall submit the material listed in the Table of
Submission Requirements (at the end of this chapter) to the Township
Planning Department, at least 21 days prior to the regular Planning
Commission meeting. All required materials must be included for the
submission to be accepted as complete.
(1) The Planning Department shall review the submittal for
completeness. If any of the required information is missing, the
proprietor shall be notified of the additional data required and that
the application will be delayed until the required data are received
(i.e., the official submittal date for the time frame established in the
Land Division Act shall be based on a complete submission; the
Township may initiate review of a partial submittal).
(2) When the information is complete, the proposed tentative
preliminary plat shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular
Planning Commission meeting.
C. Technical reviews.
(1) The Planning Department shall distribute copies of the tentative
preliminary plat to the Township Engineer, Planner, Traffic
Engineer and Township departments, as appropriate, for technical
review and may transmit a copy to the school district and Township
Attorney.
(2) Staff reports shall be distributed to the Planning Commission and
the proprietor.
§ 152-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-12
1:513
D. Notice to adjacent property owners. Prior to action on the tentative
preliminary plat by the Planning Commission, a notice shall be sent to
all property owners within 300 feet of the boundary of the proposed
subdivision, based on the Township's assessment records. Such notice
shall be mailed at least five days prior to the Planning Commission
meeting. The notice shall explain that a subdivision has been proposed,
give the location and general information, and note the time and place
where the public can attend the meeting when the subdivision proposal
will be discussed. The purpose of the notification is intended to inform
the public of the project; it is not a public hearing. The Planning
Commission, however, may elect to accept comments from the public
during the informational meeting.
E. Review by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall
review the tentative preliminary plat based on the requirements of this
chapter, Chapter 170, Zoning, as amended, and applicable elements of
the Township Master Plan.
F. Planning Commission recommendation (tentative approval). The
Planning Commission shall recommend one of the following actions to
the Township Board on the proposed tentative preliminary plat within
60 days of the date of filing.
(1) Recommend approval: Should the Planning Commission find that
all requirements have been satisfactorily met, it shall recommend
tentative approval of the preliminary plat, and the Chairperson
shall make a notation to that effect on each copy of the preliminary
plat and distribute copies of it as follows:
(a) Return one copy to the proprietor.
(b) Retain three copy which shall become a matter of permanent
record in the Planning Commission files.
(c) Forward one copy to the School Board or School
Superintendent of the School District (for information
purposes).
(d) Forward the remaining copies to the Board via the Clerk's
office with recommendations for approval as well as a copy of
the Planning Commission minutes.
(2) Recommend conditional approval: The recommendation may be a
conditional approval, only if the proprietor waives, in writing, the
review time requirement set forth in § 152-8 of this chapter. The
preliminary plat shall not be forwarded to the Board until revised
plans or documentation which demonstrates compliance with said
conditions have been submitted by the proprietor. The Planning
Director shall review the revised plans, with input from other staff
and consultants as requested, prior to submission to the Township
Board, and endorse all copies of the submitted plan.
§ 152-12 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-12
1:514
§ 152-13. Final review of preliminary plat.
The procedure for the preparation and review of a final preliminary plat is
as follows:
(3) Recommend denial: Should the Planning Commission recommend
denial of the tentative preliminary plat, the reasons shall be
recorded in the minutes of that meeting and forwarded to the
Board along with a copy of the preliminary plat.
G. Review by Township Board (tentative approval).
(1) The Board shall not review a tentative preliminary plat until it has
received the review and recommendations of the Planning
Commission. Following the receipt of such recommendations, the
Board shall consider the preliminary plat at a regularly scheduled
meeting or a meeting scheduled for that purpose. The Board shall
take action on the preliminary plat within 90 days of the date of
initial filing of the plat with the Planning Department, unless the
time period is waived by the proprietor as provided by this chapter.
(2) Should the Board give tentative approval the tentative preliminary
plat, it shall be deemed to confer upon the proprietor the right to
proceed with the preparation of a final preliminary plat. The Clerk
shall record the Board's approval on the plat and return one copy to
the proprietor.
(3) Tentative approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute final
approval of the preliminary plat. It shall be deemed as an approval
of the lot sizes, lot orientation and street layout as a guide in
preparing a final preliminary plat. Any amendments to Chapter
170, Zoning, or this chapter that become effective following
approval of the tentative preliminary plat but prior to the
submission of a complete final preliminary plat package, shall
apply.
(4) Tentative approval of the Board shall be effective for one year.
Should the tentative preliminary plat, in whole or in part, not be
submitted for final approval within this time limit, the preliminary
plat must again be submitted to the Commission and Board for
tentative approval under the regulations effective at the time
unless an extension is applied for by the proprietor in writing prior
to expiration, and such request is granted in writing by the Board.
(5) No installation or construction of improvements shall be made on
the basis of tentative approval of the preliminary plat including
grading, tree removal or land balancing.
H. Projects with future phases. The Township Board may, upon
recommendation of the Planning Commission, give tentative approval
for specific phases of developments where the planned unit
development or open space options are being utilized.
§ 152-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-13
1:515
A. Summary of review: Review by applicable outside (state and Wayne
County) agencies prior to review and action by the Township Board. The
Board shall review the final preliminary plat, after the plats have been
revised to be in conformance with the requirements of outside
agencies. If there have been major changes in the tentative preliminary
plat, as determined by the Township Board, in accordance with
§ 152-section 406(5), then the application must return to the Planning
Commission and Township Board for tentative preliminary review. If
there have not been major changes from the tentative preliminary plat,
the Township Board shall consider and review the final preliminary plat
at its next meeting, or within 20 days of the date of filing of an
application that is accepted as complete, unless the proprietor grants a
time extension to address concerns of the Board. The Township Board
will then either approve the application, if the proprietor has met all the
conditions laid down for approval of the final preliminary plat have been
met, or deny the application. The Township Board will then instruct the
Clerk to promptly notify the proprietor of approval or rejection in
writing, and if rejected to give the reasons.
B. Agency Reviews. The proprietor shall deliver to the Clerk 15 copies of
the final preliminary plat bearing the necessary approvals of all other
agencies as required by the Subdivision Act including:
(1) Wayne County Department of Public Services - Roads Division.
(2) Wayne County Department of Public Services - Drains Division.
(3) Wayne County Health Department.
(4) Wayne County Plat Board.
(5) Michigan Department of Natural Resources.
(6) Michigan Department of Commerce (advisory review).
(7) Public utilities serving the area.
C. Technical (staff) review:
(1) Upon receipt of the proposed final preliminary plat, the Clerk shall
immediately transmit copies of it to the Planning Department
where the proposed plat shall be checked for completeness. Should
any of the data required by this chapter be omitted, the proprietor
shall be notified of the additional data required and that the
application will be delayed until the required data are received.
The date of submittal in regard to permissible review periods shall
be that date upon which the application and all required
information, including final correspondence from outside agencies,
has been submitted and accepted as complete. A copy of the
preliminary plat submitted for final approval shall be forwarded to
the Township Engineer and Township Planner for review.
§ 152-13 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-13
1:516
(2) Upon finding the information is complete, the proposed final
preliminary plat shall be placed on the agenda of the next regularly
scheduled Township Board meeting. A written review letter shall be
submitted by the Township Engineer and Township Planner and
forwarded to the Township Board no less than three days prior to
the Board meeting at which the application will be reviewed.
D. Conformance to tentative preliminary plat. The final preliminary plat
shall conform to the approved tentative preliminary plat. The plan shall
in all ways conform with the provisions of this chapter. The final
preliminary plat shall show the actual geometrics and dimensions of the
tract and of proposed streets, and shall show exact lot dimensions. This
submission shall include a plan view for the proposed location of public
utilities, including sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water mains and
private utilities including electric, gas, telephone and cable television.
E. Major changes.
(1) If the proprietor makes any major changes to the plat following
tentative approval, the Township Board has the authority to require
the proprietor to resubmit the plat for tentative approval to allow
the Township and the public to respond to the changes. Major
changes shall include, but not be limited to, the following changes:
(a) Adds lots to the plat; or
(b) Deletes or adds a road or access point; or
(c) Alters the basic layout of the street system; or
(d) Significantly alters the previously approved topography or
drainage plan; or
(e) Eliminates or reduces recreational facilities; or
(f) Alters the phasing by adding lots, extending streets beyond the
maximum length permitted, or deletes areas in a phase that
had been designated for open space; or
(g) Results in any lot or infrastructure element not meeting any
Township ordinance; or
(h) Due to the location of utilities, there is a loss of natural
features and landscaping that is not being replaced; or
(i) The boundaries of MDNR regulated wetlands are changed to
alter lot layout or road arrangement.
(2) Major changes made by the proprietor to the preliminary plat
following tentative approval shall relieve the Township from its
commitment to honor the general terms and conditions of the
tentative preliminary plat approval, since such major changes may
result in changes to the basic premise on which the tentative
§ 152-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-13
1:517
§ 152-14. Duration of final approval for preliminary plat.
Final preliminary plat approval shall be effective for a period of two years
from the date of final approval. The two-year period may be extended if
applied for prior to the termination date by the proprietor and granted by
the Board in writing.
§ 152-15. Final plat review.
approval was given. If the proprietor does not agree with the
Planning Commission decision as to a major change determination,
they may appeal the decision to the Township Board.
F. Design and site improvements: The preliminary plat shall meet all
design requirements set forth in Article V of this chapter.
G. Review by Township Board (final preliminary plat).
(1) At its next meeting, or within 20 days of the date of filing of a final
preliminary plat application accepted as complete, the Township
Board shall approve, modify or disapprove the final preliminary
plat.
(2) If all the required approvals of other authorities as required by the
Land Division Act have been received, and the final preliminary plat
meets all conditions laid down for tentative approval and meets all
requirements of Chapter 170, Zoning, the Board shall give final
approval to the preliminary plat
H. Notification by Clerk: The Clerk shall, within 10 working days, notify
the proprietor of approval or rejection in writing; if rejected, reasons
shall be given.
A. Summary of review. The review of engineering and construction plans
prior to construction by the Township Engineer, the Township Water
and Sewer Department staff, the Township Building Department and
other staff or consultants.
B. Construction plans and specifications. No installation or construction of
any improvements shall be made before construction/engineering plans
and specifications have been approved by the Township Engineer and
by other authorities that have jurisdiction over the improvements.
Where a plat straddles municipal boundaries, no permits for
construction shall be issued until verification has been received that the
preliminary plat has been approved by both municipalities.
C. Required improvements and documents. Before the final plat is
approved by the Township, the proprietor shall be required to complete
all of the following improvements at his/her expense and without
reimbursement from any public agency or any improvement district
(except as may be permitted by state law), and in accordance with the
conditions and specifications contained in this chapter. The proprietor
§ 152-13 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-15
1:518
shall dedicate these improvements to the Township or other applicable
governmental unit, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on
the dedicated property and public improvements. These improvements
shall be completed in accordance with the approved preliminary plat,
the approvals of other authorities, the regulations in this chapter
(particularly Article IV) and the requirements of other applicable
ordinances, laws and regulations, and shall be subject to inspection by
the Township Engineer and other authorities having jurisdiction over
such improvements
(1) Required improvements include:
(a) Monuments and lot irons. Monuments and lot irons shall be set
in accordance with Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, as
amended (MCL 560.101 et seq.), and the rules of the Michigan
Department of Treasury. If any monument or lot iron is
removed during construction the responsible party shall
secure the services of a registered land surveyor to replace the
monument or lot iron. Placing of required interior monuments
and lot corner irons may be delayed by the Board for a period
of one year from the date of approval of the final plat by the
Board, provided that:
[1] Boundary monuments or other approved irons, adequately
witnessed, shall be in place at all angles and at all ends of
curves in the boundaries of the subdivision; and
[2] The proprietor shall have delivered to the Township Clerk
cash or a certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of
credit running to the Township, whichever the proprietor
selects, for each monument and corner iron in an amount
set under Section 560.125 of the Land Division Act.
[3] Such cash, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of
credit shall be returned to the proprietor upon receipt of a
certificate by a surveyor that the monuments and irons
have been placed as required within the time specified.
Such return shall be for entire blocks, not for portions of
blocks. If the proprietor defaults, the Board shall engage a
surveyor, at the proprietor's expense, to locate the
monuments and irons called for on the plat and on
completion of the work shall return any unexpended
balance of the deposit to the party from whom it was
received.
(b) Streets (including curbs and gutters, where applicable),
intersection improvements (acceleration/deceleration lanes or
tapers and passing lanes) in accordance with the standards
and receipt of permits from the Wayne County DPS, street
signs and streetlights (where applicable).
§ 152-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-15
1:519
(c) Utilities including storm drainage, water supply system,
sanitary sewage disposal and any franchised utilities.
(d) Sidewalks, bicycle paths, trail systems and crosswalks (any or
all of these items as approved on the plat).
(e) Landscaping, including street trees, entranceway features and
any required buffer landscaping.
(f) Permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures.
(g) Mailbox clusters are prohibited but should be shown if
required by the United States Postal Service.
(h) Self-imposed improvements and restrictions. If the proprietor
proposes any improvements or places restrictions on any of the
land contained in the subdivision that exceed the requirements
in this chapter or Chapter 170, Zoning, such improvements
and restrictions shall be indicated on the plat and recorded in
the subdivision restrictive covenants in a form to be approved
by the Township Attorney.
(i) Streetlighting if proposed.
(2) Required documents include:
(a) Covenants and restrictions. Where the proprietor is
establishing a homeowners' association, a copy of the
declaration of covenants and restrictions that will govern the
homeowners' association must be submitted for review by the
Township Attorney and other applicable Township officials and
consultants. These covenants and restrictions shall include,
but are not necessarily limited to, the following stipulations:
[1] The homeowners' association shall be established before
any homes are sold.
[2] Membership shall be mandatory for each home buyer and
any successive home buyer.
[3] The association shall be responsible for liability insurance,
applicable taxes, and the continuing upkeep and proper
maintenance of recreational, open space, storm drainage
facilities, landscaping and other common facilities. If the
assessment falls to adequately provide this upkeep and
maintenance, the Township shall have the ability to make
such improvements and assess the cost, along with all
administrative charges, to the property tax bills of each
homeowner in the subdivision.
[4] The document establishing the homeowners' association
should identify how the association will collect moneys to
maintain the items mentioned under Subsection C(2)[3]
§ 152-15 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-15
1:520
above and challenge in court any encroachments and
violations of open space, woodland or wetland areas.
[5] Homeowners shall pay their pro rata share of the cost, and
unpaid assessments levied by the association may become
a lien on the property.
[6] The association shall be able to adjust the assessment to
meet changing needs.
D. Review of construction plans and specifications. Review of the
construction plans and specifications by the Township shall be initiated
by submitting the plans and specifications, and necessary review fees
established by the Township Board, in the form and quantity and
according to the process specified by the Building Department.
(1) Required plans. Plans and specifications shall be submitted for all
proposed improvements including, where applicable, or include all
information reviewed by the Township Engineer, sanitary sewers;
public water; storm sewers; sidewalks; bikepaths and sidewalks;
soil erosion and sedimentation control measures; site grading
(including spot and finished elevations at all property corners,
corners of all structures, and first floor elevations on each lot);
streets (including street and paving cross-sections and profiles);
streetlighting; landscaping; and signs. Cost estimates for all such
improvements shall be included.
(2) Review by other authorities; proprietor's responsibility. It shall be
the responsibility of the proprietor to obtain review and approval of
construction plans and specifications for public improvements that
are under the jurisdiction of other authorities. Evidence of all
approvals required from other authorities shall be submitted in the
form specified by the Planning Department prior to issuance of any
permits for construction.
E. Authorization to proceed.
(1) Proprietor requirements. Authorization to proceed with
construction may be granted after:
(a) Construction plans and specifications have been approved by
the Township and other applicable authorities; and
(b) All necessary permits have been issued by applicable county
and state agencies.
(c) The proprietor has submitted evidence of public liability and
property damage insurance in a form and amount specified by
the Planning Department; and
(d) The proprietor has submitted an inspection fee deposit in an
amount specified by the Planning Department.
§ 152-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-15
1:521
(e) A landscape escrow has established with the Township.
(2) Grading permit. Notwithstanding the preceding requirements,
subsequent to preliminary plat approval the proprietor may apply
for a topsoil, tree removal, and excavation permit from the Building
Department, provided that the final grading plan has been
approved by the Township Engineer. Upon receipt of the grading
permit, the proprietor may commence construction to the grades
and elevations specified on the approved grading plan.
(3) Model home. The Building Department, at its discretion, may
permit construction of up to two model homes prior to final plat
approval subject to the following conditions:
(a) Access: The lots on which the model homes are constructed
shall have direct access to a public or approved private road to
provide adequate access for emergency vehicles.
(b) Water: The lots on which model homes are constructed shall
have adequate water supply.
(c) The proprietor shall submit plans and specification and a
performance guarantee to cover the cost of all improvements
that would be necessary to achieve certificate of occupancy for
the two homes in the event that the remainder of the
subdivision is not constructed.
(d) The model homes shall not be offered for sale until certificates
of occupancy have been properly issued.
F. Preconstruction meeting. Prior to construction of subdivision
improvements, the contractor shall contact the Planning Department to
establish a date and time for a preconstruction meeting. The proprietor
shall be responsible for making all arrangements and notifying meeting
attendees. Those in attendance shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to, the proprietor, the proprietor's engineer, the contractor and
the contractor's on-site superintendent, subcontractor representatives,
the Township Engineer, representatives from Water and Sewer
Department, the Planning Director, and the Northville Township
Building Official. In addition, utility companies and other state, county,
or local governmental agencies that have facilities that may be affected
by the proposed development, or that may be able to contribute
information of use to the construction project, shall be informed of and
invited to attend the preconstruction meeting.
G. Utility inspections. No work on water mains, sanitary sewers, storm
sewers and stormwater basins, and paving shall proceed without the
presence of the Township Engineer. The contractor or proprietor shall
contact the Township Engineer at least 48 hours prior to the start of
construction to arrange for the inspection and to deposit the required
inspection fee.
§ 152-15 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-15
1:522
(1) Any work installed without inspection will not be accepted for
dedication to the Township and will not be allowed to connect to
the public system and/or be issued a certificate of occupancy
(2) Field changes. Where actual conditions encountered on the
construction site warrant design modifications, such modifications
may be permitted in accordance with the usual procedures
established by the Township for review and approval of such
modifications; provided, further, that all such modifications comply
with the regulations in this and other applicable ordinances and
laws, and provided that such modifications do not result in any
"major" changes, as defined under § 152-13 of this chapter, to the
subdivision layout or lot sizes or dimensions. Changes to the
subdivision layout or lot size or dimensions shall be subject to
Planning Commission review and Township Board approval.
H. Escrow deposits. If certain lot improvements cannot be completed
because of the season of the year, the Building Official may issue a
certificate of occupancy, provided that there is no danger to health,
safety or general welfare, upon accepting a cash escrow deposit for
20% above the full estimated cost of the improvements. All required
improvements for which escrow funds have been accepted shall be
installed by the proprietor within a period of nine months from the date
of deposit and issuance of the certificate of occupancy. If the
improvements have not been properly installed at the end of this time
period, the Building Official shall give notice to the proprietor that the
improvements shall be installed within two weeks. If the improvements
are not properly installed after two weeks, the Building Official may
request the Township Board to proceed to contract out the work for
installation of the required improvements. If costs exceed the escrow
deposit amount, the proprietor is responsible for overrun costs and all
expenses incurred by his failure to comply. At the time of issuance of the
certificate of occupancy for which escrow moneys are being deposited,
the proprietor shall file a notarized statement from the purchaser or
purchasers of the premises authorizing the Township to install the
improvements at the end of the nine-month period if the improvements
have not been properly installed by the proprietor.
I. Final inspections and acceptance.
(1) Final inspection and tests. Prior to acceptance of public facilities or
utilities for use and maintenance by the Township, all
improvements shall have been completed and equipment removed
from the site, and the final inspection and all required tests shall be
completed. Any tests which fail shall be repeated after repairs have
been made. Any portions of the work found to be unacceptable shall
be repaired or replaced prior to acceptance.
(2) Maintenance bond. Prior to final acceptance of any public utility, a
one-year maintenance and guarantee bond in an amount equal to
§ 152-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-15
1:523
25% of the cost of the improvements shall be posted with the
Township by the proprietor.
(3) Construction record drawings. Construction record drawings
showing the final locations and grades of all utilities and other
improvements shall be submitted to the Township Engineer for
review, who will then forward them to the Director of Public
Utilities for review and acceptance.
J. Alternative to completing improvements. In lieu of completion of all
public improvements prior to approval of the final plat, the Township
Board may permit the proprietor to enter into an agreement
(hereinafter referred to as a "subdivision improvement agreement") by
which the proprietor covenants to complete all required public
improvements no later than two years following the date on which the
final plat is signed by the Township. The subdivision improvement
agreement shall provide for the following:
(1) Performance guarantee. The proprietor shall agree to furnish a
performance guarantee in an amount not to exceed 120% of the
projected cost of installation of the improvements. The
performance guarantee shall be in a form specified in Article V.
(2) Subdivision improvement agreement. The subdivision
improvement agreement shall provide that the covenants
contained in the agreement shall run with the land and bind all
successors, heirs and assignees of the subdivider. The subdivision
improvement agreement shall be adopted by the Township Board
and recorded pursuant to applicable state and local laws and
ordinances.
(3) Completion of improvements. Upon substantial completion of all
required improvements, the proprietor may notify the Township in
writing of the completion or substantial completion of
improvements, and shall send a copy to the Township Engineer. The
Township Engineer shall inspect all improvements identified in the
notice and shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the Township
Board indicating either approval, partial approval, or rejection of
such improvements with a statement of reasons for any rejection.
The cost of the improvements as approved or rejected shall be
listed.
(4) Approval of improvements. The Township Board shall either
approve, partially approve, or reject the improvements based on
the Township Engineer's report, and shall notify the proprietor in
writing of the contents of the report and the action taken no later
than 30 days after receipt of the notice from the proprietor of the
completion of the improvements. Failure of the Township Board to
send or provide such notification within 30 days shall be deemed to
constitute approval, and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be
released from all liability pursuant to such performance guarantee.
§ 152-15 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-16
1:524
§ 152-16. Final plat approval.
A. Summary of approval. The Township Board will review and take action
to approve or deny the final plat at its next regular meeting or within 20
days of the date of filing of an application that is accepted as complete.
The Township Board shall either:
(1) Approve the final plat if it conforms to all of the provisions of this
chapter, and other applicable Township ordinances, and instruct
the Clerk to certify on the plat to the Township Board's approval,
showing the date of the Township Board's approval, the approval of
the County Health Department, when required, and the date
thereof as shown on the approved preliminary plat; or
(2) Reject the final plat, instruct the Clerk to give reasons in writing as
set forth in the minutes of the meeting, and return the plat to the
proprietor.
B. Submittal requirements. One approved polyester film and 15 prints on
paper no larger than 18 inches by 24 inches of the final plat along with
the completed application, the review fee authorized by the Township
Board, and the recording and filing fee required by the Land Division
Act shall be filed by the proprietor with the Township Clerk. To be
considered by the Township Board, the submittal must include the
following:
(1) The final plat shall be prepared and submitted in a form that is
consistent with the requirements in the Land Division Act,
Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended.
(2) The final plat shall conform substantially to the final preliminary
plat as approved. In determining whether the final plat satisfies this
criterion, the Township Board shall consider the following:
(a) A final plat shall be considered no longer substantially
conforming to the final preliminary plat if any of the following
revisions have been made:
[1] An increase in the number of lots.
[2] An increase or decrease in the buildable area of any lot by
over 10%.
[3] A change in the boundary of a regulated wetland or
floodplain that reduces the building envelope on any lot
below minimum requirements or would create
nonconformance with required water feature setbacks.
[4] Realignment of proposed roads and intersections.
[5] Change in the basic layout of the subdivision and lots.
§ 152-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-16
1:525
(b) A final plat shall still be considered substantially conforming to
the final preliminary plat if any of the following revisions have
been made individually and not in combination with other
revisions:
[1] Decrease in the number of lots without changing the basic
layout.
[2] Revisions to horizontal or vertical alignment of streets to
satisfy Wayne County Department of Public Services
standards, provided that such revisions do not affect the
overall arrangement of streets.
[3] Adjustment to lot lines or setbacks due to a more precise
wetland or floodplain boundary where such an adjustment
has an insignificant impact on lot area, setbacks, or buffer
zone requirements.
[4] Change in location of monuments or lot markers to correct
surveying errors.
(3) The proprietor shall submit proof of ownership in the form of title
insurance or a title opinion prepared by an attorney licensed in
Michigan.
(4) All easements and utility agreements shall be executed by the
Township and/or appropriate utility authority and the proprietor,
setting forth the terms of utility arrangements and the use and/or
development of any land reserved for the use of the public and/or
future subdivision property owners.
(5) The proprietor shall submit copies of deed restrictions and
protective covenants in their final recordable form.
C. Submittal to approving authorities. The proprietor shall submit the final
plat and, where required for approval, to obtain final approval
signatures on the final plat Mylar from the following agencies:
(1) Wayne County Department of Public Services - Roads Division.
(2) Wayne County Department of Treasury.
(3) Wayne County Department of Public Services - Drains Division.
(4) Wayne County Department of Health (if applicable).
D. Initial review. Upon receipt of the final plat, the Township Clerk shall
immediately transmit copies to the Planning Department where the plat
shall be checked for completeness. Should any of the required data
specified in this chapter be omitted, the proprietor shall be notified of
the additional data required and that review will be delayed, until the
required data are received. The date of filing shall be considered the
§ 152-16 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-16
1:526
§ 152-17. Building permits and certificates of occupancy.
date on which a plat containing all required data is received by the
Township.
E. Placement on Township Board agenda. When the submittal information
is determined to be complete, the proposed final plat shall be placed on
the agenda of the next regular Township Board meeting.
F. Review by Township Engineer and Planner. The Township Engineer and
Township Planner shall review the final plat to determine compliance
with the approved final preliminary plat and plans for utilities,
landscaping and other improvements, and notify the Township Board in
writing of their recommendations to either approve or deny the final
plat.
G. Township Board action. At its next regular meeting, or at a meeting
called within 20 days of the date of filing an application accepted as
complete, the Township Board shall review the proposed final plat to
determine conformance with the Land Division Act, this chapter, the
preliminary plat, any conditions of approval attached to the preliminary
plat and the completion of public improvements or performance
guarantees to ensure their completion. The Township Board may
approve or deny the final plat as follows:
(1) Upon determination that the final plat does not comply with the
standards and regulations in this chapter and other applicable
ordinances and laws, the Township Board shall deny the final plat,
record the reasons for denial in the official minutes, and refund the
filing recording fee.
(2) Upon determining that the final plat is in compliance with the
standards and regulations in this chapter and other applicable
ordinances and laws, the Township Board shall approve the final
plat and direct the Township Clerk to sign the plat. The Township
Clerk shall forward the required number of copies of the plat to the
Clerk of the County Plat Board, together with the filing and
recording fee.
A. Proposals to construct residential or nonresidential structures shall
comply with the review and permit requirements in the adopted
Building Code and Zoning Ordinance.72
B. When a subdivision improvement agreement and performance
guarantee have been required for a subdivision, no certificate of
occupancy for any building in the subdivision shall be issued prior to
the completion of the required public improvements and the
acceptance of dedication of those improvements by the Township or
other authority having jurisdiction.
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 58, Building Construction, and Ch. 170, Zoning.
§ 152-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-17
1:527

ARTICLE V
Subdivision Design Standards
§ 152-18. Objectives.
The design standards in this article are intended to accomplish the
following objectives:
§ 152-19. Preservation of natural features.
The natural features and character of lands shall be preserved wherever
possible. Due regard must be shown for all natural features such as
woodlots, large trees, topography, wetlands, watercourses and similar
community assets that will add attractiveness and value to the property,
if preserved. The preservation of drainage courses and natural stream
channels shall be encouraged of the proprietor. The dedication and
provision of adequate barriers and easements shall be required, where
appropriate. In order to achieve these objectives, the following standards
shall be met:
A. A development pattern consistent with that described in the Township
Master Plan.
B. Respect for the natural features on the site, and preservation of
significant environmental resources.
C. Minimize negative impacts on adjacent developments, both during and
after construction.
D. Promote continuity in the public street and utility systems.
E. Help ensure adequate accessibility for emergency vehicles.
F. Provide links to nonmotorized facilities and links between open space,
whether public or private.
G. Help ensure consistency with standards of the other agencies which
review the proposed subdivision.
A. Township protected woodlands and trees. Woodlands and trees which
are protected by Township regulations, as described in Article 23, Tree
and Woodlands Replacement, of Chapter 170, Zoning, are to be
identified in the preparation of plans submitted to the Township for the
review of a proposed subdivision. Such trees and woodlands are to be
preserved and protected as part of the overall subdivision design and
during construction, or replaced in accordance with the provisions
outlined in Chapter 170, Zoning. Tree protection and replacement on a
lot by lot basis shall be in accordance with Building Department
procedures.
B. Water features. The design of subdivisions shall preserve the integrity
of existing lakes, streams, channels and ponds to the extent practical.
§ 152-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-19
1:529
§ 152-20. Lots.
Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards:
C. Wetlands. The design and construction of the subdivision shall comply
with the Goemaere-Anderson Wetlands Protection Act (Michigan Public
Act 203 of 1979, as amended). Wetlands shall be delineated by a
qualified wetland consultant and shown on the preliminary plat. (See
requirements for wetlands within a lot and water features setback in
§ 152-20 below.)
D. Floodplains. Areas of special flood hazard within Northville Township
have been identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a
scientific and engineering report. Those areas so designated have been
mapped on the Flood Insurance Rate Map. The flood insurance map and
study are on file at the Township offices.
E. Portions of plats located within any area of special flood hazard shall be
subject to the provisions of Section 60.3(d) of the Rules and Regulations
of the National Flood Insurance Program (44 CFR 59, etc., formerly
1901). Areas under the jurisdiction of the MDNR shall comply with the
Land Division Act and MCL 324.30101 et seq., as amended). If any part
of a proposed subdivision lies within a floodplain, restrictive deed
covenants shall be recorded with the final plat which specify the
floodplain will remain essentially in its natural state.
A. General lot arrangement.
(1) Every lot shall front on, and have direct access to, a public street
approved by Wayne County or private road approved by the
Township.
(2) Side lot lines shall generally be at right angles or radial to the
street center lines. This requirement shall not apply where such lot
lines would create irregularly shaped lots which would
unreasonably limit construction, or where adjustments to the
standard lot configuration would protect regulated wetlands or
preserve other natural features, such as topography.
(3) Residential lots abutting major thoroughfares shall be platted so
that the driveways shall access the interior road network. In
addition, the driveways for all corner lots shall access the most
interior, or less traveled, street within the subdivision.
(4) Lots shall have a front-to-front relationship across all streets where
possible.
(5) Through-lots (lots with frontage on two parallel streets) are
prohibited.
(6) Except for corner lots, lots less than one acre in area shall not have
frontage on more than two public streets.
§ 152-19 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-20
1:530
(7) Lots facing a three-way intersection should be aligned to prevent
on-coming headlight glare into the living area of the building
envelope.
(8) Blocks shall be so designed as to provide two tiers of back-to-back
lots, except where lots back onto a major thoroughfare, railroad,
natural feature or subdivision boundary.
(9) Corner lots shall have access to the lesser traveled roadway.
(10)No more than 50% of the perimeter of a lot shall front along a
public street right-of-way or private road access easement.
(11) If the plat extends into an adjacent community, boundaries for
individual lots shall be within one community to the extent feasible.
In no case shall a building envelope result in a situation where a
home crosses a community or school district boundary.
(12) Lots which abut an active rail line shall have minimum depth of 250
feet to provide a minimum seventy-five-foot setback from the
railroad right-of-way line.
(13) If the subdivision includes any outlots or excepted parcels, an
illustration shall be provided to demonstrate that the remaining
land can be used or subdivided in conformance with Township
standards.
B. Lot sizes and shapes.
(1) Lot area and width. Each lot shall comply with at least the
minimum area and width requirements of Chapter 170, Zoning, for
the district in which the subdivision is proposed.
(2) Area calculation of ponds and lakes. Areas of the subdivision plat
that contain ponds, lakes, or similar bodies of water shall be
recorded as acreage, but shall not be platted as subdivision lots nor
§ 152-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-20
1:531
calculated as a portion of the minimum lot area as required by
Chapter 170, Zoning,
(3) Area calculation of wetland. A maximum of 25% of the minimum
required lot area may be wetlands regulated by the Michigan
Department of Natural Resources. This requirement may be
modified by the Township Board, upon a recommendation from the
Planning Commission, if the proprietor successfully demonstrates
that a building envelope can easily be accommodated on the lot
without intruding into the required water features setback. and
that provisions have been made to help ensure the long-term
protection of the wetland. These protection measures could include
a physical barrier, conservation easement, deed restriction, or
similar technique.
(4) Area in floodplain. Lands within the floodplain ("area of special
flood hazard"), as defined in Chapter 170, Zoning, and illustrated
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map, shall not be included within
platted lots for residential uses or uses which the Planning
Commission determines may increase the flood hazard or endanger
life, health, general welfare or property values. Such land may be
set aside as open space or parkland. (Refer to Article 25, Floodplain
Control, of Chapter 170, Zoning, for specific regulations.)
(5) Width-to-depth ratio. Narrow, deep lots shall be avoided. A depthto-
width ratio of three to one shall normally be considered a
maximum.
(6) Lot frontage. Each lot shall comply with the minimum frontage
required for the zoning district, but in no case shall the frontage be
less than 60 feet along a public street or private road and 40 feet
along a curvilinear street or at the end of a cul-de-sac.
(7) Building setbacks. Lots shall be of sufficient size and proportion to
accommodate at least the minimum required building setbacks
listed in § 170-18.1, Schedule of Regulations Limiting Height, Bulk,
Density and Area by Land Use, of Chapter 170, Zoning, for the
district in which the subdivision is located.
(8) Natural water features setback: Minimum setbacks from water
features, including any wetland regulated by MCL 324.30901 et
seq., as amended) or the shoreline of a water body regulated by
MCL 324.30101 et seq., as amended, follows:
(a) Principal building: 25 feet.
(b) Accessory building: 15 feet.
(c) Accessory structure or deck: 15 feet.
(d) Parking lot or paved drive: 15 feet.
§ 152-20 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-20
1:532
§ 152-21. Public streets and private roads.
The provisions of this chapter shall be the minimum requirements for
streets and intersections. If any other public agency having jurisdiction,
including the Wayne County Department of Public Services, shall adopt
any statute, ordinance, rule or regulation imposing additional, or more
rigorous requirements, then the provisions of such statute, ordinance, rule
or regulations shall govern.
(9) Corner lot setbacks. Corner lots shall have additional area to
provide the required front yard setback along all sides facing a
public street, as listed in the Schedule of Regulations in Chapter
170, Zoning.
(10) Nonresidential lots. Lots intended for purposes other than
residential use shall be specifically designated for such purposes,
and shall have adequate provision for off-street parking, setbacks
and other requirements accordance with Chapter 170, Zoning.
A. Compliance with Wayne County standards. The standards of this
section are intended to comply with the public street standards of the
Wayne County Department of Public Services. The Township reserves
the right to adopt standards which are more restrictive, upon a
determination that the additional regulations meet special needs or
goals in the Township which may not be appropriate on a county-wide
basis.
B. Conformance with Township Master Plan. The layout of the street
system shall conform to the goals, policies, street functional
classification system, alignment and minimum rights-of-way
recommended in the Township's Master Plan or Thoroughfare Plan.
Street functional classification, rights-of-way and alignments shall also
conform with appropriate transportation plans of the Wayne County
Department of Public Services or the Southeast Michigan Council of
Governments.
C. Relationship to natural features and grades. Streets shall be aligned to
maximize the preservation of natural features and existing grades to
the extent feasible.
D. Continuity of the street system. The arrangement of streets shall
provide for the continuation of existing streets from adjoining areas into
new subdivisions, unless otherwise approved by the Township Board,
following a recommendation by the Planning Commission, due to
documented environmentally sensitive features, unusual lot
configuration or where the abutting street system is not deemed
capable of safely handling additional traffic volumes, or other similar
reasons. Where adjoining vacant areas are zoned or planned for
development similar to the proposed subdivision, streets shall be
extended to the boundary line of the tract to make provision for the
future street connections. The proprietor shall demonstrate that the
§ 152-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-21
1:533
proposed stub street is in a reasonable location for extension into
the adjacent lands, in consideration of such factors as grades, water
bodies, wetlands and lot configuration. A temporary cul-de-sac shall be
provided unless the length of the stub street only abuts one lot on either
side. A sign shall be placed at the end of the stub street or cul-de-sac
with a sign face on both sides stating "Future Street Extension."
E. Minor streets (collectors and local streets). The proposed subdivision
street layout shall discourage use by through traffic, except where a
continuation of streets to adjoining properties is deemed desirable by
the Township. In determining the need for such connections, the
Township may consider the need for adequate access and response time
for emergency vehicles, the impacts such connections may have on
reducing congestion along arterials. projected traffic volumes and the
compatibility with adjacent developments.
F. Alleys. Alleys shall not be permitted in areas of detached single- or twofamily
residences. Alleys shall be allowed in multiple dwelling or
commercial subdivisions unless other provisions are made for service
access, off-street loading, and parking. Dead-end alleys are prohibited.
G. Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited unless the Township and
the county approve a combination of a new half street with an existing,
recorded half street as part of the subdivision. Any such combination of
half streets shall result in a right-of-way in conformance with the
standards of this chapter. In all other cases, where the tract to be
subdivided is adjacent to a recorded half street, the existing half street
shall be incorporated and platted as part of the subdivision.
H. Existing streets and roads. Where a subdivision incorporates existing
public streets or private roads which are not in conformance with
current standards, such facilities shall be reconstructed as necessary to
improve the road to the extent required by the Wayne County
Department of Public Services.
I. Maximum length for blocks.
§ 152-21 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-21
1:534
(1) Blocks or the length of any street constructed for any phase of a
subdivision shall be in accordance with the following table:
Maximum Block Length (in
feet) Measured Between
Right-of-way Line
Blocks containing lots of 90 feet
or less in width
1,350
Blocks containing lots of more
than 90 feet and not more than
120 feet in width
1,300
Blocks containing lots
exceeding 120 feet in width
2,250
(2) Exceptions:
(a) Subdivisions with an avenge lot area of 1/2 acre or greater
shall not be restricted by the above dimensions of the block
length when the lots do not exceed a three-to-one ratio of depth
to width.
(b) The Township Board, upon recommendation from the Planning
Commission, may approve a plat which varies from these
dimensions if there is documented evidence that significant
natural features will be preserved or stub streets to connect to
vacant land are being provided which will result in a
conforming condition in the future.
(c) Patterns, which cannot be described as having blocks, shall be
reviewed and approved by the Township Board, upon
recommendation from the Planning Commission Planning
Commission.
J. Culs-de-sac. The length of cul-de-sac streets shall not exceed 1,000 feet
measured from the center line of the street to the center point of the
cul-de-sac, unless a longer street is necessitated by topography or other
natural features, existing conditions or other circumstances as may be
approved by the Township Board and the Wayne County Department of
Public Services. In all cases, however, at least two means of access shall
be provided to serve a cul-de-sac having more than 20 single-family lots
or uses which would result in more than 200 trips per average weekday,
based on the most recent edition of Trip Generation, published by the
Institute of Transportation Engineers. In no case shall a dead end street
be permitted. A temporary cul-de-sac may be utilized for a stub street
where future access to an adjacent site is planned.
K. Minimum right-of-way widths. The minimum street right-of-way (ROW)
width for subdivisions shall be as follows:
§ 152-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-21
1:535
Street Type Minimum ROW Width1
Major thoroughfare 120 feet
Collectors and boulevards 86 feet
Local residential streets 60 feet
Local commercial/industrial
streets
60-86 feet2
Turnaround 110-foot diameter
Alley 26 feet
NOTES:
1A greater right-of-way may be required by the Township of the Wayne
County Department of Public Services in consideration of the intensity
of development, the expected traffic volumes, the need for additional
area for utilities, grading, sight distance or to accommodate planned
or expected street cross section.
2 The right-of-way shall be determined based on the expected traffic
volumes, characteristics associated with the types of uses which may
access the street based on the zoning or the volumes estimated in a
traffic impact study.
L. Location of entrances along major thoroughfares for large subdivisions.
For streets which will potentially have average daily tragic volumes of
over 2,000 trips during an average day or 200 trips during a peak hour,
major entrances should be limited to the half mile or quarter mile points
along major thoroughfares where there is potential for traffic
signalization in the future. Deviations from this standard shall be
permitted if needed to provide adequate sight distance or if a
modification is supported by a traffic impact study provided by the
proprietor.
M. Spacing of intersections along major thoroughfares. Streets
intersecting along major thoroughfares shall be spaced at least 300 feet
from the intersection of another platted street on the same side of the
street, and spaced at least 660 feet where possible. In addition, streets
crossing major thoroughfares shall cross in direct alignment. Streets on
opposite sides of a major thoroughfare shall be directly aligned or no
closer than 250 feet to each other, unless the Planning Commission and
Township Board determine that a lesser offset is justified because of
numerous existing streets or the difficulty of providing adequate site
distance with a different alignment.
§ 152-21 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-21
1:536
N. Intersection design at entrances. Streets which intersect with a paved
major thoroughfare shall provide a paved deceleration lane with an
adequate taper if more than 50 right turns are projected during a peak
hour. A passing lane may also be required on the major thoroughfare
when traffic volumes dictate the need. Deceleration and acceleration
lanes and tapers shall also be provided if required by the Wayne County
DPS. A passing lane shall be provided at any entrance where more than
50 left turns are expected during a peak hour, where projected
intersection level of service would be D or worse, or where required by
the Wayne County DPS. Deceleration/acceleration facilities and passing
lanes shall be designed according to the standards of the Wayne County
DPS.
O. Internal street offsets. Three-way intersections (T-type intersections)
are encouraged within the plat, rather than four-way intersections. No
more than two streets shall cross at any intersection. Street
intersections within a plat shall be offset at least 150 feet, measured
between center lines. Lesser offsets may be approved where less than
10 single family lots will be served by the intersection, where expected
average daily traffic volumes will be less than 100 vehicle trips per day,
or where significant natural features would be preserved that would
otherwise be destroyed.
§ 152-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-21
1:537
P. Horizontal curves. Radii for minimum horizontal curves shall be in
accordance with the following table. Larger curves may be required by
the Wayne County DPS dependent upon the intended function of the
street.
Type of Street Local Street 25 mph
Design Speed
Major Thoroughfare or
Collector w/35 mph
Design Speed
Residential
street:
1-25 lots 150 feet N/A
26+ lots 175 feet 350 feet
Commercial or
industrial uses
230 feet 450 feet
Q. Tangents between reverse curves. A minimum tangent distance of 50
feet shall be provided between reverse curves. This distance shall be a
minimum of 200 feet along major thoroughfares or collectors, unless a
shorter distance is approved by Wayne County.
R. Intersection angles. Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as
possible to 90°; in no case shall the intersection be less than 80°. In
cases of an intersection along a curved street, there shall be a tangent
(straight) section which extends at least 50 feet from the intersection
right-of-way.
S. Corner clearance. All corners at an intersection of two public streets or
a private road intersection with a public street shall maintain a clear
vision zone free of buildings, fences, walls, signs, structures,
landscaping or other obstruction to vision between a height of 30
inches and six feet above the established street grade. The corner
clearance area shall be provided within a triangular area 25 feet in
length measured along abutting street right-of-way lines with the third
side being a line connecting these two sides. A nonobscuring fence may
have a maximum height of 36 inches in a corner clearance area.
§ 152-21 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-21
1:538
§ 152-22. Sidewalks, pedestrian through-block connectors and
bikepaths.
T. Sight distance. Minimum sight distance at intersections shall be in
accordance with the standards of the Wayne County DPS.
U. Street gradients. The maximum street grade shall be 7% and the
minimum street grade shall be 0.5%.
V. Vertical alignment at intersections. A nearly flat grade with appropriate
drainage slopes is desirable within intersections. This flat section shall
be 100 feet in all directions from the intersection (the minimum length
shall depend upon the classification of the intersecting streets).
Allowances of 2% intersection grade in rolling terrain and 4% for hilly
terrain may be permitted, if approved by the Wayne County DPS.
W. Street names. Street names shall be sufficiently distinct from other
street names in the area to avoid confusion, particularly for emergency
service providers. Proposed street names shall be accepted by the
Township Public Safety Department and approved by the Wayne County
DPS as a part of the preliminary plat approval process.
X. Signs. The proprietor shall be responsible for placement of street name
signs at all street intersections in accordance with the requirements of
the Wayne County DPS. If the roads are private, a distinct color or
symbol "Pvt" shall be used on the sign. The proprietor shall also be
responsible for placement of pavement markings and regulatory street
signs (such as no-parking signs, stop or yield signs, speed limit signs,
and warning signs) as requested by the Township or the Wayne County
DPS. All regulatory signs shall be in conformance with the Michigan
Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
Y. Curb and gutter. Curb and gutter, in accordance with Township
specifications, shall be required.
Z. Streetlighting. Streetlighting is required at external intersections and
entrances and may be required at internal intersections and entrances
at the discretion of the Township. Ornamental streetlights may be
allowed with approval of the Planning Commission and Township
Board. Any streetlighting shall comply with the specifications of the
Township Engineer and the public utility corporation franchised to
provide electricity.
AA. Street construction requirements. All streets and appurtenances
thereto shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications of the
Wayne County DPS, except that private roads built to Township
standards may be permitted, if approved by the Township and the
Wayne County DPS.
BB. Phasing. Each phase of the plat shall be designed to meet the street
requirements above, regardless of whether future phases are
constructed.
§ 152-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-22
1:539
A. Sidewalks and bikepaths shall be provided in accordance with Article 3
of Chapter 170, Zoning. Sidewalks may also be required by the
Township Board on one or both sides of the street or road in
consideration of factors such as the density of development, age
characteristics of the expected residents, expected traffic volumes
along the street, proximity to other sidewalk systems and proximity to
schools, parks and public institutions.
B. The Township Board may eliminate the sidewalk requirement for
special situations such as along culs-de-sac or for very low density
development, or where another type of pedestrian trail system is being
provided by the proprietor.
C. Pedestrian through-block connectors may be required in the middle of
any block over 1,350 feet in length to obtain satisfactory pedestrian
circulation within the subdivision, to provide access to parks or open
space, to provide links with an adjacent subdivision, or to provide
access to an activity center. Where such pedestrian through-block
connectors are required, an easement at least 20 feet wide shall be
provided. The Township may require placement of a fence along the
easement to ensure the location is visible and to protect the adjacent
property owners. Pedestrian through-block connectors shall be paved in
accordance with the specifications of the Township Engineer, provided
that wood chip paths or wooden boardwalks may be permitted in open
space areas or areas with sensitive environmental features.
D. Any yard which abuts a pedestrian easement shall provide the required
minimum building setback, as applicable, from the easement.
E. A bikepath shall be provided for a subdivision located along a street
designated for a future bikepath on the Township Bikepath Plan. The
Township may also require a bikepath to provide access from within the
subdivision to existing or proposed bikepaths outside the subdivision,
or to schools, parks, commercial areas and public institutions.
F. All sidewalks shall be a minimum five feet wide and constructed to the
specifications of the Wayne County Department of Public Services and
Township Engineer.
G. Bikepaths shall be at least eight feet wide and constructed in
accordance with the specifications of the Township Engineer.
H. Grades shall be clearly illustrated on the plans to insure proper
connection to sidewalks and bikepaths on adjacent lands.
I. Sidewalks and bikepaths shall be installed by the proprietor within the
dedicated street right-of-way, private road access easements or special
easement where grades or other factors prevent placement within the
right-of-way or access easement.
§ 152-22 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-22
1:540
§ 152-23. Landscaping.
The selection, size, spacing and planting of all landscaping within a
subdivision shall comply with Article 24, Landsacpe Standards, of Chapter
170, Zoning, and the following standards:
J. Crosswalk pavement markings and signs may be required by the
Township. Crosswalks shall be in accordance with the requirements of
the Wayne County Department of Public Services.
A. General standards.
(1) Tree species should be selected for tolerance of the harsh roadside
conditions in southeast Michigan, for compliance with sight
distance requirements, to ensure maintenance of accessibility to
fire hydrants, to provide a minimum overhead clearance of 15 feet
over any roadway and eight feet over a sidewalk or bikepath, and to
avoid interference with overhead or underground utility lines.
(2) Plantings within 15 feet of a fire hydrant shall be no taller than six
inches.
(3) The development and planting of required landscaping shall be the
responsibility of the proprietor, not the individual lot owner.
(4) The Township Board, upon recommendation from the Planning
Commission, may approve fewer trees if the proprietor provides
evidence that existing healthy trees over 2.5 inches caliper or
natural habitat areas will be preserved during and after
construction.
(5) The landscape plan shall be approved by the Township Board, upon
recommendation of the Planning Commission, as part of the final
preliminary plat process in consideration of the above and
compatibility with the visual character of the surrounding area.
§ 152-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-23
1:541
B. Street trees.
(1) The minimum size of all street trees shall be 2 1/2 inches caliper.
(2) One canopy tree shall be planted for each 40 feet of frontage along
a street or private road, including all frontages for a corner lot,
rounded up to the next whole number. One canopy tree shall also
be planted for each 50 linear feet along a median boulevard.
(3) Street trees shall be planted so that each lot has at least one
canopy tree and each corner lot has at least three canopy trees.
Street trees shall be placed to avoid any future driveway locations.
(4) Street trees shall be at least 50 feet from the intersection of two
street right-of-way lines or access easements.
(5) Street trees shall be planted between the curb and sidewalk; where
curbs or sidewalks do not exist, trees shall be located between the
front property line and the edge of the pavement but outside of
areas needed for open ditches or potential future sidewalks. Where
tree location in the public right-of-way is not possible due to
conflicts with overhead or underground utility lines or restrictions
of the Wayne County DPS, street trees may be located on private
property just beyond the front lot line. Where a meandering
sidewalk or bikepath exists or is approved, the street tree locations
shall be determined by the Township. Trees shall be at least four
feet from the edge of any paved surface and shall not interfere with
sight distance required by the Wayne County DPS.
(6) The lowest branch of any canopy tree shall provide a minimum
fifteen-foot clearance over a public street or private road, and a
minimum eight feet above grade from a sidewalk or bikepath.
§ 152-23 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-23
1:542
Greater clearances shall be provided if required by the Wayne
County DPS.
(7) Street trees should be informally arranged, rather than using a
formal, or regimented scheme, to be consistent with Northville
Township's goal of retaining a semirural character.
C. Landscaping in culs-de-sac.
(1) A minimum of one canopy tree for every 1,000 square feet of pound
area, rounded upward, shall be planted within each cul-de-sac or
island (e.g., if the island is 2,305 square feet, three canopy trees
would be required).
(2) The lowest branch of any canopy tree within the island shall be a
minimum eight feet above the grade of the island and 15 feet above
the grade of the roadway.
(3) The island must either be mounded to a height of between one foot
six inches and two feet six inches and planted with grass or ground
cover or have four low shrubs planted for every 1,000 square feet of
ground area. The shrubs shall be maintained at a maximum height
of two feet, six inches.
(4) Plantings within 15 feet of a fire hydrant shall be no taller than six
inches.
D. Subdivision entrances. Subdivision entrances may include landscaping,
lighting, identification signs, wrought iron fences or other architectural
features. All such features shall comply with Chapter 170, Zoning. A
detail of the entranceway shall be submitted with the tentative
preliminary plat. The lighting for entryway signs must be ground-
§ 152-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-23
1:543
§ 152-24. Public reservations.
When consideration is given by the proprietor to set aside areas suitably
located and of adequate size for playgrounds, school sites, parks, recreation
facilities, open space or other public use as indicated in the Master Plan or
Chapter 170, Zoning, said areas shall be provided by one of the following
methods:
§ 152-25. Easements and reserve strips.
mounted with no more than two one-hundred-twenty-five-watt bulbs
directed toward each face of a sign. In no case shall high pressure
sodium or other nonstandard bulbs be utilized.
E. Landscaping as a buffer zone or transition zone. The Township Board,
upon recommendation by the Planning Commission, may require
landscaping along the periphery of the subdivision to serve as a buffer
zone from adjacent uses. A buffer zone may include trees, shrubs,
berms, fences, walls or a combination. A transition zone may include
preservation of existing woodlands or slopes, the addition of
landscaping to provide an effective screen, lot sizes which are similar to
the size of adjacent lots or building heights which are similar to the
height of building on adjacent lots.
F. Required landscape greenbelt. When a subdivision borders a major
thoroughfare, and wherever a rear yard abuts a public street or private
road, an easement for construction of a thirty-five-foot-wide landscape
greenbelt shall be provided, in addition to the required rear yard
setback, measured from the interior setback line. This buffer zone may
include trees, berms, walls or a combination designed in accordance
with the landscape standards described in Article 24, Landscape
Standards, of Chapter 170, Zoning. Existing natural features shall be
retained wherever possible to promote a natural appearance and to
protect the existing ecosystem within the greenbelt. Where a free-form
berm is used as part of the landscape greenbelt, the minimum height
shall be two feet six inches. The maximum slope of the berm facing the
primary road shall be 6:1 and the maximum slope of the berm facing the
inside of the lot shall be 3:1. The construction of the greenbelt and its
plantings shall be the responsibility of the proprietor and not the
individual lot owner(s).
A. Dedication to the Township.
B. Reservation of land for the use of property owners by deed or
covenants.
C. Reservation for acquisition by the Township or School District within a
period of two years of recording of the final plat. Said reservation shall
be made in such a manner as to provide for a release of the land to the
proprietor in the event that the Township, the School District or other
public entity does not proceed with the purchase.
§ 152-23 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-25
1:544
§ 152-26. Utilities.
It is the purpose of this section to establish and define the public
improvements which shall be provided by the proprietor, at his/her expense
with or without reimbursement from any public agency or improvement
district, as conditions for final plat approval.
A. Utility easements. Easements shall be provided and dedicated along the
rear, side or front lot lines as necessary for utility lines. The easement
width shall be a minimum of 12 feet along each lot. The width may be
adjusted along adjacent lots with irregular alignments.
Recommendations on the proposed layout of public utility easements
shall be sought from all of the public utility companies serving the area.
It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor to submit copies of the
approved preliminary plat to all appropriate public utility agencies.
B. Drainageways. The proprietor shall provide drainageway easements, as
required. By the Township and the Wayne County DPS.
C. Municipal services. The Township may require easements to provide
access for municipal water, sanitary or storm sewer facilities, or to
insure the extension of such services into adjoining lands.
D. Common areas. The proprietor shall provide access easements to parks,
open space and other common areas.
E. Private roads. If private roads are provided, access easements shall be
provided as required by the Township along with an executed private
road maintenance agreement.
F. Reserve strips. Privately held reserve strips controlling access to
streets shall be prohibited. The Township may require a one-foot-wide
reserve strip deeded to the Township at the end of a stub street which
terminates at the subdivision boundary or between half streets.
A. Sanitary sewers.
(1) When connection to a public sanitary sewer system is probable
within a reasonable period of time, a sanitary sewer system
consisting of appropriate sewer lines, lift stations, and other
sanitary sewer system appurtenances shall be provided by the
proprietor. This system shall meet all requirements of Wayne
County, the State of Michigan, the Township Engineer and the
Township Water and Sewer Department.
(2) If a central sewage disposal system is not provided in areas outside
of the public sanitary sewer service area, then septic tanks and
disposal fields may be utilized so long as they comply with all
requirements of Wayne County, the State of Michigan, and the
Township.
§ 152-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-26
1:545
(3) All sewer systems must be constructed in accordance with
established construction standards.
B. Water supply.
(1) When a proposed subdivision is located within, adjacent to or
reasonably near the service area of a public water supply, a water
distribution system consisting of appropriate water distribution
mains, fire hydrants, and other water system appurtenances shall
be provided by the proprietor. This system shall meet all
requirements of Wayne County, the State of Michigan, the
Township, and any water supplier with which the Township has
contracted for water supply.
(2) If a central well or wells are not provided in areas outside of the
public water system service area, individual wells may be
permitted. Individual wells shall comply with the requirements of
Wayne County, the State of Michigan, and the Township.
(3) All water systems must be constructed in accordance with the
Chapter 139, Water and Sewer.
C. Storm drainage.
(1) Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from
all buildings and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with
the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be
designed to avoid increased flow of stormwater from one lot onto
adjacent lots.
(2) An adequate storm drainage system, including storm sewers, drain
inlets, manholes, culverts, bridges and other appurtenances, shall
be required and shall meet all requirements set forth by the
Township and the Wayne County DPS.
(3) If the Township Engineer and the Wayne County DPS accept or
require a stormwater detention area, the maximum side slope shall
not exceed five on one, and the outside edge of the detention area
shall provide adequate space for landscaping. A landscape plan
shall be submitted for the detention area which illustrates that
views will be obscured from adjacent streets or lots. If such area
borders an existing single-family residential development, the
landscaping shall be consistent with the standards for greenbelt
plantings contained in Chapter 170, Zoning.
D. Soil and sedimentation control.
(1) In the event that any proprietor intends to make changes in the
contour of any land proposed to be subdivided, developed or
changed in use by razing, excavating, removal or destruction of the
natural topsoil, trees, or other vegetative covering thereon, the
property owner or his/her agent shall first apply to the Wayne
§ 152-26 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-26
1:546
County DPS for approval of a plan for erosion and sedimentation
control.
(2) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until final grading has
been completed in accordance with the approved final plat and the
lot precovered with soil with an average depth of at least six inches
which shall contain no particles over two inches in diameter over
the entire area of the lot, except that portion covered by buildings
or included in the streets, or where the grade has not been changed
or where natural vegetation has not been seriously damaged.
Where weather prohibits compliance with this requirement, the
Building Department may grant a temporary certificate of
occupancy for a specified period until weather permits final
grading.
E. Underground wiring. The proprietor of a residential subdivision shall
make arrangements for all local lines for telephone, cable television and
electric services, exclusive of main supply and perimeter feed lines
when located on section or quarter section lines, to be placed entirely
underground throughout a subdivided area; provided, however, that
when a subdivision overlaps a section or quarter section line, said main
supply and perimeter feed lines located on such section or quarter
section line shall be placed underground. The Township Board, upon
recommendation from the Planning Commission, may waive or modify
this requirement where, in its judgment, circumstances exist which
render compliance impractical. Conduits or cables shall be placed
within private easements provided to the service companies by the
proprietor or within public rights-of-way. Those telephone and cable
television and electrical facilities placed in dedicated public rights-ofway
shall be planned so as not to conflict with other underground
utilities. All telephone and electrical facilities shall be constructed in
accordance with standards of construction approved by the Michigan
Public Service Commission.
§ 152-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-26
1:547

ARTICLE VI
Administration and Enforcement
§ 152-27. Compliance.
No subdivision plat required by this chapter or the Land Division Act
(Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended) shall be admitted to the
public land records of the County or received or recorded by the County
Register of Deeds, until such subdivision plat has received final approval
by the Township Board. No public board, agency, commission, official or
other authority shall proceed with the construction of or authorize the
construction of any of the public improvements required by this chapter
unless such public improvements have been accepted or otherwise
permitted in accordance with the terms of this chapter. No public board,
agency, commission, official or other authority shall issue building or
occupancy permits for structures on lands subject to this chapter where the
proprietor has not complied with the requirements set forth herein.
§ 152-28. Interpretation, conflict and separability.
§ 152-29. Fees
The proprietor shall be responsible for payment of all fees, in accordance
with the fee schedule and administrative regulations adopted and, from
time to time, updated by the Township Board, including fees for review by
consultants (planning, landscape architect, woodlands, engineering, traffic
engineer or wetlands consultant, as appropriate); legal review; and
Township administrative costs (including notification and publication costs);
filing and recording as specified in the Land Division Act; inspection; and
connection to public utilities.
§ 152-30. Plat design waivers.
A. Interpretation. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of
this chapter shall be held to be the minimum requirements. More
stringent provisions may be required if it is demonstrated that different
standards are necessary to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare.
B. Conflict. Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this
chapter are either more or less restrictive than comparable conditions
imposed by any other provisions of this chapter or of any other
applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the
regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or
requirements shall govern.
C. Separability. The provisions of this chapter are separable. If a section,
sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is adjudged by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the decision shall not affect the
remaining portions of this chapter.
§ 152-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-30
1:549
A. Waivers from this chapter.
(1) Applicable waivers. Waivers from requirements of this chapter may
be considered by the Township Board for the following:
(a) Planned unit development or open space community waiver. A
waiver from specific provisions of this chapter may be granted
in the case of a platted subdivision within a planned unit
development or open space community project upon finding
that the proposed development meets the spirit and intent of
Chapter 170, Zoning, provides adequate public and open
space, and includes provisions for efficient circulation, light
and air, and other needs.
(b) Waivers from public improvement or utility requirements. The
Township Board may grant a waiver from required public
improvements if, in its best judgment, said installations would
be impractical.
B. Process. The process for a waiver request from this chapter shall be as
follows:
(1) Applications for any waiver shall be made in writing to the
Township Clerk by the proprietor prior to approval of the final
preliminary plat. The application shall state fully and clearly all
facts relied upon by the proprietor. The application shall include
any required fee, and be supplemented with maps, plans. and other
additional data which may aid the Planning Commission in the
analysis of the requested waiver. In the case of a requested waiver
for a planned unit development or open space community, the plans
submitted for such development shall include such covenants,
restrictions, or other legal provisions necessary to guarantee the
full achievement of the plan.
(2) The request shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission. The
Planning Commission shall first conduct a public hearing. Notice of
the public hearing shall be posted in a newspaper of daily record
and sent, in accordance with § 170-40.8, Public hearings, of
Chapter 170, Zoning, to landowners within 300 feet of the parcels
or lots for which the variance is sought.
(3) Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall
provide a recommendation to the Township Board, in accordance
with the standards below.
(4) The Township Board shall make a decision on the request. In
making its decision, the Township Board may establish
requirements, time constraints or conditions that will, in its
judgment, secure substantially the objectives and requirements of
this chapter. The Township Board shall state the reasons for its
finding or decisions as part of its official records.
§ 152-30 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-30
1:550
§ 152-31. Performance guarantee.
Whenever the Township Board permits or requires a performance
guarantee as security for required improvements, the performance
guarantee shall be in the form of a letter of credit, certified check or
cash escrow. Any such security shall be in an amount equal to 120% of
the estimated cost of completion of the required public improvements,
including lot improvements. The issuer of the letter of credit or the escrow
agent, as applicable, shall be acceptable to the Township Attorney.
(5) The Township Board shall have the final authority on waivers or
modifications of the standards of this chapter, except Wayne
County must also endorse any waivers from county standards.
Appeals of the Township Board decisions shall be to a court of law.
C. Waiver standards. The decision on a waiver request shall be based on a
finding that practical difficulties are unnecessary hardship result from
strict compliance with specific provisions or requirements of the
chapter. In making its finding, the Township Board shall take into
account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of
land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the
proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of the proposed
subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No waiver shall be
recommended unless the Township Board finds that:
(1) There are such special circumstances or conditions affecting said
property that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter,
would clearly be impractical or unreasonable.
(2) The granting of the specified waiver will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which
said property is situated.
(3) Such waiver will not violate the provisions of the Land Division Act
(Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended) nor create a
violation of Chapter 170, Zoning.
(4) Such waiver will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and
purpose of this chapter and the Township Master Plan.
D. Variances from Chapter 170, Zoning. Variances from requirements of
Chapter 170, Zoning, may be considered by the Zoning Board of
Appeals. The process for a variance request from Chapter 170, Zoning,
shall be according to Article 41, Zoning Board of Appeals, of Chapter
170, Zoning.
A. Letter of credit. If the proprietor posts a letter of credit as security, the
credit shall:
(1) Be irrevocable.
§ 152-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-31
1:551
(2) Be for a term sufficient to cover the completion, maintenance, and
warranty periods specified in this chapter or in other ordinances or
regulations for the specific improvement.
(3) Require only that the Township present the credit with a sight draft
and an affidavit signed by the Township Attorney attesting to the
municipality's right to draw funds under the credit.
B. Cash escrow or certified check. If the proprietor posts a cash escrow or
certified check as security, the escrow instructions shall provide that:
(1) The proprietor shall have no right to a return of any of the funds
except as provided herein.
(2) The escrow agent shall have a legal duty to deliver the funds to the
Township whenever the Township Attorney presents an affidavit to
the agent attesting to the Township's right to receive funds
whether or not the proprietor protests the right.
C. Release or reduction of security.
(1) Certificate of satisfactory completion. The Township Board shall
not accept dedication of required improvements, nor release nor
reduce the amount of any security posted by the proprietor until
the Township Engineer has submitted a certificate stating that all
required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and
until the proprietor's engineer or surveyor has certified to the
Township Engineer, through submission of a detailed as-built
survey plat of the subdivision, indicating location, dimensions,
materials and other information required by the Township
Engineer, that the layout of the line and grade of all public
improvements is in accordance with construction plans for the
subdivision, and a title insurance policy has been furnished to and
approved by the Township Attorney indicating that the
improvements have been completed, are ready for dedication to the
Township and are free and clear of any and all liens and
encumbrances. Upon such approval and recommendation by the
Township Engineer and Township Attorney, the Township Board
shall accept the improvements for dedication in accordance with
the established procedure.
(2) Reduction of escrowed funds and security. If the security posted by
the proprietor was a cash escrow, the amount of that escrow shall
be reduced upon actual acceptance of the dedication of public
improvements and then only to the ratio that the cost of the public
improvement for which dedication was accepted bears to the total
cost of public improvements for the subdivision. In no event shall a
cash escrow be reduced below 25% of the principal amount. Funds
held in the escrow account shall not be released to the proprietor,
in whole or in part, except upon express written instructions of the
Township Attorney. At the end of the maintenance and warranty
periods, all escrowed funds, if any, shall be released to the
§ 152-31 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-31
1:552
§ 152-32. Enforcement.
§ 152-33. Penalties.73
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this Chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to the following
penalties:
proprietor. If the security provided by the proprietor was a letter
of credit, the Township Attorney shall execute waivers of the
municipality's right to draw funds under the credit upon actual
acceptance of the dedication of public improvements and then only
to the ratio that the cost of the public improvement for which
dedication was accepted bears to the total cost of public
improvements for the subdivision. In no event shall waivers be
executed that would reduce the security below 25% of its original
amount.
A. Enforcement. Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of
the Township Building Department. The Building Department shall
have the authority to enforce this chapter in accordance with
requirements and procedures set forth in this section.
B. Authorized Township officials. The Township Supervisor, Township
Manager, Planning Director, Zoning/Code Enforcement Officers, Chief
Building Official and public safety officers are hereby designated as the
authorized Township officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations
directing alleged violators to appear in court or municipal civil action
violation notices directing alleged violators to appear at the Township
of Northville Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau.
A. The following civil fines shall apply in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a municipal civil infraction, unless a different fee is
specified in connection with a particular section:
(1) First offense. The civil fee for a first offense violation shall be in the
amount of not less than $150, plus costs and other sanctions, for
each offense.
(2) Repeat offense. The civil fine for any offense which is a repeat
offense shall be in an amount of not less than $300, plus costs and
other sanctions for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a
municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and
expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any
judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce, or enjoin violation of, the
chapter.
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 152-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-33
1:553
§ 152-34. Other remedies.
In addition to all other remedies, including the penalties provided in
§ 152-33 of this chapter, the Charter Township of Northville may commence
and prosecute appropriate actions in the Circuit Court for the County of
Wayne or any other court having jurisdiction to restrain or prevent any
noncompliance with or violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or
to correct, remedy or abate such noncompliance or violation.
§ 152-35. Pending prosecutions.
Any prosecution arising from a violation of ordinances or regulations
repealed herein, which prosecution may be pending at the time this chapter
shall become effective, or any prosecution which may be commenced in the
future for any offenses committed before the effective date of this chapter,
may be instituted, tried and determined in accordance with the provisions
of such ordinances or regulations in effect at the time of the commission of
the offenses.
C. Continuing offense. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which
any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. Remedies not exclusive. In addition to any remedies provided for by the
Code of the Charter Township of Northville, any equitable or other
remedies available may be sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses as provided by law.
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
§ 152-33 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 152-35
1:554
Chapter 155
SWIMMING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nude swimming — See Ch. 67, § 67-20.
Fences around dangerous bodies of
water — See Ch. 77, Art. I.
Swimming and bathing at outdoor
gatherings — See Ch. 128.
Swimming pools and hot tubs — See Ch. 170.
§ 155-1. Permission to use pool required.
No person shall enter a swimming pool or a natural or artificial body
of water for the purpose or activity of swimming, including wading or
otherwise placing the body of a person in contact with the water, without
having first received the permission of the owner of the swimming pool or of
the body of water and without having such owner personally present on the
property at all times while the person is in the water, provided that if the
person has first received permission of the owner of such swimming pool or
body of water who is not personally present, said person shall be deemed
to have complied with the requirements of this chapter upon presenting
written evidence of such owner's permission to an officer of the law, which
written authorization shall specify the date and time when the person is
permitted to engage in such swimming during the owner's absence from the
property as subscribed by the owner of record of the property.
§ 155-2. Penalties. [Amended 9-18-2003]
Chapter 159
TAXATION
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties specified for a violation of the Township Code.74
B. Any minor, as defined in this state's probate code, who violates any
provision of this chapter shall be dealt with by the Juvenile Division of
the Probate Court or as otherwise prescribed by state law.
74.Editor's Note: See §§ 1-10, 1-14 and 1-16.
§ 152-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-2
1:555

ARTICLE I
Tax Exemption for Housing Projects
[Adopted 7-11-1991 as Ch. 30 of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 159-1. Nonapplicability.
The tax exemption established in Section 15a1. of Public Act No. 334 of
1968 [MCL 125.1415a(1)] shall not apply to all or any class of housing
projects within the boundaries of the Township to which MCL 125.1415a(1)
applies.
§ 159-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-1
1:557

ARTICLE II
Property Assessment Protest
[Adopted 7-11-1991 as Ch. 10 of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 159-2. Personal appearance not required.
All resident taxpayers may file assessment protest by letter rather than by
personal appearance before the Board of Review.
§ 159-3. Inclusion of information in assessment notice.
The Township shall include a statement that protests may be filed by letter
in every assessment notice and on any notice or publication of the meeting
of the Board of Review.
§ 159-4. Failure to send notice.
Failure to send or publish the statement as required in § 159-3 shall not in
any way affect the validity of an assessment or tax levied nor in any way
prejudice the right to collect or enforce the payment of tax.
§ 159-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-4
1:559
Chapter 162
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 170.
§ 162-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use
of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rightsof-
Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) (Act)75 and
other applicable law, and to ensure that the Charter Township of Northville
qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to
providers and complying with the Act.
§ 162-2. Conflict.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict
with the Act or other applicable law.
§ 162-3. Definitions.
A. The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
ACT — The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from
time to time.76
PERMIT — A nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this
chapter to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-ofway
in the Township for its telecommunications facilities.
TOWNSHIP — The Charter Township of Northville.
TOWNSHIP BOARD — The Township Board of the Charter Township of
Northville or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation
of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the
Township Board.
TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Township Manager or his or her
designee.
75.Editor's Note: See MCL 484.3101 et seq.
76.Editor's Note: See MCL 484.3101 et seq.
§ 159-4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 162-3
1:560
B. All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as
defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the
following:
AUTHORITY — The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications
Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the
Act.
MPSC — The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department
of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning
as the term "Commission" in the Act.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area on, below, or above a public roadway,
highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does
not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES OR FACILITIES — The equipment
or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires,
switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can
generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide
telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or
facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas,
equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and
miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial
mobile service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part 1 of Title III of the
Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C.
332, and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR
20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication
device.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, PROVIDER AND
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — Those terms as defined in
Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179,
MCL 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a person
or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed
commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part
1 of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47
U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47
CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication
device. For the purpose of the Act and this chapter only, a provider also
includes all of the following:
A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications
service.
(1)
Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns
telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way.
(2)
(3) A person providing broadband internet transport access service.
§ 162-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-4
1:561
§ 162-4. Permit required.
A. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider
using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the Township for its
telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit
pursuant to this chapter.
B. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an
application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section
6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the
application with the Township Clerk, one copy with the Township
Manager, and one copy with the Township Attorney. Upon receipt, the
Township Clerk shall make 2 copies of the application and distribute a
copy to the Building Inspector and the Ordinance Enforcement Officer.
Applications shall be complete and include all information required by
the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location
of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with
Section 6(5) of the Act.
C. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route
maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret,
proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the
Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246,
pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider
shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map.
D. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be
accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee in the
amount of $500.
E. The Township Manager may request an applicant to submit such
additional information which the Township Manager deems reasonably
necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests
in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional
information established by the Township Manager. If the Township and
the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional
information requested by the Township, the Township or the applicant
shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the Act.
F. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits previously
issued by the Township under Section 251 of the Michigan
Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, and
authorizations or permits issued by the Township to
telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section
251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, but after 1985, shall
satisfy the permit requirements of this chapter.
G. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days from November 1,
2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with
facilities located in a public right-of-way in the Township as of such
date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under
Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179,
§ 162-4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 162-4
1:562
§ 162-5. Issuance of permit.
§ 162-6. Construction/engineering permit.
A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon,
over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the Township without
first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under
ordinances of the Charter Township of Northville, as amended, for
construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for
such a construction or engineering permit.
MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the Township an application for a permit
in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to
Section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an
application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500
application fee required under Subsection D above. A provider under
this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the
permit application if allowed by the Authority, as provided in Section
5(4) of the Act.
A. Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for
a permit is hereby delegated to the Township Manager. Pursuant to
Section 15(3) of the Act, the Township Manager shall approve or deny
an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a
telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under
Section 4(b) of this chapter for access to a public right-of-way within the
Township. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the Act, the Township Manager
shall notify the MPSC when the Township Manager has granted or
denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the
application was filed and the date on which the permit was granted or
denied. The Township Manager shall not unreasonably deny an
application for a permit.
B. Form of permit. If an application for a permit is approved, the Township
Manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with
or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with
Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act 3.
C. Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the Township Manager
may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions
shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage
of the public right-of-way.
D. Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without
limitation on Subsection C above, the Township Manager may require
that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a
condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the
reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its
original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's
access and use.
§ 162-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-7
1:563
§ 162-7. Conduit or utility poles.
Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the
fees required under the Act or under this chapter does not give a
telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles.
§ 162-8. Route maps.
Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall,
within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new
telecommunications facilities in the Township, submit route maps showing
the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and
to the Township. The route maps should be in paper or electronic format
unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with
Section 6(8) of the Act.
§ 162-9. Repair of damage.
Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider
undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications
facilities within a public right-of way or temporarily obstructing a public
right-of-way in the Township, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly
repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under,
over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the
public right-of-way to its preexisting condition.
§ 162-10. Establishment and payment of maintenance fee.
In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the Township set
forth in § 162-4D above, a telecommunications provider with
telecommunications facilities in the Township's public rights-of-way shall
pay an annual maintenance fee to the Authority pursuant to Section 8 of the
Act.
§ 162-11. Modification of existing fees.
In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the
Township hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to
telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date
of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an
amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under
the Act, which shall be paid to the Authority. In compliance with the
requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act, the Township also hereby approves
modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in
public rights-of-way within the Township's boundaries, so that those
providers pay only those fees required under Section 8 of the Act. The
Township shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the
fee with a copy of this chapter, in compliance with the requirement of
Section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged
telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under
the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition
§ 162-7 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 162-11
1:564
is hereby declared to be contrary to the Township's policy and intent, and
upon application by a provider or discovery by the Township, shall be
promptly refunded as having been charged in error.
§ 162-12. Savings clause.
Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to be
invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under § 162-11 shall be
void from the date the modification was made.
§ 162-13. Use of funds.
Pursuant to Section 10(4)of the Act, all amounts received by the Township
from the Authority shall be used by the Township solely for rights-of-wayrelated
purposes. Depositing the amounts received into the Major Street
Fund and/or Local Street Fund, maintained by the Township under Act No.
51 of the Public Acts of 1951,77 would help ensure compliance with this
requirement of the Act.
§ 162-14. Annual report.
Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the Township Manager shall file
an annual report with the Authority on the use and disposition of funds
annually distributed by the Authority.
§ 162-15. Cable television operators.
Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the Township shall not hold a cable
television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an
obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this
Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from
charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided
through broadband internet transport access services.
§ 162-16. Existing rights.
Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein
with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that
a telecommunications provider or the Township may have under a permit
issued by the Township or under a contract between the Township and a
telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way.
§ 162-17. Compliance.
The Township hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this
chapter is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the
provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that
purpose. The Township shall comply in all respects with the requirements
of the Act, including but not limited to the following:
77.Editor's Note: See MCL 247.651 et seq.
§ 162-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 162-17
1:565
§ 162-18. Reservation of police powers.
Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this chapter shall not limit the
Township's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's
A. Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act,
1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in § 162-4C of this
chapter;
B. Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit
requirements hereof, in accordance with § 162-4F of this chapter;
C. Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an
application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500
application fee, in accordance with § 162-4G of this chapter;
D. Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from
the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit
for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the Township, in
accordance with § 162-5A of this chapter;
E. Notifying the MPSC when the Township has granted or denied a permit,
in accordance with § 162-5A of this chapter;
F. Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance
with § 162-5A of this chapter;
G. Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without
additional or different permit terms, as provided in § 162-5B of this
chapter;
H. Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the
telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-ofway,
in accordance with § 162-5C of this chapter;
I. Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds
the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to
its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's
access and use, in accordance with § 162-5D of this chapter;
J. Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for
construction or engineering permits, in accordance with § 162-6 of this
chapter;
K. Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the Township's
right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with
§ 162-11 of this chapter;
L. Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with
§ 162-14 of this chapter; and
M. Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay
certain franchise fees, in accordance with § 162-15 of this chapter.
§ 162-17 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 162-18
1:566
access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the Township's
authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public.
§ 162-19. Severability.
The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this
chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence,
paragraph, section, or clause of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional
or invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction,
the unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or
validity of any remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 162-20. Authorized Township officials.
The Township Supervisor or his or her designee is hereby designated as
the authorized Township official to issue municipal civil infraction citations
(directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction
violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal
chapter violations bureau) for violations under this chapter as provided by
the Township Code.
§ 162-21. Municipal civil infraction.
A person who violates any provision of this chapter or the terms or
conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and
shall be subject to the penalties provided in the ordinances of the Charter
Township of Northville for violations of the Township Code. Nothing in this
§ 162-21 shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the Township
in the event of a violation by a person of this chapter or a permit.
§ 162-22. Repealer.
All ordinances and portions of ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are
hereby repealed.
§ 162-23. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect on September 4, 2003.
Chapter 166
UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking Violations Bureau — See Ch. 28.
Cruising — See Ch. 69.
Motor vehicles — See Ch. 113.
§ 162-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-1
1:567
§ 166-1. Title.
This chapter and the provisions of the Uniform Traffic Code and state laws
adopted by reference herein shall be collectively known and may be cited
as the "Northville Township Traffic Code Ordinance."
§ 166-2. Adoption of Uniform Traffic Code by reference.
The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages as
promulgated by the Director of the Michigan Department of State Police
pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, 1969 Public Act
306, as amended (MCL 24.201 et seq.) and made effective October 30,
2002, is hereby adopted by reference. All references in said Uniform Traffic
Code to a "governmental unit" shall mean the Charter Township of
Northville.
§ 166-3. Adoption of provisions of the Michigan Vehicle Code by
reference.
The following provisions of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 Public Act 300,
as amended (MCL 257.1 et seq) are hereby adopted by reference:
§ 166-4. Adoption of other state laws by reference.
The following provisions of state law are hereby adopted by reference:
A. Chapter I (Words and Phrases Defined): MCL 257.1 through 257.82;
B. Chapter II (Administration, Registration): MCL 257.215, 257.216,
257.217, 257.217b, 257.217g, 257.223, 257.224, 257.225, 257.228,
257.230a, 257.233, 257.243, 257.244, 257.255, and 257.256;
C. Chapter III (Operator's and Chauffeur's License): MCL 257.310e,
257.311, 257.312, 257.312a, 257.319d, 257.319f, 257.324, 257.325,
257.326 and 257.328;
D. Chapter VI (Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws): MCL
257.601-257.601b, 257.602-257.606, 257.611-257.616,
257.617a-257.622, 257.624a-257.624b, 257.625 (except felony
provisions), 257.625a, 257.625m, 257.626-257.626b,
257.627-257.627b, 257.628, 257.629, 257.629b, 257.631-257.632,
257.634-257.645, 257.647-257.655, 257.656-257.662,
257.667-257.675d, 257.676-257.682b, 257.683-257.710e, and
257.715-257.726; and
E. Chapter VIII (License Offenses): MCL 257.904-257.904a, 257.904e, and
257.905.
A. Section 3102 of the Michigan Insurance Code of 1956, 1956 Public Act
218, as amended, pertaining to required insurance (MCL 500.3102).
§ 166-1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 166-4
1:568
§ 166-5. Penalties.
The penalties provided by Uniform Traffic Code and the provisions of the
state laws hereinabove adopted by reference are hereby adopted as the
penalties for violations of the corresponding provisions of this chapter.
Chapter 170
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 58.
Design and construction standards — See Ch.
72.
Fences — See Ch. 77.
Floodplain regulation — See Ch. 82.
Grading and drainage — See Ch. 85.
Historic District — See Ch. 91.
Landfills — See Ch. 101.
Mining and quarrying — See Ch. 110.
Oil and gas operations — See Ch. 122.
Signs — See Ch. 145.
Stormwater detention basins — See Ch. 151.
Subdivision control — See Ch. 152
Telecommunications — See Ch. 162.
B. Subchapter 6 of Part 811 of the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act, 1994 Public Act 451, as amended, pertaining to off-road
vehicles (MCL 324.81101-324.81147).
C. Part 821 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act,
1994 Public Act 451, as amended, pertaining to snowmobiles (MCL
324.82101-324.82158).
D. Section 703 of the Michigan Liquor Control Act, 1998 Public Act 58, as
amended, pertaining to minors and alcoholic liquor (MCL 436.1703).
§ 166-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 166-5
1:569

ARTICLE 1
Introduction and Applicability
[Amended 11-19-2015]
§ 170-1.1. Long title.
The long title of this chapter is "An ordinance enacted pursuant to the
Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006), to provide for
the establishment of zoning districts within which the proper use of land
and natural resources may be encouraged or regulated, and within which
provisions designate the location, size and type of uses permitted, minimum
open spaces, sanitary, safety and protective measures, buildings, structures
and vehicles; to provide for amendments thereto; to provide for the
administration thereof; to provide for conflicts with other ordinances; to
provide for public hearings; to provide for appeals and for the establishment
of a Zoning Board of Appeals; to provide control and regulation of
nonconforming uses and property; to provide for prior ordinances to be
saved; to provide for the collection of fees; to provide for the enforcement
of the provisions; and imposing penalties for the violation of the provisions
of the ordinance."
§ 170-1.2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may by cited as the "Township of Northville
Zoning Ordinance."
§ 170-1.3. Purpose.
This chapter is based on the Charter Township of Northville Master Plan,
including subarea plans, corridor plans, design standards, amendments
to those plans and similar plans adopted by the Planning Commission
addressing future development patterns and development goals. This
chapter is intended to implement the Master Plan through regulations on
use of land, buildings and structures to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare.
§ 170-1.4. Interpretation and application.
A. References to the effective date of this chapter shall include any
amendments hereto.
B. In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of
the public health, safety or general welfare.
C. This chapter is not intended to impair or interfere with other provisions
of law or ordinances. However, where this chapter imposes greater
restrictions than required by existing ordinances or rules, regulations
or permits, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 170-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1.4
1:571
§ 170-1.5. Compliance required.
No building, or part thereof, shall hereby be erected, constructed,
renovated, altered or maintained and no new use shall be made of any
building or land except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 170-1.6. Severability.
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or word of this
chapter be held invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of the chapter.
§ 170-1.7. Effect on prior violations.
Amendments to this chapter shall not affect violations of the Code of the
Charter Township of Northville or any other ordinance existing prior to
the effective date of this chapter, and such violation shall be governed and
continue to be separately punishable to the full extent of the law under the
provisions of such ordinance at the time the violation was committed.
§ 170-1.8. Repealer.
The Zoning Ordinance adopted by the Township of Northville, and all
amendments thereto, are hereby repealed. The repeal of the above
ordinance and its amendments does not affect or impair any act done,
offense committed or right occurring, accrued or acquired or liability,
penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time enforced,
prosecuted or inflicted, nor change the status of previous nonconforming
situations.
D. Except as otherwise noted, nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted
or construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the
continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification or any
permissible activities therein. In addition, all rights are hereby declared
to be subject to such subsequent amendment, change or modification
hereof as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public
health, safety and welfare.
E. If the meaning of this chapter is unclear in a particular circumstance,
the Zoning Board of Appeals shall construe the provision to carry out
the intent of this chapter if such can be discerned from the provisions of
this chapter or law.
§ 170-1.4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-1.8
1:572
ARTICLE 2
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-1.8
1:573

ARTICLE 3
General Use Provisions
[Amended 4-16-2009; 6-16-2011; 12-17-2015]
§ 170-3.1. Regulations regarding uses of land or buildings.
A. Each developed lot shall be in compliance with the dimensional
requirements of this chapter. All requirements of this chapter shall be
located on a single lot; an adjacent lot shall not be used to meet any
portion of the requirements.
B. Each zoning district provides for "similar uses." If a proposed use is not
explicitly listed as a permitted or special land use in any of the zoning
districts, an application for determination of similar use shall be made
to the Planning Commission. If a use is determined to be similar to a use
listed in a particular zoning district, the proposed use shall comply with
the standards that apply to the similar use. If the Planning Commission
determines a proposed use is not similar to a use in a particular zoning
district, the applicant may petition for an amendment to the chapter, as
described in § 170-40.7. Based on information provided by the
applicant, the Planning Commission shall determine if the use is similar
by considering factors such as, but not limited to, peak-hour use, nature
of use, aesthetics, traffic generated, noise, vibration, dust, smoke, odor,
glare and other impacts in terms of health, safety and welfare.
C. Only one principal structure or use is permitted per lot, except for an
approved manufactured housing community, condominium or multiplefamily
development or related commercial, office, industrial or public
buildings contained within a single, integrated complex and sharing
parking, access, signs, detention and other similar features.
D. Prior to commencing any site grading or clearing, the activity shall be
reviewed for compliance with Article 23, Tree and Woodlands
Replacement. This standard does not apply to individual residential lots
containing an existing house.
E. A clear vision zone shall be maintained at all intersections, as defined
by the following:
(1) The clear vision zone refers to the triangular area created by the
intersection of two public or private roads, a public road and a
private road, or a public or private road and a driveway, and a
straight line connecting two points measured 25 feet along the
intersection of the road right-of-way or easement. The triangle area
shall also include the road right-of-way or private road easement
area. When a right-of-way or easement is not provided, the point of
intersection shall be determined a distance of 10 feet beyond the
edge of pavement or road surface.
§ 170-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3.1
1:575
(2) No obstructions are permitted within the clear vision zone between
a height of 30 inches and six feet above the established grade of the
road.
F. Parking, storage, repair, restoration or maintenance of vehicles,
equipment, trailers and other similar items shall comply with the
following:
(1) Items shall be located on an improved driveway surface, licensed
and operable.
(2) Inoperable items and parts shall be stored within an enclosed
building.
(3) Recreation vehicles or trailers may be parked in the front yard for
up to 48 hours for the purpose of loading, unloading, cleaning and
maintenance.
(4) Parking or storage is permitted within a garage or the rear yard.
This restriction shall not apply to vehicles used exclusively for
farming.
(5) Within residential zoning districts, commercial vehicles,
equipment, trailers or other similar items shall not be used to
advertise or be parked or stored for commercial purposes.
(6) Within nonresidential zoning districts, the storage of vehicles,
equipment, trailers or other similar items is prohibited when they
are not associated with the primary business located on the
property.
(7) Storage or parking of semi-trucks, semi-trailers, bulldozers, earth
movers, cranes or any other similar machinery shall only be
permitted when being used in conjunction with an active
construction project.
(8) Vehicles or objects such as, but not limited to, golf carts, riding
lawn mowers or extra vehicles may not be parked, stored or
advertised for sale, lease or other similar situations. This standard
shall not apply to passenger vehicles customarily parked in an
improved driveway.
G. Performance standards.
(1) Odor. Any condition or operation which results in the creation of
odors of such intensity and character as to be detrimental to the
health and welfare of the public or which interferes unreasonably
with the comfort of the public shall be removed, stopped or
modified to remove the odor. Such odors shall be prohibited when
perceptible at any point along the property line.
§ 170-3.1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-3.1
1:576
(2) Gases. The escape or emission of any gas which is explosive or
injurious, destructive or harmful to persons or property is
prohibited.
(3) Airborne emissions. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to permit the emission of any smoke or air
contaminants that violates applicable state and federal air quality
standards.
(4) Glare and radioactive materials.
(a) Glare from any process, such as or similar to arc welding or
acetylene torch cutting, that emits harmful ultraviolet rays
shall be performed in such a manner as not to be seen from any
point beyond the property line and as not to create a public
nuisance or hazard along lot lines.
(b) Radioactive materials and wastes, including electromagnetic
radiation such as x-ray machine operation, shall not be emitted
to exceed quantities established as safe by the United States
Bureau of Standards, when measured at the property line.
(c) Glare from automobile, commercial or industrial vehicle
headlights shall not be directed into any adjacent property so
as to become a nuisance.
(5) Vibration. Operations that cause vibration shall not be perceptible
at any abutting property line. This requirement shall not apply to
construction activities undertaken between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00 p.m.
(6) Hazardous substances.
(a) Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity operating a
business or conducting an activity which uses, stores or
generates hazardous substances shall obtain the necessary
permits and/or licenses from the appropriate federal, state or
county authority having jurisdiction and shall operate it in
compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws,
rules, regulations, orders and directives pertaining to said
hazardous substances. The Township shall be informed of any
and all inspections conducted by a federal, state or local
authority in connection with a permit and/or license.
(b) Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity operating a
business or conducting an activity which uses, stores or
generates hazardous substances shall complete and file a
hazardous materials survey in conjunction with the following:
[1] Upon submission of a site plan.
[2] Upon any change of use or occupancy of a structure or
premises.
§ 170-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3.1
1:577
§ 170-3.2. Accessory structures and uses.
[3] Upon any change of the manner in which such substances
are used, handled, or stored and/or in the event of a
change in the type of substances to be used, handled or
stored.
(7) Waste and rubbish dumping. No garbage, sewage, filth, rubbish,
waste, trash, debris or any other offensive or obnoxious matter
shall be kept in open containers, or piled, placed, stored or dumped
on any land in the Township in such a manner as to constitute a
nuisance or create a hazard to the health, safety, morals and
general welfare of the residents in the Township.
A. Accessory structures and uses shall be subject to the following
regulations, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter.
B. A building permit or compliance permit is required in order to review
plans for compliance with applicable Township standards.
C. Accessory structures and uses are only permitted in connection with,
incidental to and on the same lot as a permitted principal structure or
use.
D. An accessory structure or use shall not be occupied or utilized unless
the principal structure is occupied or utilized.
E. The placement and design of an accessory structure or use shall not
create a negative impact of stormwater runoff. Grading plans may be
required to ensure compliance with this provision.
F. Parking for an accessory structure or use shall be provided in
accordance with Article 26, Off-Street Parking and Loading/Unloading.
G. When an accessory structure is structurally attached to a principal
building, it shall be subject to the regulations applicable to principal
buildings, except where otherwise noted herein.
H. Accessory buildings shall not be occupied for dwelling purposes. Up to
50% of an accessory structure may be used for a home occupation,
provided all other applicable regulations pertaining to home
occupations are met.
I. Setbacks.
(1) On lots two acres or greater, an accessory structure or use may be
permitted in the nonrequired front yard, provided the accessory
structure or use is set back a distance equal to the setback of any
residential dwellings on adjacent properties, including those
directly across the street and located within the Township.
(2) On lots less than two acres, accessory structures or uses shall not
be located in any front yard (required or nonrequired).
§ 170-3.1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-3.2
1:578
(3) Accessory structures or uses are not permitted in the required side
yard.
(4) Accessory structures or uses shall be at least five feet from a rear
lot line.
(5) Setback limitations shall not apply to developments containing
detached parking garages or carports, provided the Planning
Commission approves elevation drawings and materials. The
Planning Commission shall consider the impact of headlights and
views from nearby public streets on adjacent properties.
J. Buildings shall be at least 25 feet from the shoreline of any lake, pond,
stormwater pond, treatment basin, watercourse or wetland regulated
by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources or United States
Environmental Protection Agency. A boathouse, deck or patio may be
located along the shoreline.
K. Detached accessory structures shall comply with the following
standards:
(1) Lots less than two acres.
(a) Up to three detached accessory structures are permitted.
(b) The cumulative square footage shall not exceed 1 1/2 times the
occipital square footage of the main structure. "Occipital
square footage" shall be defined as all living areas excluding a
basement or garage.
(2) Lots two acres and greater.
(a) The number of accessory structures shall be limited by the
maximum size and maximum lot coverage requirements
pertaining to accessory structures.
(b) The cumulative square footage of the accessory structure(s)
shall not exceed two times the occipital square footage of the
principal structure. The Zoning Board of Appeals may modify
the maximum size standard for accessory buildings related to a
bona fide farming operation or raising livestock in
consideration of the size of the property, conformance with
other standards and the character of adjacent uses.
(3) The combined square footage of all accessory structures, excluding
swimming pools, may occupy up to 25% of the required rear yard.
Swimming pools and their associated structures (decks, patios,
etc.) may occupy up to 50% of the required rear yard.
L. Structures shall be at least 10 feet from a principal building, street
right-of-way or private road easement, unless otherwise regulated
herein.
§ 170-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3.2
1:579
M. Height shall not exceed 14 feet, measured from the finished floor
elevation to the average height between the eaves and the ridge.
N. Decks, porches, patios, terraces or other similar hardscape structures
that are open, unenclosed, uncovered and attached or unattached to a
principal structure shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Structures shall not extend more than 16 feet into the required rear
yard setback. Stairs may extend beyond the end of the structure for
the minimum distance necessary to meet the established grade in
the rear yard. If the structure is at the maximum projection of 16
feet, the stairs must be parallel to the structure.
(2) Structures shall not extend into the required side yard setback,
except a walkway up to three feet six inches is permitted to allow
access from a side door to the back of the house.
(3) Structures shall not extend more than 12 feet into a required front
yard setback, including steps and stairs.
(4) The height of railings or walls shall not exceed three feet.
(5) A minimum fifteen-foot setback shall be provided between a
structure and the edge of any lake, pond, stormwater facility,
watercourse or wetland regulated by the Michigan Department of
Natural Resources or United States Environmental Protection
Agency.
(6) A separate deck or patio may be permitted along a shoreline,
subject to the following:
(a) The maximum length measured along the shoreline does not
exceed 10 feet.
(b) The width does not exceed six feet.
(c) A walkway, up to five feet wide, is permitted within the
required fifteen-foot buffer to the water's edge.
O. A garden structure, such as a gazebo, pergola, arbor or other similar
structure, attached to a deck or patio shall comply with the following
standards:
(1) The size of the structure may not exceed 150 square feet.
(2) The structure may extend beyond the sixteen-foot permitted
encroachment into the rear yard setback.
(3) The structure may not be located in the required side yard setback.
P. Mechanical equipment (permanent or temporary), including, but not
limited to, air-conditioning units, HVAC equipment, transformers,
generators, electrical boxes and other similar devices, shall comply
with the following standards:
§ 170-3.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-3.2
1:580
(1) In residential zoning districts, equipment may not extend more
than 10 feet into the rear yard setback and may be permitted within
the side yard setback, provided a minimum four-foot setback is
provided to the property line.
(2) In nonresidential zoning districts, equipment shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from any property line.
(3) In nonresidential zoning districts, equipment shall be screened
from public view by a wall, fence, berm and/or landscape.
(4) Noise from the equipment shall not exceed the Township's noise
level standard at the lot line.
Q. Swimming pools, spas, hot tubs and other similar facilities shall comply
with the following standards:
(1) Facilities are not permitted in a front yard.
(2) Decks, walks or other accessory items surrounding the facility shall
be set back at least 10 feet from any property line.
(3) A minimum ten-foot separation is required between a facility and
the principal structure.
(4) Mechanical equipment shall be set back at least five feet from any
property line.
(5) An enclosure is required for any facility containing 24 inches or
more of water. Enclosures, including the gate, lock and fence, must
be approved by the Building Official.
(6) Hot tubs or other similar facilities must be enclosed by a fence or
shall provide a locking lid.
R. Site entrance features, including, but not limited to, walls, columns,
lighting and other similar decorative elements, used to define entrances
to residential developments shall comply with the following standards:
(1) The corner clearance standards of this article.
(2) Low-intensity lighting is required and shall comply with the lighting
requirements of Article 21.
S. Private boat docks shall be permitted as an accessory structure on a lot
that is occupied by a residential dwelling. One dock is permitted per
dwelling unit.
T. Waste receptacles.
(1) Waste receptacles may be located in a required rear or side yard
setback, provided they are not located in front of the front building
line.
§ 170-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3.2
1:581
(2) Waste receptacles must be conveniently accessible to servicing
vehicles.
(3) The concrete base shall extend six feet beyond the front edge of the
receptacle pad or gate, to support the front axle load of a refuse
vehicle. The pad shall be constructed with six inches of reinforced
concrete and designed to prevent any liquid or other matter from
draining into adjacent areas.
(4) An enclosure shall comply with the following:
(a) Enclosed on three sides and a gate on the fourth side.
(b) Constructed of brick or decorative concrete material to match
or complement the primary building material.
(c) The height shall be at least six feet or one foot above the height
of the enclosed waste receptacle, whichever is greater.
(d) A three-foot clear area shall be provided between the waste
receptacle and screen wall.
(e) A change to a larger or taller waste receptacle may require
modifications to the screening to retain compliance with these
standards.
(f) The waste receptacle must have a lid or cover.
(g) The enclosure shall be located as far as practical, but not less
than 20 feet, from a residential property line or district.
U. Electric vehicle infrastructure.
(1) Permitted in all zoning districts when accessory to a principal use
and when fees are not collected to recharge.
(2) Permitted in any zoning district except single-family districts when
fees are collected for recharge.
(3) May be included in the minimum number of required parking
spaces.
(4) Except when located in conjunction with a single-family use,
charging stations shall be reserved for parking and charging of
electric vehicles only.
(5) Battery charging stations, outlets and connector devices shall be
between 36 inches and 48 inches from the surface on which they
are mounted. Equipment mounted on pedestals, light posts,
bollards or similar devices shall be designed and located as to not
impede pedestrian travel, create trip hazards or conflict with
vehicles.
§ 170-3.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-3.2
1:582
(6) Equipment shall be protected by bollards, curbs or other similar
protective devices. Where possible, equipment shall be located
within landscape islands. Equipment shall be set back at least 24
inches from a curb or bumper block.
(7) Signage.
(a) Information shall be posted identifying classification of the
equipment (voltage and amperage levels), hours of operation,
fees, safety information or any other applicable information
related to the charging station.
(b) A sign shall indicate the parking space is for electric vehicle
charging purposes only.
(c) A phone number or other contact information shall be provided
on the equipment to report malfunction or other problems.
V. Wind energy turbines.
(1) General standards.
(a) Permitted in all zoning districts when accessory to a principal
use.
(b) One turbine is permitted.
(c) The turbine is only permitted in the rear yard.
(d) A wind energy system shall not generate a noise level of
55dB(A) or greater, measured at the property line, for more
than three minutes in any hour of the day. If the ambient sound
level exceeds 55 dB(A), measured at the base of the wind
turbine, the sound of the turbine shall not exceed the ambient
dB(A) plus 5 dB(A) for more than three minutes in any hour of
the day.
(e) A shadow flicker analysis is required to demonstrate the
locations where shadow flicker will occur at sunrise and
sunset, along with measures the applicant will take to
eliminate or mitigate the effects on adjacent or affected
properties.
(f) Lighting is not permitted, unless required by the Federal
Aviation Administration.
(g) The system shall have a nonreflective finish and shall be
maintained in the color or finish that was originally applied by
the manufacturer.
(h) All signs other than the manufacturer's or installer's
identification or appropriate warning signs are prohibited.
§ 170-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3.2
1:583
(i) All electrical wires shall be located underground, except for
the wire necessary to connect the wind generator to the tower
wiring, the tower wiring to the disconnect junction box, and
grounding wires.
(2) Tower-mounted systems.
(a) A minimum two-acre lot is required.
(b) The minimum setback from a property line, easement or R.O.W.
shall be the height of the turbine plus 10 feet.
(c) The maximum height shall not exceed 45 feet or the height
requirement of the zoning district, whichever is greater.
(3) Roof-mounted systems.
(a) The system shall be mounted on the back of the structure and
in a location that minimizes its appearance to the greatest
extent possible.
(b) The system shall be set back at least 30 feet from any property
line.
(c) The height of the system shall not extend more than 10 feet
above the ridge or peak of the roof or the maximum height of
the zoning district in which it is located, whichever is greater.
W. Antenna and satellite dish structures.
(1) The provisions of this section are intended to achieve the following
objectives:
(a) Promote safety and prevent hazards to persons and property
resulting from accidents involving antenna and satellite dish
structures.
(b) Maintain architectural integrity, preserve aesthetic qualities
and preserve property values by minimizing visibility of
antenna or satellite dish structures.
(c) Balance regulations on the placement, manner of reception
and installation to the minimum required to demonstrate
compliance with the objectives contained herein.
(d) Comply with the Federal Communications Commission
regulations.
(2) Antennas and satellite dishes 3.28 feet or less in diameter are
permitted, provided units are not attached to a pole or tower and
do not encroach into required setbacks.
§ 170-3.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-3.2
1:584
(3) Antennas and satellite dishes 6.56 feet or less in diameter and
located in a nonresidential zoning district are exempt from the
regulations contained in this section.
(4) Conventional AM and FM radio antennas, amateur ("HAM") radio
antennas, citizen band ("CB") antennas and digital audio radio
service ("DARS") signals that are less than 11.25 feet in diameter
and do not extend higher than 10 feet above the ridge and/or peak
of the roof are permitted, provided they are located on the portion
of the roof facing the rear yard and they do not exceed the height
limitation of the zoning district.
(5) An antenna or satellite dish that cannot meet the location
requirements of Subsection W(3), (4) or (5) above may obtain a
permit from the Building Official when it can be determined that
the requirements unreasonably delay or prevent installation,
maintenance or use, unreasonably increase the cost of installation,
maintenance or use or preclude reception or transmission of an
acceptable quality signal.
(6) The Building Official may require that the facility be placed subject
to conditions which further the objectives of this section, such as
requiring the facility to be painted in such a way as to be
compatible with the primary structure or surrounding landscaping,
requiring the facility to be screened with landscape, or other
appropriate measures to minimize the visibility and impact of the
structure.
(7) All other antenna and satellite dish structures not otherwise
addressed by Subsection W(3), (4) and (5) shall be subject to the
following requirements:
(a) A permit shall be required from the Building Official.
(b) Structures shall be located to minimize visibility to the greatest
extent possible.
(c) The diameter of the antenna shall not exceed eight feet.
(d) The height shall not exceed 14 feet if ground-mounted.
(e) The height shall not exceed 17 feet if mounted on a structure.
(f) The antenna structure shall be perforated, mesh or rod and/or
pole construction and shall not be solid sheet or panel
construction.
(g) An antenna structure within 100 feet of a residential property
line or street right-of-way/easement shall be screened from
view by a wall or fence, berm, evergreen plantings or a
combination of these elements. If there is no conforming
location on the property where the structure may be screened
from view, screening shall be accomplished to the extent
§ 170-3.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3.2
1:585
reasonably feasible, as approved by the Building Official. A
reception antenna which is intended to serve more than one
unit in a residential development complex shall be screened
from residential dwelling units in accordance with these
provisions.
(h) The color of all antennas or satellite dishes shall be similar to
the surrounding environment. The surface of the antenna shall
be painted or treated to prevent glare.
(i) Advertising is not permitted.
(j) The antenna shall be located in the rear yard, subject to the
setback requirements of the zoning district.
(k) All wiring shall be placed underground.
(l) Up to two units are permitted per lot.
X. Sidewalks and pathways.
(1) Sidewalks and pathways shall be provided in accordance with the
following:
(a) Where sidewalks or pathways are identified on the Township's
Pathway Plan, Township Master Plan, Zoning Ordinance or
other planning documents.
(b) To connect high pedestrian generators, such as
neighborhoods, schools, parks, public buildings, places of
worship, multiple-family residential, offices and uses serving
the aforementioned.
(c) Within developed parcels to achieve connection between
buildings, uses and separation from vehicles.
(d) Within any development where the Planning Commission
determines sidewalks and pathways are appropriate in
consideration of the use, project density, design, relationship to
the public pathway system and adjacent facilities.
(e) To provide access to, or through, common areas. The minimum
width of the open space containing a sidewalk or pathway shall
be 20 feet. The Planning Commission may require landscaping,
fence or wall to buffer walkways from adjacent uses.
(f) When located adjacent to a public or private road, an easement
for the location and maintenance of the nonmotorized facility
shall be provided and recorded.
(2) Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five feet.
(3) Pathways shall have a minimum width of 10 feet.
§ 170-3.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-3.2
1:586
ARTICLE 4
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-3.2
1:587

ARTICLE 5
Zoning Districts, Maps and Requirements
[Amended 8-19-2010; 12-15-2011; 11-19-2015]
§ 170-5.1. Districts established.
For the purposes of this chapter, the Charter Township of Northville is
hereby divided into the following zoning districts.
R-1 Single Family Residential District
R-2 Single Family Residential District
R-3 Single Family Residential District
R-4 Single Family Residential District
RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential District
SH Senior Housing District
PROS Public Recreation and Open Space District
OS Office Service District
B-1 Local Business District
B-3 General Business District
NRMU Northville Road Mixed Use District
CR Commercial Recreation District
ORT Office, Research and Technology District
I-1 Industrial District
CI Consumer Industrial District
PUD Planned Unit Development
OSC Open Space Community
§ 170-5.2. Zoning Map.
The Zoning District Map depicts the various districts the Township is
divided into and identifies the adoption or amendment date. The Zoning
Map is made a part of this chapter and shall be as much a part of this
chapter as the information described herein.78
§ 170-5.3. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any districts
shown on the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following or
parallel to the center line of streets, such center lines shall be
construed to be said boundary.
78.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Township offices.
§ 170-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-5.3
1:589
§ 170-5.4. District regulations.
Each district, as created in this article, shall be subject to the regulations
contained in this chapter. Uses not expressly permitted are prohibited. Uses
for enterprises or purposes that are contrary to federal, state or local laws
or ordinances are prohibited.
§ 170-5.5. Zoning of vacated areas.
When any street, alley or other public way is vacated, it or any portion
thereof shall automatically be classified in the same district as the property
it is attached to.
B. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundary.
C. Where the boundaries of a district follows a subdivision boundary line,
such boundary line shall be construed to be said boundary.
D. If distances are not specified on the Map, dimensions shall be
determined by the scale on the Zoning Map.
E. Due to the scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the Zoning Map, if there
is uncertainty, contradiction or conflict as to the intended location of
district boundaries, interpretation of the exact location of district
boundary lines shall be determined by the Planning Commission.
§ 170-5.3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-5.5
1:590
ARTICLE 6
Single Family Residential Districts (R-1 through R-4)
[Amended 7-15-2010; 12-15-2011; 11-19-2015]
§ 170-6.1. Intent.
The R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts are intended to provide for singlefamily
detached houses and other related facilities serving residents in the
district. Each residential district has minimum area, density and location
requirements that promote development consistent with existing residential
neighborhoods. The R-4 District, as designated on the Zoning Map, is
specifically designed to preserve and maintain the character of single-family
neighborhoods in older platted sections of the Township. Creation of new
R-4 Districts is not permitted.
§ 170-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-6.1
1:591

ARTICLE 7
Multiple-Family Residential District (MF)
[Amended 7-15-2010; 12-15-2011; 11-19-2015]
§ 170-7.1. Intent.
The Multiple-Family (MF) Residential District is intended to provide
locations for higher-density housing types in transition zones between
nonresidential and single-family residential zoning districts and uses.
§ 170-7.2. Required conditions.
The following standards shall apply to all multiple-family developments:
A. A minimum of 25,000 square feet of open space, or 225 square feet for
each dwelling unit, shall be provided. Open space shall be designed to
facilitate access and usability.
B. Buildings, parking lots and internal site circulation shall be set back at
least 30 feet from nonresidential property lines and 50 feet from an
abutting residential district or when proposed buildings are greater
than 15 feet tall.
C. Buildings shall not exceed 180 feet in length.
D. The minimum distance between buildings shall comply with the
following:
Building
Height Side/Side Rear/Rear Rear/Side
Up to 30' 30' 80' 60'
Greater than
30'
Height of
building
100' 80'
If there is a combination of building heights in the same development,
the minimum distance requirement shall be established by the taller
building.
E. Parking or vehicular circulation is not permitted within the required
separation between buildings.
F. Decks, patios and terraces without a roof may extend 12 feet into the
required rear yard spacing between buildings.
G. Sidewalks are required and must be set back five feet from the edge of
the road. Pedestrian routes shall provide access to recreation amenities
and between parking areas and dwelling units.
H. Buildings must be set back at least 15 feet from a sidewalk, parking lot
or roadway.
§ 170-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-7.2
1:593
I. For developments with private attached garages, a minimum of 25 feet
must be provided between a garage and sidewalk.
J. A minimum four-foot-wide landscape area is required between
driveways.
K. Carports and detached garages are not permitted between the
perimeter street right-of-way and the nearest building.
§ 170-7.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-7.2
1:594
ARTICLE 8
Senior Housing District (SH)
[Amended 12-15-2011; 11-19-2015]
§ 170-8.1. Intent.
The Senior Housing (SH) District is intended to provide housing
opportunities for seniors, empty nesters, and active adults, and related
uses, to serve the needs and levels of care desired or required by senior
citizens. For purposes of this chapter, "senior persons" are defined as
individuals 55 years or older; or persons living together with one or both
attaining the age of 55.
§ 170-8.2. Required conditions.
The following conditions shall be applicable to any senior residential
housing permitted by this article:
A. One property line, or a majority of a property line, shall abut an existing
use or zoning district other than a single-family, or which is an area that
is planned for something other than single-family in the future.
B. Ingress and egress shall be directly onto a major road.
C. Required open space shall be exclusive of required setbacks and may
include plazas, gardens, walking paths, etc.79
79.Editor's Note: Former Art 8.A, Retirement Community District (RC), which immediately
followed this article, was repealed 11-17-2011.
§ 170-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-8.2
1:595

ARTICLE 9
Public Recreation and Open Space District (PROS)
[Amended 12-15-2011; 11-19-2015]
§ 170-9.1. Intent.
The Public Recreation and Open Space (PROS) District is intended to
provide an area exclusively for specified government, civic and public
recreation facilities.
§ 170-9.2. Required conditions.
A. The size of the site shall be adequate to accommodate the intended
use(s), parking and necessary buffer areas without significant impact
on nearby properties in terms of noise, traffic, lighting glare, views,
odors, trespassing, dust or blowing debris.
B. Buildings or domes for athletic fields may have a peak height of 80 feet,
provided the setback is at least two feet for every one foot in height.
Other structures shall not exceed 35 feet in height.
C. All outdoor activities, including lighting, public address systems, etc.,
must cease at 11:00 p.m.
§ 170-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-9.2
1:597

ARTICLE 10
Office Service District (OS)
[Amended 7-15-2010; 12-15-2011; 11-19-2015]
§ 170-10.1. Intent.
The Office Service (OS) District is intended to provide a variety of office
uses and personal services to meet the demonstrated public need at
appropriate locations.
§ 170-10.2. Required conditions.
A. Outdoor storage, display or staging of goods or materials is not
permitted.
B. All business, servicing or processing shall be conducted within an
enclosed building, unless otherwise specified herein.
§ 170-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-10.2
1:599

ARTICLE 11
Northville Road Mixed Use District (NRMU)
[Amended 12-15-2011; 11-19-2015]
§ 170-11.1. Intent.
The Northville Road Mixed Use (NRMU) District is intended to address
the evolution of the Northville Road corridor and attract mixed uses and
adaptive reuse of buildings that once housed industrial uses to create
a unique area of the community with a strong synergy between a
complementary mix of uses.
§ 170-11.2. Required conditions.
A. Permitted manufacturing or assembly uses must be screened from
residential uses and public view.
B. Outdoor storage, display or staging of goods or materials is not
permitted.
C. All business, servicing or processing shall be conducted within an
enclosed building, unless otherwise specified herein.
§ 170-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-11.2
1:601

ARTICLE 12
Local Business District (B-1)
[Amended 7-15-2010; 12-15-2011; 11-19-2015]
§ 170-12.1. Intent.
The Local Business (B-1) District is intended to provide for retail businesses
and service uses that primarily satisfy the day-to-day convenience shopping
and/or service needs of persons residing in nearby residential areas. This
district is further intended to encourage the concentration of local business
areas and avoid strip business development along road corridors.
§ 170-12.2. Required conditions.
A. Outdoor storage, display or staging of goods/materials is not permitted.
B. All business, servicing or processing shall be conducted within an
enclosed building, unless otherwise specified herein.
§ 170-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-12.2
1:603

ARTICLE 13
General Business District (B-3)
[Amended 7-15-2010; 12-15-2011; 11-19-2015]
§ 170-13.1. Intent.
The General Business (B-3) District is intended to provide more-diversified
and larger-scale business types than the B-1 District with the intent to serve
nearby residential areas as well as a regional service base.
§ 170-13.2. Required conditions.
A. Outdoor storage, display or staging of goods/materials is not permitted.
B. All business, servicing or processing shall be conducted within an
enclosed building, unless otherwise specified herein.
C. Accessory uses and facilities, including, but not limited to, interior or
exterior playgrounds, shall be architecturally integrated with the
primary structure, and the height and bulk shall be proportionate to the
primary structure.
§ 170-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-13.2
1:605

ARTICLE 14
Commercial Recreation District (CR)
[Amended 4-19-2012; 11-19-2015]
§ 170-14.1. Intent.
The Commercial Recreation (CR) District is intended for private commercial
recreation uses providing a family-oriented environment with activities for
all ages.
§ 170-14.2. Required conditions.
§ 170-14.3. Prohibited uses.
A. All structures shall be set back at least 50 feet from adjacent
nonresidential districts and uses and 100 feet from adjacent residential
districts and uses.
B. The Planning Commission may impose regulations on the hours of
operation in consideration of adjacent land uses.
C. All outdoor activities, including lighting, public address systems, etc.,
must cease at 11:00 p.m.
D. Scoreboards or similar signs may be approved at the discretion of the
Planning Commission.
A. Outdoor and indoor gun clubs.
B. Outdoor archery ranges.
C. Indoor stadiums and arenas with seating capacity greater than 5,000.
D. Outdoor stadiums which are not accessory to a permitted or special
land use.
E. Go-cart facilities.
F. Accessory residential uses.
§ 170-14.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-14.3
1:607

ARTICLE 15
Office, Research and Technology District (ORT)
[Amended 6-16-2011; 4-19-2012; 11-19-2015]
§ 170-15.1. Intent.
The Office, Research and Technology (ORT) District is intended to provide
for research and development, manufacturing, corporate and professional
offices and limited office service uses.
§ 170-15.2. Required conditions.
§ 170-15.3. Prohibited uses.
A. Up to three exterior truck docks are permitted per building. Truck
docks shall not be located at the front of the building.
B. Outdoor storage, staging or display of goods or materials is not
permitted.
C. All business, servicing or processing shall be conducted within an
enclosed building, unless otherwise specified herein.
D. Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or materials beyond that
normally incidental to the above-permitted uses is not permitted.
A. Processing of corrosive acid, cement, lime, gypsum or plaster.
B. Distillation of bone, tar, petroleum refuse, grain or wood.
C. Processing or storage of explosives.
D. Processing of fertilizer or storage of compost.
E. Processing of products from animal refuse or offal, including glue, size
or gelatin.
F. Processes using steam or board hammers or forging presses.
G. Tanning, curing or storage of skins or hides.
§ 170-15.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-15.3
1:609

ARTICLE 16
Industrial District (I)
[Amended 4-19-2012; 11-19-2015]
§ 170-16.1. Intent.
The Industrial (I) District is intended to provide locations for industrial uses,
including manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembling
and/or treatment of finished or semifinished products from previously
prepared materials. Manufacturing, processing, assembling and/or
treatment from raw materials shall be limited in scope as defined herein.
§ 170-16.2. Required conditions.
A. Ingress and egress shall be directly onto a major road.
B. Outdoor storage, display or staging of goods/materials is not permitted,
unless otherwise specified herein. Permitted outdoor storage shall be
screened from public view.
C. All business, servicing or processing shall be conducted within an
enclosed building, unless otherwise specified herein.
§ 170-16.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-16.2
1:611

ARTICLE 17
Consumer Industrial District (CI)
[Amended 4-16-2009; 4-19-2012; 11-19-2015]
§ 170-17.1. Intent.
The Consumer Industrial (CI) District is intended to provide locations for
retail and service businesses that are industrial in nature. The nature of
these uses would not be compatible with other commercial shopping areas
of the Township due to the architecture of buildings, outdoor storage and/
or use of trucks and construction equipment.
§ 170-17.2. Required conditions.
A. Outdoor storage shall be located behind the front building line or 50
feet from the right-of-way for lots that do not contain a building.
B. Parking in the front yard shall be limited to the day-to-day business
operation of the use.
C. Conduct or operation having the appearance or character of an
automobile junkyard or salvage business is not permitted.
D. All business, servicing or processing shall be conducted within an
enclosed building, unless specified herein.
§ 170-17.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-17.2
1:613

ARTICLE 18
Schedule of Regulations
[Amended 12-15-2011; 4-19-2012; 9-17-2015]
§ 170-18.1. Schedule of regulations limiting height, bulk, density
and area by land use.
Minimum Lot
Size per Unit
(BB, M)
Minimum Yard Setbacks
(A, E, I, Q, R, S, T, U, V,
W)
Residential
Districts
Area/
Density
(B,C,D)
Width
(J)
Maximum
Height
(N,O,P)
Front
(G,J,X)
Side
(F,H)
Rear
(G)
Minimum
Floor
Area per
Unit
Maximum
Percentage
of Lot
Coverage
by all
Buildings
R-1 Single Family
Residential
43,560
sf
150' 35' 40' 15' 50' 1,650 sf 15%
Without
Public
Utilities
43,560
sf
150' 35' 35' 15' 50' 1,350 sf 15%
R-2
Single
Family
Residential
With
Public
Utilities
20,000
sf
125' 35' 35' 15' 50' 1,350 sf 25%
Without
Public
Utilities
43,560
sf
150' 30' 35' 15' 50' 1,100 sf 15%
R-3
Single
Family
Residential
With
Public
Utilities
15,000
sf
100' 30' 35' 15' 50' 1,100 sf 25%
R-4 Single Family
Residential
10,000
sf
60' 30' 30' 5' min.;
20'
total
50' 1,100 sf 25%
Up to 8
units/
acre
— 40' 30' 15' 30' (K, L) 20%
MF Multiple-Family
Residential Up to 12
units/
acre
— 40' 30' 30' 30' (K, L) 20%
SH Senior Housing 30' 30' 30' 30' 450 sf 20 sf
§ 170-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-18.1
1:615
Minimum Yard Setbacks
(A, E, Q, R, S, T, U, V, W)
Nonresidential
Districts
Maximum
Height
(N, O, P, Y)
Front
(X)
Sides
(AA)
Rear
(AA)
OS Office Service 35' 25' 10' 20'
B-1 Local Business 30' 25' 10' 20'
B-3 General
Business
30' 30' 10' 20'
CR Commercial
Recreation
30' 25' 10' 20'
ORT Office,
Research and
Technology
48' 50' (BB) 20' 50'
I Industrial 50' 50' (BB) 20' 50'
CI Consumer
Industrial
30' 30' 10' 50'
NRMU Northville
Road Mixed Use
50' 25' 10' 35'
PROS Public
Recreation and
Open Space
35' 25' 10' 20'
§ 170-18.2. Notes to schedule.
A. Setbacks (all districts). The required setbacks are measured from the
property line, future right-of-way, private road easement, greenbelt,
buffer, easement, etc., as applicable.
B. Lot area (residential districts and planned developments). The
requirement of "public utilities" shall refer to the provision of both
public water and sanitary sewer.
C. Lot area (residential districts). Modifications to dimensional and
density requirements may be permitted using one of the development
options permitted in Article 20, Development Options, or Footnote AA of
this article.
D. Lot area (residential districts). The actual density may be lower than
the permitted maximum density in order to comply with the various
dimensional requirements and other applicable standards of this
chapter. Up to 25% of state-regulated wetlands or stormwater facilities
may be included in area calculations. Dedicated public road right-ofway,
private road easements, private driveway easements and water
bodies regulated by the Inland Lakes and Streams Act (Public Act 346
of 1972, as amended)80 shall not be included in area calculations.
§ 170-18.1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-18.2
1:616
E. Setbacks (all districts). A thirty-five-foot-wide greenbelt is required
along any public right-of-way or private road easement serving more
than four residential dwellings. For nonresidential zoning districts, the
width of the greenbelt shall be equal to the required parking lot
setback. Building setbacks shall be measured from the interior edge of
the greenbelt.
F. Setbacks (R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 Districts). A minimum of 30 feet is
required between buildings and 56 feet between opposing garages for
lots in the R-1, R-2 or R-3 Zoning District. A minimum of 20 feet is
required between buildings in the R-4 District. A minimum fifteen-foot
side yard setback is required for lots in all single-family zoning districts
when the lot is adjacent to open space or a project boundary.
G. Setbacks (R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts). For the purpose of preserving
natural features and creating variation along the street edge, the
building envelope may be shifted up to 10 feet (front to back), provided
the total required front and rear yard setback of 90 feet is maintained in
the R-1 District and 85 feet is maintained in the R-2 and R-3 Districts.
H. Setbacks (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, MF and SH Districts). Driveways must be
set back a minimum of four feet from the side lot line. The setback may
be reduced to two feet upon a finding by the Township Engineer that
positive drainage can be maintained. Eight feet is required between
driveways for detached condominiums.
I. Setbacks (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, MF and SH Districts). Specified building
elements and architectural features may encroach into required
setbacks in accordance with the following standards:
Key:
P = Permitted
NP = Not permitted
80.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 324.30101 et seq.
§ 170-18.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-18.2
1:617
Building Elements Side Front Rear
Architectural elements such as
windowsills, belt courses, eaves
and architectural features used
exclusively to provide a
decorative function and not
increase living space within the
dwelling (up to 2 inches for
each 1 foot of side yard and
maximum 24 inches in the front
and rear yards)
P P P
Awnings and canopies (up to 2
inches for each 1 foot of
required setback)
NP P P
Bay window (up to 2 inches for
each 1 foot of side yard setback
and maximum 24 inches in the
front and rear yard)
P (1st floor)
NP (2nd
floor)
P P
Box out (up to 24 inches) NP P P
Build out (1 inch per foot of
required setback, provided it is
an architectural feature with at
least 75% of the outer plane
consisting of window glazing
and not exclusively living or
mechanical space)
P (1st floor)
NP (2nd
floor)
NP P
Chimney with foundation (up to
30 inches' depth and 8 feet in
width)
P NP P
Chimney without foundation NP NP NP
Chimneys - direct vent NP NP NP
Maximum percent of
encroachments per wall,
excluding a chimney with
foundation
35% 35% 65%
Gutters P P P
Porch/patio/terrace without a
roof (up to 12 feet in front yard
and up to 16 feet in the rear
yard, including steps and stairs;
3 feet maximum wall/rail
height)
NP P P
Porch/patio/terrace with a roof NP NP NP
§ 170-18.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-18.2
1:618
Building Elements Side Front Rear
Wing wall as an architectural
feature, not as a screen/privacy
wall (up to 6 feet in length with
a maximum pillar height of 3
feet, provided at least 4 feet is
maintained to the property line)
P P P
J. Corner lots (all residential districts). The required front yard setback
must be provided on each side of the lot/unit that abuts a public street,
private road easement or driveway easement. Corner lots shall be 25
feet wider in the R-1 Zoning District and 15 feet wider in all other
districts.
K. Minimum floor area per unit (MF District). All units shall have at least
one living room and one bedroom, except that up to 10% of the units
may be efficiency apartments. A maximum of 50% of the dwelling units
within a development shall consist of one-bedroom units.
L. Minimum floor area per unit (MF District). The minimum net floor area
for apartment units shall be as follows:
(1) Efficiency unit: 350 square feet.
(2) One-bedroom unit: 700 square feet.
(3) Two-bedroom unit: 800 square feet.
(4) Three- or more bedroom unit: 900 square feet for three bedrooms,
plus 200 square feet for each additional bedroom.
M. Lot area (all districts). The depth to width ratio shall not exceed 3:1.
N. Building height (all districts). Height limitations shall not apply to farm
buildings, chimneys, flagpoles, public monuments or water towers.
With Planning Commission approval, schools, churches and other
similar institutional buildings or architectural elements may be erected
to a height of 48 feet, provided the front, side and rear yards shall not
be less than the height of the building wall abutting such yard.
O. Building height (all districts). Radio, television, and cellular phone
antennas and other similar apparatus may be erected above the height
limit, as permitted by § 170-3.1J.
P. Building height (all districts). Penthouse or rooftop structures for
elevators, stairways, heating/air-conditioning equipment and other
similar apparatus may be erected above the height limits upon a finding
by the Planning Commission that the building elevations illustrate the
following:
§ 170-18.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-18.2
1:619
(1) All rooftop equipment and apparatus shall be housed in a
penthouse, parapet wall or architecturally appropriate screening
structure.
(2) Penthouses and structures shall be set back from the outermost
vertical walls or parapet of the principal structure a distance equal
to at least two times the height of the penthouse or screening
structure. The height of the penthouse or screening structure shall
not exceed 15 feet.
(3) A penthouse or screening structure shall not have a total floor area
greater than 15% of the total roof area of the building.
(4) Roof-mounted reception antennas shall comply with Article 3,
General Use Provisions.
Q. Setbacks (all districts). Setbacks apply to principal buildings. Setbacks
for accessory structures shall comply with Article 3, General Use
Provisions, or as otherwise specified in this chapter.
R. Setbacks (all districts). All required yard areas shall be lawn, ground
cover or living plant materials, except for approved access drives,
pathways, architectural features, signs, water features, essential
service facilities and accessory structures permitted in Article 3,
General Use Provisions.
S. Setbacks (all districts). Where a nonresidential use abuts a residential
zoning district, the following setbacks shall be provided from the
adjoining residential district:
Zoning District/Use
Minimum
Building
Setback*
Minimum
Parking Lot
Setback*
B-1, MF, OS, CI 50' 50'
B-3, CR, SH, PROS, ORT,
NRMU, school, church,
utilities
100' 50'
I 200' 100'
NOTE:
* The setbacks above may be reduced, up to 50%, by the Planning
Commission upon a finding that the abutting area is designated on
the Township's future land use map for a use other than residential,
is used as a permanent nonresidential use or where the amount
of landscaping in the buffer zone adjacent to the residential is
increased by 50% above the minimum landscape buffer
requirement.
T. Setbacks (all districts). Off-street parking shall be set back a minimum
of 30 feet from any front property line in the B-3, CR, OS, ORT and I
§ 170-18.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-18.2
1:620
Zoning Districts and 25 feet in all other nonresidential zoning districts.
Based on the expected traffic operations, a deeper front yard setback
may be required at site access points to provide sufficient internal
vehicular storage. Setbacks are measured from the street right-of-way
or private road access easement. The required parking lot setback shall
be maintained as lawn, ground cover or living plant materials, except
for approved access drives, pathways, architectural features, signs,
water features and accessory structures permitted in Article 3, General
Use Provisions, or as otherwise specified in this chapter.
U. Setbacks (all districts). Principal buildings shall be set back at least 25
feet from water features, including wetlands, stormwater facilities,
rivers, lakes and streams. A fifteen-foot setback is required for
accessory structures, accessory uses, pavement and similar items.
Principal buildings and accessory structures/uses shall be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from the center line of Johnson Creek.
V. Setbacks (all districts). All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 10
feet from any utility line.
W. Setbacks (all districts). Setbacks shall be measured from the near edge
of an access easement or private road. If an easement meeting current
Township standards has not been recorded, then the setback shall be
equal to the required setback plus an additional 25 feet measured from
the center line of the private road or drive. Where sidewalks are located
along the private road, the setback shall be at least 25 feet from the
sidewalk to provide adequate space to park a vehicle without blocking
pedestrian traffic.
X. Setbacks (all districts). Where 50% or more of the street frontage
between two successive intersecting streets is occupied by buildings
having a front yard setback less than required by this chapter, the
minimum front yard for new buildings shall be the average setback of
existing buildings located within 200 feet on either side of the subject
lot. The depth of the front yard shall not be less than 1/2 of the setback
specified in the Schedule of Regulations.
Y. Setbacks (all districts). For lots without frontage on a public street and
at the end of a private road without a turnaround, all buildings shall be
set back a minimum of 40 feet from the property lines or road
easement.
Z. Setbacks (nonresidential districts). Parking lots, aisles and drives shall
be subject to the side and rear yard setback requirements of the
district.
AA. Front yard setbacks (ORT and I). Front yard setbacks from local streets
within an industrial park may be reduced to 25 feet, provided parking
or loading is not located in the front yard.
BB. Lot clustering (R-1, R-2 or R-3 District). For developments served by
both public utilities and containing at least five single-family lots, the
§ 170-18.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-18.2
1:621
required dimensional standards may be reduced in return for the
provision of open space or preservation of natural features, provided
the density does not exceed what could otherwise be built on the
property. The density calculation must be supported by a conventional
plan alternative as defined in Article 20, Development Options.
Setbacks may also be reduced provided the resultant building
envelopes are smaller than required if the standard setbacks were
applied.
§ 170-18.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-18.2
1:622
ARTICLE 19
(Reserved)81
81.Editor's Note: Former Art. 19, Mobile Home Parks, as amended, was repealed 11-19-2015.
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-18.2
1:623

ARTICLE 20
Development Options
[Amended 12-15-2011; 4-19-2012; 6-16-2016]
§ 170-20.1. Intent.
The intent of this article is to provide alternative development options, to
produce development that is substantially consistent with the standards
of this chapter and the Master Plan while allowing flexibility of land
development regulations and innovative land use in terms of variety, layout
and product.
§ 170-20.2. PUD options.
§ 170-20.3. Qualifications.
To qualify for an AAC, OSC or PUD, all of the following conditions must be
met:
A. Active adult community (AAC): a unified age-targeted residential
development option containing detached or duplex homes whose
product is targeted toward people over the age of 55, but not explicitly
age-restricted; due to smaller floor plans than a traditional home, the
master bedroom and primary living quarters are located on the first
floor, and it offers low-maintenance living with community amenities.
B. Open space community (OSC): a unified residential development option
in which dwelling units are planned in a more-compact arrangement
than a conventional subdivision and the project is designed to preserve
natural features and provide open space/recreation areas.
C. Mixed-use planned unit development (PUD): a unified mixed-use
development option consisting of uses contained in two or more zoning
districts. At least one of the uses shall be nonresidential.
A. The development shall result in a benefit to residents of the Township or
the users of the site which would not otherwise be available utilizing
the existing zoning classification.
B. The development shall provide a land use or residential product that is
desired or not currently available in the Township.
C. The site can be adequately served by public water, sanitary sewer and
storm sewer service.
D. Open space shall be provided as a project or Township-wide benefit.
E. Preservation of significant assets, such as wooded areas, regulated
trees, topography, view sheds, natural drainage, water bodies,
floodplains or wetlands, that might otherwise be negatively impacted if
the site was developed utilizing conventional zoning.
§ 170-20.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-20.3
1:625
§ 170-20.4. Design standards for AACs, OSCs and PUDs.
F. A continuous pedestrian circulation system that links all areas of the
development and the development to other destinations in the
surrounding area.
G. Compatibility with adjacent land uses.
H. The development does not result in a significant increased demand on
public facilities or services, such as police and fire, schools, recreation,
traffic operations and utilities, beyond the expected impacts associated
with development permitted by the underlying zoning classification,
unless such impacts are mitigated.
A. To encourage flexibility and creativity consistent with the intent of this
article, the Township may permit specific departures from the design
and supplemental standards when the deviation will result in a morecreative
or -desirable layout than would be possible using the standards
contained herein.
B. The width of the greenbelt along perimeter roads shall be an average of
50 feet wide, minimum 35 feet.
C. Improvements to existing streets may be required to mitigate the
impacts of the project traffic, based on the traffic impact study required
per Article 32, Impact Assessment.
D. All utility services shall be underground.
E. The development shall contain high-quality design and cohesion in
terms of building facades, building materials, landscape treatments,
screening and signage.
F. A buffer shall be provided when a project abuts a single-family
residential district/use or any other location where the Township
determines that a buffer will reduce impacts to adjacent properties. The
buffer shall consist of one or more of the following conditions:
(1) Lots or setbacks abutting established residential areas shall be
similar in size to adjacent residential development.
(2) A fifty-foot setback consisting of woodlands, natural features or a
landscaped area.
(3) Difference in topography.
G. Architectural design.
(1) Buildings shall be harmonious with adjacent uses in terms of
texture, materials, rooflines, scale and massing.
(2) Unifying design elements, such as accents, style, color and/or
materials, shall be provided for each use within the project.
§ 170-20.3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-20.4
1:626
(3) For nonresidential buildings, the primary material shall be brick or
stone. Metal roof systems may be permitted when it is determined
by the Township that they are appropriate in character and context
of the proposed development and adjacent uses.
(4) For residential buildings, materials shall be high quality and
appropriate in character and context of the proposed development
and adjacent residential communities. Primary materials shall
include natural brick, stone, wood lap or shingle siding with
architectural shingles or metal roof systems. Alternate materials of
a composite or synthetic nature emulating the materials above,
excluding vinyl or metal lap siding or trim, may be accepted by the
Township.
H. Residential units.
(1) At least 80% of detached residential units, and 50% of attached
residential units, shall have side-entry, rear-entry or detached
garages.
(2) Attached front-facing garages shall incorporate design elements
that diminish the appearance of the garage.
(3) Attached front-facing garages shall be recessed a minimum of five
feet behind the front building line and be limited in width to two
vehicles per unit.
(4) Building elevations, colors, materials and setbacks shall be varied.
Identical or similar elevations, in terms of building mass and form,
may not be repeated more frequently than every sixth house along
the same side of any street.
I. Density.
(1) A density bonus up to 10% may be awarded for residential
developments that provide one or more of the following. The
amount of density bonus shall be determined by the Township
based on the extent to which the project provides the following
elements:
(a) The amount of open space and depth of the greenbelt exceeds
minimum Township standards and the additional open space or
greenbelt is a benefit to the development or the Township.
(b) Usable land is dedicated to the Township. The land shall fulfill
a demonstrated need, provide a connection to a Township park
or open space, have historic value or exhibit other beneficial
qualities as determined by the Township. The land to be
donated must be free of environmental hazards and liens and
configured to accommodate the types of uses anticipated by
the Township. A survey of the property and title insurance shall
be provided to the Township.
§ 170-20.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-20.4
1:627
(c) The development will provide a range of housing opportunities
through varied housing types, dwelling sizes and lot sizes
within a single neighborhood.
(d) The neighborhood shall be designed to create clusters of
housing, synergy and promote interaction.
(e) Existing buildings that are of historic significance are retained
and rehabilitated for adaptive reuse. Provisions for ongoing
maintenance must be included in the development agreement.
J. Open space.
(1) Open space shall be designed to achieve the following, as
applicable on a site-by-site basis:
(a) Organized around the site's most important natural features, a
physical design element or to link existing and planned open
spaces.
(b) Provide pedestrian pathways within the open spaces and link
with adjacent open spaces, public parks, Township facilities or
existing and planned nonmotorized routes.
(c) Provide areas for active public recreation, informal
spontaneous recreation or passive recreation amenities for the
benefit of residents or users of the development.
(d) Preserve or create a buffer from adjacent land uses.
(e) Be highly visible within the development and/or from public
view.
(2) Open space standards.
(a) A minimum of 20% of the site's gross area shall be dedicated to
common open space, except duplex and multiple-family
residential products shall require a minimum of 25% open
space.
(b) A golf course, including its stormwater facilities, shall not
account for more than 50% of the required open space.
(c) Lakes, streams, detention ponds, other surface water bodies or
wetlands regulated by the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality shall not account for more than 25% of
required open space.
(d) At least 50% of the open space must be usable, exclusive of
permitted water bodies, stormwater facilities or other required
site plan elements.
(e) Additional greenbelt width may be credited towards the open
space standards.
§ 170-20.4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-20.4
1:628
§ 170-20.5. Supplemental standards for active adult community
projects (AAC).
(f) The following shall not count as required open space:
[1] Areas within an existing or future public street right-ofway,
private road easements or overhead utility lines.
[2] Required setbacks or spacing between buildings.
[3] Parking and loading areas, except those associated with a
recreation facility or common open space.
[4] Other undeveloped areas not specifically addressed in this
article but which do not fulfill the intent of open space as
determined by the Township.
(3) Protection of open space. The dedicated open space shall be set
aside by the developer through an irrevocable conveyance and
protected by a maintenance agreement, in a form and manner
acceptable to the Township. Such conveyance shall assure the open
space will be protected and used as intended on the concept plan.
Said documents shall bind all successors and future owners in fee
title to commitments made as part of the proposal but shall allow
transfer of ownership and control to a subdivision or condominium
association consisting of residents within the development,
provided notice of such transfer is provided to the Township. Such
conveyance shall indicate the allowable use(s) within the dedicated
open space. Upon transfer to a successor of the developer, the open
space shall be maintained by the property owners' association or
condominium association. The Township may require the inclusion
of open space restrictions to prohibit activities such as the
following:
(a) Dumping or storing of any material or refuse.
(b) Activity that may cause risk of soil erosion or threaten plant
material.
(c) Cutting or removal of plant material, except for removal of
dying or diseased vegetation.
(d) Use of motorized off-road vehicles.
(e) Cutting, filling or removal of vegetation from wetland areas.
(f) Use of pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers within or adjacent to
wetlands.
A. Permitted uses:
(1) Detached single-family.
(2) Duplexes.
§ 170-20.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-20.5
1:629
B. Design and dimensional standards.
(1) Garages.
(a) Buildings with front-facing garages may be permitted upon
approval of the Township, provided the architectural design
minimizes the appearance of the garage element.
(b) The width of front-facing garages shall not exceed two cars.
(2) Detached single-family.
(a) If there is an attached front-facing garage, it shall be set back a
minimum of 25 feet from the sidewalk or curb (in the absence
of a sidewalk).
(b) The front plane of the building, excluding a front-facing
garage, may be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the
sidewalk or curb (in the absence of a sidewalk).
(c) Minimum 20 feet between units.
(d) Minimum 50 feet side yard to rear yard.
(e) Minimum 70 feet rear yard to rear yard.
(f) Decks and patios may encroach 12 feet into required spacing
between units, when located on the back of the building.
(3) Duplexes.
(a) If there is an attached front-facing garage, it shall be set back a
minimum of 35 feet from the sidewalk or curb (in the absence
of a sidewalk).
(b) The front plane of the building, excluding a front-facing
garage, may be set back a minimum of 30 feet from the
sidewalk or curb (in the absence of a sidewalk).
(c) Minimum 25 feet between units, average of 30 feet.
(d) Minimum 50 feet side yard to rear yard.
(e) Minimum 70 feet rear yard to rear yard.
(f) Decks and patios may encroach 12 feet into required spacing
between units, when located on the back of the building.
(4) Additional setbacks may be required for larger product types.
(5) Units located on a corner shall provide an additional five-foot
setback on the side that does not contain a driveway.
(6) A fifty-foot setback is required from all perimeter property lines.
§ 170-20.5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-20.5
1:630
§ 170-20.6. Supplemental standards for open space community
projects (OSC).
§ 170-20.7. Supplemental standards for mixed-use planned unit
development (PUD).
(7) Front porches shall be a minimum of five feet deep. The size of
front porches shall be large enough to be more functional than
decorative.
(8) Decks or patios are not permitted to encroach into a front or side
yard setback.
A. If a density bonus is authorized pursuant to § 170-20.4I, single-family
lots in the R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts may be reduced to the following
dimensional standards:
(1) R-2 Zoning District: 15,000 square feet minimum lot area/100 feet
minimum lot width.
(2) R-3 Zoning District: 12,000 square feet minimum lot area/80 feet
minimum lot width.
B. In addition to the uses permitted in the underlying single-family
residential zoning district, residential uses identified in the Multiple-
Family and Senior Housing Districts may be permitted by the Township,
provided the following standards are met:
(1) Up to 20% of the total number of units may be attached.
(2) Attached units shall be located on the interior of the site, or a
transitional use adjacent to a non-single-family use.
(3) Attached units shall comply with the dimensional standards
contained in § 170-7.2D.
(4) Attached units may include up to four-unit buildings, provided fourunit
buildings shall not comprise more than 50% of the total
attached units.
(5) Attached units shall be set back a minimum of 50 feet from singlefamily
lot lines and 75 feet from a single-family building.
A. The project shall contain a use from the existing zoning classification,
or other zoning district authorized by the Township as being consistent
with the intent of this article, and at least one other zoning district.
Uses found exclusively in the Consumer Industrial and Industrial
Zoning Districts shall not be eligible for a PUD.
B. Permitted residential types and densities shall comply with the
standards contained in § 170-20.6 (OSC), unless modified by the
Township.
§ 170-20.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-20.8
1:631
§ 170-20.8. Approval procedures for AACs, OSCs and PUDs.
A. Submittal requirements:
(1) A summary of how the project meets the qualifications contained in
§ 170-20.3 and the rezoning criteria contained in § 170-43.5.
(2) A table identifying any deviations from ordinance standards.
(3) A conventional alternative plan, for residential projects requesting
a density bonus.
(4) Impact assessment and traffic impact study.
(5) A site analysis map illustrating the following:
(a) Vegetation and regulated trees.
(b) Wetlands, water bodies, drainage patterns.
(c) Other natural features.
(d) Overhead utility lines.
(e) Driveways and intersections within 250 feet of the site (on both
sides of the street).
(f) Existing buildings and structures.
(g) Existing easements and rights-of-way.
(h) Adjacent land uses.
(6) A concept plan drawn illustrating the following features:
(a) Location of proposed land uses, vehicular circulation and
parking areas.
(b) Building footprints and/or arrangement of lots.
(c) Type and density of dwelling units.
(d) Location of open spaces, natural features and pedestrian
circulation.
(e) Conceptual utility layout.
(7) The Township may request the applicant prepare a market study or
fiscal impact analysis to demonstrate support for one or more of the
proposed uses or evaluate the financial impact on the Township.
(8) A draft development agreement, including the following:
(a) A survey of the project area and the recommended concept
plan.
(b) The ownership of the developed land.
§ 170-20.8 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-20.8
1:632
(c) Approved deviations from this chapter.
(d) Responsibility and timing of public improvements.
(e) Building design guidelines.
(f) Methods for preservation and maintenance of open space.
(g) Addresses other design and operational issues.
(h) A phasing plan. For mixed-use projects, residential
components shall be constructed before nonresidential uses.
B. Review procedure.
(1) The approval process for an AAC, OSC and PUD is summarized
below.
(2) The applicant, or designated agent, must be present at all
scheduled meetings.
(3) Upon verification by the Township that all required documents
have been provided, the application will be reviewed and placed on
the next scheduled Planning Commission agenda.
(4) The Planning Commission conducts a public hearing.
(5) Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make
a recommendation to the Township Board based on the following
factors:
(a) The proposal meets the criteria established for rezoning to
AAC, OSC, or PUD District.
§ 170-20.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-20.8
1:633
(b) The proposal promotes the Township's land use goals and
objectives.
(c) All applicable provisions of this article and this chapter are
met.
(d) Adequate facilities, or improvements, are available to
accommodate impacts, utilities and traffic generated by the
proposed project.
(e) The proposal provides a better development option than if the
property were to be developed under the current zoning
classification.
(f) The proposed development will not adversely affect the public
health, safety and welfare.
(6) Conditions or modifications recommended by the Planning
Commission shall be submitted for Township review prior to
placement on the Township Board agenda.
(7) The Township Board shall review all findings and approve, approve
with conditions or deny the request.
(8) In addition to the concept plan, a final development agreement is
required. Approval of the agreement can occur simultaneously with
the concept plan or follow it. The development agreement shall be
reviewed by the Planning Commission, who shall make a
recommendation to the Township Board.
(9) The applicant is responsible for recording the development
agreement at the Wayne County Register of Deeds. A recorded
copy of the development agreement must be provided to the
Township prior to final site plan or plat approval.
C. AAC, OSC and PUD concept plan.
(1) The project shall be governed by the regulations specified in the
development agreement. Regulations not specifically addressed in
the agreement shall be governed by the current Zoning Ordinance
and building codes.
(2) Construction must begin within two years of the date approved by
the Township Board.
(3) The applicant may request a one-year extension, provided the
request is made in writing at least 60 days prior to the expiration.
Additional extensions beyond the first approved extension shall be
approved where the Township finds there are extenuating
circumstances that have prevented progress in development. The
applicant shall be responsible for providing information to support
the request for an extension. The extension may be approved by the
Township Board based on the following criteria:
§ 170-20.8 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-20.8
1:634
(a) Substantial progress has been made or the developer can
document good cause why such progress has not been made.
(b) Demands on public infrastructure, roadway level of service,
public facilities and services have not changed, or the
applicant has agreed to mitigate an increased level of demand
to offset the impacts of the project.
(c) The project complies with the current ordinance standards or
the applicant has agreed to revise the plan or development
agreement to comply with the current ordinance standards.
(4) If the approved concept plan expires, the applicant shall resubmit a
concept plan for approval in accordance with the procedures
herein and the standards that apply at the time of the new
submittal.
D. Site plans or subdivision plans.
(1) Site plans and subdivision plans shall be substantially consistent
with the approved concept plan.
(2) Site plans shall be submitted in accordance with Article 33, Site
Plan Review, or subdivision plans in accordance with the
Subdivision Control Regulations or Article 35, Site Condominiums.
E. An AAC, OSC or PUD zoning classification may be initiated by the
Township and include a conceptual land use plan and supporting text.
For Township-initiated zoning classifications, preliminary and final
plans prepared by the applicant shall substantially conform to the
intent of the approved conceptual land use plan adopted by the
Township. If the Planning Commission determines that a proposed AAC,
OSC or PUD concept plan is a significant departure from the concept
plan adopted by the Township, the applicant can request a modification
of the applicant's development plan that will better serve the
Township's needs. The request for a modification shall demonstrate that
the modification will not increase impact on schools, traffic, and other
Township infrastructure.
F. Modifications.
(1) Approval of the concept plan and site plans confers upon the
Township the authority to approve certain minor deviations when
an applicant or landowner notifies the Planning Department, in
writing, and provides a site plan illustrating the proposed
change(s).
(2) Minor changes may be approved administratively. Major changes
or changes that may result in a material change shall be submitted
to the Planning Commission.
(3) Minor modifications include, but are not limited to, the following:
§ 170-20.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-20.8
1:635
(a) Correcting errors in the development plan.
(b) Changes to berms and landscaping, provided the original
intent is achieved.
(c) Changes to site access, vehicular circulation or pedestrian
circulation, provided the original intent is achieved.
(d) Up to a three-percent increase or decrease in the square
footage of residential buildings, provided the overall density
does not increase and the building(s) do not extend into any
required setbacks.
(e) Up to 3%, or 2,000 square feet, whichever is smaller, increase
or decrease in gross floor area of nonresidential buildings,
provided parking requirements are met and the building does
not extend into any required setbacks or open space.
(f) Relocation of a building, provided it is does not encroach into
required setbacks and complies with other applicable
standards.
(g) Changes required or requested by the Township, county or
state for safety reasons.
(4) Major modifications are more significant in nature than minor
modifications and include, but are not limited to, changes in use,
parking, access, open space, building height, density, setbacks and
building elevations and materials.
G. Appeals, modifications and variances. Modifications to the amount of
open space, setbacks, minimum lot area and other design and
supplemental standards for an AAC, OSC or PUD are not subject to
variance approval by the Zoning Board of Appeals; such modifications
shall be processed as a major or minor change as described herein. As
an exception, once a home has been occupied, an individual homeowner
may request a dimensional variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals
as outlined in Article 41, Zoning Board of Appeals, provided the
common open space and other conditions of approval are not affected.
H. Procedures for projects approved under former regulations. Several
projects have been approved based on standards and procedures that
were removed from the Zoning Ordinance: open space subdivision,
cluster housing option, planned residential unit development (PRUD),
and Haggerty Road Planned Unit Development (HPUD). Such
developments shall be considered conforming, provided such projects
conform to the ordinance standards in place at time of approval, comply
with the site plan and any written development agreement and the
projects have either been completed or work is diligently being carried
on within the time limits stipulated herein. Modifications to plans that
were approved under prior regulations shall be reviewed per the AAC,
OSC or PUD procedures outlined in this chapter.
§ 170-20.8 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-20.8
1:636
ARTICLE 21
Lighting Standards
[Amended 4-19-2012; 11-19-2015]
§ 170-21.1. Intent.
The intent of this article is to provide lighting systems that are appropriate
for the task intended and to minimize the impact of off-site glare and
light pollution. Standards contained herein are structured to conform to
Illumination Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) guidelines for
recommended illumination levels and the International Dark-Sky
Association's (IDSA) goal to eliminate over-lighting while providing for
vehicular, pedestrian and site safety.
§ 170-21.2. General provisions.
§ 170-21.3. Residential lighting.
A. LED-lamped luminaires are required unless an alternate type is
approved by the Planning Commission. Incandescent sources may only
be used for decorative lighting.
B. Energy-efficient, UL or equivalent approved LED drivers are required
for all LED lights.
C. Illumination levels at property lines shall not exceed 1.0 footcandle/
10.8 LM/M2 at grade'; except where adjacent to residential property,
footcandle levels at the property line shall not exceed 0.5 footcandle/5.4
LM/M2.
D. Building-mounted or pole-mounted floodlights are prohibited.
E. Luminaires within 100 feet of a residential zoning district/use shall not
exceed 20 feet in height.
F. Searchlights, strobes, lasers or similar high-intensity light used for
outdoor advertisement or entertainment is prohibited.
G. Flashing, moving or intermittent-type lights are prohibited.
H. LED luminaires must have a color temperature (Kelvin) between 3,500
and 4,100K.
A. Streetlighting.
(1) Streetlighting shall be provided to illuminate entrances of
residential developments. A minimum output of three footcandles/
32.3 LM/M2 shall be provided.
(2) Cutoff-style luminaires are required.
§ 170-21.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-21.3
1:637
§ 170-21.4. Nonresidential lighting.
(3) If HID lamps are used, lamps shall not exceed 100 watts. If another
source is used, it shall not exceed the mean lumen output of the
common HID source.
(4) Mounting height shall not exceed 20 feet, and the spacing between
fixtures shall not exceed 200 feet.
(5) Intersections and pedestrian crosswalks must be illuminated.
(6) Streetlighting systems provided by the applicable public electrical
utility company shall use the utility company's standard system
components.
(7) Decorative luminaires shall comply with the following standards:
(a) The luminaires shall be mounted between 12 feet and 18 feet.
(b) Cutoff optics are required.
(c) The lamps must be recessed to shield the light source and
prevent light above 90°.
(d) Normal HID lamp wattage shall be 100 watts (or the mean
lumen equivalent).
(e) Maximum HID wattage shall be 175 watts (or the mean lumen
equivalent).
(f) Multiple luminaires may be mounted on a common pole to
achieve higher light levels where required. Decorative drop
lenses are allowed on these luminaires only.
B. Building-mounted lights shall be shielded and directed downward.
Decorative incandescent lights may be permitted without shielding,
provided they comply with lighting limits at the property line.
A. Pole lighting.
(1) Lighting shall be provided to illuminate roadway and pedestrian
areas, and the system shall comply with I.E.S. Standard RP-8.
(2) Luminaires shall have cutoff optics and flat lenses. Optical drop
lenses are not permitted. Luminaires using LED sources shall
provide the equivalent means of optical control.
(3) Pole-mounted lights shall comply with the following standards:
(a) The height of 100-250 watt metal-halide lamps (or the mean
lumen equivalent) shall not exceed 20 feet.
(b) The height of 400-watt metal-halide lamps (or the mean lumen
equivalent) shall be mounted between 20 feet and 40 feet.
§ 170-21.3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-21.4
1:638
(4) Parking lot lights shall comply with the following standards:
(a) The illumination levels at grade shall average three to six
footcandles/32.3 to 64.6 LM/M2 at entrances, intersections or
pedestrian crosswalks.
(b) The illumination levels at grade shall average one to three
footcandles/10.8 to 32.3 LM/M2 on roadways and parking
surfaces.
(c) The illumination levels at grade shall average five footcandles/
53.8 LM/M2 at building entrances.
(d) The illumination levels at grade shall not exceed 10
footcandles/107.6 LM/M2.
(e) The maximum uniformity (max-to-min) ratio shall be 10:1.
(f) Light fixtures shall be located within landscaped islands.
(5) Luminaires located in landscaped areas shall be mounted on
concrete foundations in accordance with the following:
(a) Concrete foundations located 36 inches or less from the back
of curb shall not exceed a height of 30 inches above finished
pavement.
(b) Concrete foundations located more than 36 inches from the
back of curb shall not exceed a height of six inches above
finished grade.
(6) Decorative luminaires shall comply with the following standards:
(a) The luminaires shall be mounted between 12 feet and 18 feet.
(b) Cutoff optics are required.
(c) The lamp must be recessed to shield the light source and
prevent light above 90°.
(d) Normal HID lamp wattage shall be 100 watts (or the mean
lumen equivalent).
(e) Maximum HID wattage shall be 175 watts (or the mean lumen
equivalent).
(f) Multiple luminaires may be mounted on a common pole to
achieve higher light levels where required. Decorative drop
lenses are allowed on these luminaires only.
B. Bollard-style lights, 36 inches to 48 inches high, may be used to
illuminate pedestrian areas and walkways and shall comply with the
following standards:
§ 170-21.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-21.4
1:639
(1) Ground-mounted lights shall not contain an up-light component.
(2) Step-lights with cutoff optics may be used to illuminate exterior
stairways and pedestrian walkways.
C. Building lighting shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Lights shall be shielded and directed downward. The lamp shall not
be visible from normal viewing angles.
(2) The illumination level shall not exceed 15 footcandles/161.5 LM/M2
at the surface and an average of five footcandles/53.8 LM/M2 on the
building.
(3) The illumination level at doorways shall be a minimum of three
footcandles/32.3 LM/M2 at grade.
(4) Exterior emergency lighting shall be provided at all exit doors.
(5) Ground- or pole-mounted floodlights are not permitted.
(6) Lighting for multiple-tenant buildings must be uniform.
D. Flagpoles may be illuminated by uplights or floodlights as required by
law and shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Beam spread shall be the minimum necessary to illuminate the flag.
(2) The illumination level at the flagpole shall not exceed 20
footcandles/215.3 LM/M2.
(3) The lamp size shall not exceed 100 watts.
E. Landscape lighting shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Lighting shall be limited to the objects only.
(2) Lamp wattage shall be the minimum necessary to illuminate the
object without causing glare on the site or neighboring properties.
(3) The illumination level shall not exceed five footcandles/ 53.8 LM/
M2.
(4) HID lamp wattage shall not exceed 100 watts (or the mean lumen
equivalent).
F. Canopy lighting shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Flat lenses are required.
(2) Illumination levels shall comply with IESNA standards.
(3) Illumination shall not exceed 50 footcandles under a canopy/538
LM/M2.
§ 170-21.4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-21.4
1:640
§ 170-21.5. Submittal requirements.
§ 170-21.6. Administration.
G. Luminous tube (neon), side emitting fiberoptic and exposed-tube
fluorescent lighting is prohibited.
A. A site lighting photometric plan shall be submitted for all outdoor
lighting. The lighting information shall be superimposed on top of the
site plan.
B. The photometric plan shall include the following information:
(1) Location of all site lights, including pole lights, pedestrian lights,
building-mounted lights, canopy lights, sign lights, landscape lights
and floodlights.
(2) The designation type for each luminaire.
(3) A luminaire schedule indicating type ("A," "B," "C," etc.),
manufacturer, model number, lamp type, lumen output, wattage,
number of heads and the I.E.S. luminaire photometric file number
used for the calculations.
(4) Mounting height for each luminaire.
(5) A photometric grid indicating footcandle levels over the entire site,
including at all property lines, measured at grade level. Grid
spacing shall not exceed 20 feet by 20 feet. ISO footcandle lines
may be included.
(6) A photometric summary and statistics table indicating the
maximum, minimum and average footcandle levels, maximum-tominimum
and average-to-minimum ratios.
(7) Two calculation area summaries: one for roadways, parking lots
and pedestrian areas, and one for the entire site.
(8) Cut-sheets for proposed luminaires, electronic AutoCAD site plan
file and I.E.S. photometric files for use in analyzing the lighting
plan. If Visual Basic as developed by Lithonia Lighting, or
equivalent photometric program, is used for calculations, a copy of
the project file is required.
(9) If facade lighting is proposed, a photometric layout of building
elevations showing lumen levels on the wall shall be provided.
C. Any modifications to an approved photometric plan shall be submitted
to the Township for approval prior to installation.
A. The Township may require redirection of existing light fixtures when it
is determined that the fixture is creating off-site glare.
§ 170-21.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-21.6
1:641
B. Illumination systems shall be installed as approved. The Township
reserves the right to instruct the contractor/developer to remove or
modify lighting systems that were not installed as approved, at no cost
to the Township.
§ 170-21.6 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-21.6
1:642
ARTICLE 22
Nonconforming Uses, Buildings and Structures
[Amended 6-21-2012; 9-17-2015]
§ 170-22.1. Intent.
The intent of this article is to provide regulations governing lots, buildings,
structures and uses which were lawful prior to the enactment of this
chapter, or amendments hereto, but are regulated under the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 170-22.2. Applicability.
A. This article shall not apply to any structure for which there is a valid
building permit or where construction was lawfully started prior to the
effective date of this chapter. Actual construction shall include placing
and attaching construction materials in a permanent position.
B. For projects that include demolition or removal of an existing structure
prior to rebuilding, demolition shall be deemed to be actual
construction.
C. If there is a change in occupancy or ownership of an existing
nonconforming use, structure or lot, it shall be allowed to continue,
provided the nature or character of the nonconformity has not changed.
D. If a nonconforming use, structure or land, independently or in
combination, ceases operation for a period of more than six months, the
nonconforming use, structure or land shall thereafter conform to the
regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located.
Structures operated by approved seasonal uses shall be exempt from
this provision as long as the use remains in operation over consecutive
seasons. A nonconforming use shall be determined to be abandoned if
one or more of the following conditions exist, as determined by the
Township:
(1) Utilities, such as water, gas and electricity, to the property have
been disconnected.
(2) The property, structures and grounds have fallen into disrepair.
(3) Signs or other indications of the nonconforming use have been
removed.
(4) Equipment or fixtures which are necessary for the operation of the
nonconforming use have been removed.
(5) Other actions, which are determined by the Township to constitute
an intention on the part of the property owner or lessee to abandon
the nonconforming use.
§ 170-22.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-22.2
1:643
E. The provisions of this article are not intended to preclude normal
repairs and maintenance on nonconforming structures, subject to the
provisions of § 170-22.5E.
F. Any structure or use established in violation of this chapter shall, for
the purposes of this chapter, be considered a nuisance and shall not
receive any of the rights, privileges or protection conferred by this
article.
G. A summary of the nonconforming regulations included in this article is
provided in the table below:
Summary of Nonconforming Regulations
Nonconforming
Situation Required Action Section
Illegal use or structure Not permitted Article 40
A nonconforming use is
abandoned for over 6
months
Next use must be
conforming
§ 170-22.2
Change in ownership of a
nonconforming lot, use
or structure
No effect on
nonconforming status or
rights
§ 170-22.2
Creation of permitted
use on a nonconforming
lot
Permitted, provided
current ordinance
standards are met
§ 170-22.2
Establishment or
expansion of a
nonconforming use
Not permitted § 170-22.4
Expansion of a
nonconforming use
within a conforming
structure
Permitted § 170-22.4
Establishment of a
permitted use or
construction of a
structure on a
nonconforming singlefamily
lot when
contiguous to 1 or more
nonconforming lots
under the same
ownership
Lots must be combined § 170-22.3
§ 170-22.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-22.2
1:644
§ 170-22.3. Nonconforming lots.
A nonconforming lot is a lot which lawfully existed at the effective date of
this chapter but does not conform to the current lot size, lot width or other
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
Summary of Nonconforming Regulations
Nonconforming
Situation Required Action Section
Construction or
expansion of a structure
on a nonconforming lot
when adjacent lots are
not under the same
ownership
Permitted, provided all
other requirements are
met
§ 170-22.3
Expansion of a singlefamily
residence that has
1 or more nonconforming
setbacks
Permitted, provided the
expansion maintains
conformity with other
setbacks; ZBA approval is
required if expansion will
extend into an already
nonconforming setback
§ 170-22.5
Increase in height of a
nonconforming structure
Permitted, provided the
increased height complies
with the current
requirement; ZBA
approval is required if the
proposed height exceeds
the current requirement
§ 170-22.5
Safety-related
maintenance and
structural repairs to a
nonconforming structure
Permitted up to 50% of
market value
§ 170-22.5
Non-safety-related
modifications to a
nonconforming structure
Permitted § 170-22.5
Repairs necessitated by
catastrophe
Permitted up to 50% of
market value
§ 170-22.5
Maintenance or
expansion of a
nonconforming site or
structure due to
expanded public right-ofway
Permitted, provided the
nonconformity is not
increased
§ 170-22.7
A. A nonconforming lot shall only be used for a use permitted in the
district in which it is located.
§ 170-22.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-22.3
1:645
§ 170-22.4. Nonconforming uses.
A nonconforming use is a use which lawfully existed at the effective date
of this chapter but does not currently conform to the use regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located. Any lawful nonconforming use of land
established prior to the effective date of adoption of this chapter shall not be
considered to be in violation of this chapter and may be continued, subject
to the following provisions:
B. Single-family dwellings and accessory structures may be erected on any
lot of record at the effective date of this chapter, provided the
structures comply with all other applicable setbacks, floor area, height
and access requirements for the district in which they are located.
C. If a nonconforming single-family lot requires deviation from
dimensional requirements of the chapter to erect or enlarge a
structure, it shall only be permitted if a variance is granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals.
D. If two or more individual, single-family-zoned lots with contiguous
frontage are owned by the same person/entity and do not meet the lot
width and area requirements, the parcels shall be combined if any
changes are proposed to the current building footprint.
E. No portion of said parcel shall be used, occupied or sold in a manner
which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements
established by this chapter, nor shall any division of a parcel be made
which creates a lot width or area less than the requirements contained
Article 18.
A. A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged, increased or extended to
occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of
this chapter.
B. An existing nonconforming use may be expanded, provided the
expansion is within the building footprint that existed at the effective
date of this chapter.
C. If a nonconforming use is moved, it shall conform to the regulations of
the district it is relocated to.
D. In nonresidential districts, nonconforming uses may be changed to
another nonconforming use, provided the ZBA finds that the proposed
use is equal to or more conforming to the uses permitted in the district
in which it is located. In permitting this change, the ZBA may require
appropriate conditions in accord with the purpose and intent of this
section. Where a nonconforming use is hereafter changed to an equal or
more-conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to a lessconforming
use.
§ 170-22.3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-22.4
1:646
§ 170-22.5. Nonconforming structures.
A nonconforming structure is a structure or portion thereof that lawfully
existed at the effective date of this chapter but does not conform to the
current provisions of this chapter. Any lawful nonconforming structure
established prior to the effective date of this chapter shall not be considered
to be in violation of this chapter and may be continued, subject to the
following provisions:
E. In a residential district, where a nonconforming use is abandoned, the
structure may only be changed to a use that is permitted by the district
in which it is located.
F. Where nonconforming use status applies to a mobile home, trailer
coach or manufactured housing unit located outside a licensed mobile
home park, nonconforming use status shall be extinguished and
eliminated if the mobile home, trailer coach or manufactured housing
unit is moved to a different lot outside a licensed mobile home park.
G. Those alleged nonconforming uses which cannot be proved to have
lawfully existed prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be
declared illegal and shall be discontinued and made subject to the
enforcement provisions of Article 40, Administration and Public Notice,
of this chapter.
A. Nonresidential nonconforming structures shall not be expanded, unless
a variance is obtained from the ZBA per the standards contained in
Article 41, Zoning Board of Appeals.
B. A residential nonconforming structure may be expanded, provided the
expansion will be within required setbacks and that other dimensional
and building code requirements are met. For example, a home with a
nonconforming front yard setback may be expanded in the rear so long
as the rear yard setback and lot coverage remains conforming.
C. A residential nonconforming structure may be expanded into a required
front, side or rear yard, upon approval from the ZBA, in accordance
with the following standards. A proposed expansion which does not
meet the following requirements shall only be permitted after obtaining
a variance from the ZBA per the criteria contained in Article 41, Zoning
Board of Appeals.
(1) The expansion does not extend closer to the lot line than any
existing, nonconforming part of the structure.
(2) The addition does not extend beyond the predominant existing
building line along the same block.
(3) The addition retains compliance with all other setback, lot
coverage and height requirements.
§ 170-22.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-22.5
1:647
§ 170-22.6. Nonconforming sites.
Nonconforming sites contain development improvements which lawfully
existed at the effective date of this chapter but do not now conform to the
regulations of the zoning district in which they are located.
(4) The addition will meet all building codes and any other applicable
Township ordinance requirements.
(5) The resultant addition will be compatible in terms of scale and
design with the existing structure and the established character of
the neighborhood.
D. Any nonconforming structure, or structure containing a nonconforming
use, that is damaged by fire, flood or other means in excess of 50% of
the structure's pre-catastrophe assessed value, as determined by the
Township Assessor, shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter.
E. Routine maintenance, repairs and improvements may be conducted on
any nonconforming structure or structure containing a nonconforming
use, provided the structure is not enlarged or the use is not expanded.
F. Maintenance, repairs or alterations deemed necessary by the Building
Department to keep a nonconforming structure or structure containing
a nonconforming use structurally safe or fit for human occupancy shall
be permitted, provided the cost does not exceed 50% of the market
value of the building or structure within a twelve-month period. Such
repairs are permitted, provided the structure is not enlarged or the use
expanded. If repairs or alterations exceed 50% of the assessed value as
determined by the Township Assessor, it shall conform to the provisions
of this chapter.
G. A nonconforming structure shall not be moved unless the new location
conforms to the requirements of this chapter for the district in which it
is located.
H. If a structure is altered so as to eliminate, remove or lessen any of its
nonconforming characteristics, then such nonconforming
characteristics shall not be later reestablished or increased.
A. Site improvements or expansions on sites which do not meet ,all of the
current regulations may be permitted without a complete upgrade of all
site elements provided the following conditions are met:
(1) Safety-related site issues must be met.
(2) Driveways that do not conform to Article 27, Access Management,
shall be eliminated, provided that the minimum reasonable access
shall be maintained.
(3) Nonconforming site elements shall more closely conform to the
current chapter requirements.
§ 170-22.5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-22.6
1:648
§ 170-22.7. Right-of-way changes.
Where a nonconforming front yard setback, parking lot setback or greenbelt
is created as a result of additional road right-of-way being acquired, the
building or parking lot may be maintained, improved or expanded without
a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals, provided the following
conditions are met:
§ 170-22.8. Purchase or condemnation.
(4) Cracked or damaged pavement and curbing shall be repaired.
(5) Required nonmotorized pathways shall be installed.
(6) Signs shall conform with Chapter 145, Signs.
B. Existing nonconformities shall not be increased or expanded.
C. A site plan shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with Article
33, Site Plan Review.
A. The required front yard or parking setback was in compliance prior to
the acquisition of the additional road right-of-way.
B. The front yard or parking setback shall not be further reduced as a
result of building or parking lot expansion.
A. The Township Board of Trustees may acquire, by purchase,
condemnation or otherwise, private property or an interest in private
property for the removal of nonconforming buildings, structures or
uses. The cost and expense, or a portion thereof, of acquiring the
private property may be paid from general funds or assessed to a
special district in accordance with the applicable statutory provisions
relating to the creation and operation of special assessment districts for
public improvements in townships.
B. The elimination of the nonconforming structures or uses is declared to
be for a public purpose and for a public use. The Township Board of
Trustees may institute and prosecute proceedings for condemnation of
nonconforming structures or uses under the power of eminent domain
in accordance with Act 149 of the Public Acts of 1911, as amended,
being § 213.21 to § 213.41 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, or other
applicable statute.
§ 170-22.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-22.8
1:649

ARTICLE 23
Tree and Woodlands Replacement
[Amended 6-21-2012; 9-17-2015]
§ 170-23.1. Intent.
The intent of this article to place priority on the preservation of trees,
vegetation and associated natural resources in recognition of the value
they provide the Township in terms of physical, aesthetic, recreation and
economic assets to residents, visitors and businesses.
§ 170-23.2. Applicability.
§ 170-23.3. Health/condition ranking.
Health condition of trees shall be determined by a forester or other qualified
professional, utilizing the criteria contained in the table below. Any tree
with a score of 16 or greater is regulated by this article.
Scoring
Factor 5 or 4 3 or 2 1
Trunk Sound or solid Sections of bark
missing
Extensive damage
or hollow
Growth rate More than 6" twig
elongation
2" to 6" twig
elongation
Less than 2" twig
elongation
Structure Sound 1 major or
several minor
limbs dead
2 or more major
limbs dead
Insects/disease No pest present 1 pest disease
present
2 or more pests
present
Crown/
development
Full and balanced Balanced but not
full
Unbalanced and
without full crown
Life expectancy Over 30 years 15 to 10 years Less than 5 years
§ 170-23.4. Tree survey.
A. The standards contained herein shall apply to all parcels requiring site
plan review, special land use review, administrative review, subdivision
plat review, plot plan review or land divisions/reconfigurations.
B. For legal lots of record which are not located within a new
development, trees located within 10 feet of the building footprint and a
fifteen-foot-wide driveway area are exempt from the requirements of
this article. Replacement of all other trees shall be in accordance with
the requirements contained herein.
C. Issuance of a grading permit shall prohibit clearing or grading within
50 feet of a property line prior to site plan or administrative approval.
§ 170-23.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-23.4
1:651
§ 170-23.5. Tree replacement requirements.
A. Tree tagging is only required for portions of the site where development
is proposed and where the development area is supported by clearly
defined clearing limits. Trees with driplines that extend into the area to
be developed shall be included in the tree survey, even if the trunk of
the tree is not in an area that will be disturbed.
B. Trees eight inches DBH or greater must be identified.
C. Tree locations must be provided on a topographic survey, and the base
elevation of all trees proposed for preservation shall be identified.
D. The tree survey shall clearly identify which trees will be preserved,
removed or transplanted.
E. Trees must be identified in a tabular format by tree tag number, size,
common name, genus, condition and classification. Classifications
include: regulated, nonregulated, landmark, or exempt, as regulated by
this article.
F. Tree replacement calculations shall indicate the total caliper inches of
regulated and landmark trees being removed, as well as any trees being
considered for exemption. The total number of replacement trees and
caliper inches shall be provided in written form and graphically
illustrated on the tree survey.
G. Tree identification tags shall consist of 19-gauge aluminum or similar
corrosion-resistant material. Tags shall be a minimum of 1 1/2 inches in
diameter and be permanently stamped or engraved with a number that
corresponds to a number designation defined on the tree survey.
Numbers shall be a minimum of 1/2 inch high. Tags shall be attached to
trees by way of galvanized roofing nail or other similar method.
H. The tree survey must be prepared and certified by a registered forester,
or other individual possessing related qualifications, with the
assistance of a land surveyor or registered engineer. If there are
discrepancies in the tree survey information or if the applicant requests
that a landmark or protected tree be exempted due to its health/
condition, the Township reserves the right to review the situation or
engage the services of an independent reviewer.
A. "Protected trees" are defined as all trees eight inches DBH or greater,
provided they are not classified as landmark trees.
B. Landmark trees are defined by size and species, as listed in the chart
below:.
Common Name Botanical Name DBH
All trees -- 24"
American hornbeam Ostrya Virginiana 8"
§ 170-23.4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-23.5
1:652
Common Name Botanical Name DBH
Arborvitae Thyja 18"
Beech (American) Fagur grandifolia 18"
Beech (blue) Carpinus Caroliniana 8"
Birch Betula 18"
Black walnut Juglans nigra 20"
Cedar (red) Juniperus Virginiana 12"
Chestnut Castanea 10"
Crabapple/hawthorne Malus/crataegus 12"
Dogwood (flowering) Cornus Florida 8"
Fir Abies 18"
Ginkgo Ginkgo 18"
Hemlock Tsuga 18"
Hickory Carya 18"
Kentucky coffee tree Gymnocladus dioicus 18"
Larch/tamarack Larix 12"
London plane/
sycamore
Platanus 18"
Maple Acer 18"
Oak Ouercus 18"
Pine Pinus 18"
Redbud Cercis canadensis 8"
Sassafras Sassafras albidum 15"
Serviceberry Amelanchier 8"
Spruce Picea 18"
Sweet gum Liquidamber styraciflua 16"
Tulip poplar Liriodendrom tulipifera 18"
Wild cherry Prunus 18"
Witch hazel Hamamelis Virginiana 8"
C. Landmark trees must be replaced at a rate of 100% of the total DBH
removed.
D. Protected trees must be replaced at a rate of 50% of the total DBH
removed.
E. Replacement trees shall be at least 2 1/2 caliper inches for deciduous
trees and seven feet in height for evergreens. Replacement for
evergreens shall be equivalent to one inch equals 2.8 feet in height.
Consideration may be given to allow smaller trees if they are part of a
§ 170-23.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-23.5
1:653
§ 170-23.6. Exemptions.
The following trees may be considered for exemption, provided they are
not landmark trees, they do not comprise the predominant species on site
or within a vegetated area, and they do not contribute to the overall vigor
of the woodland or have significant value for watershed or erosion control.
Singular trees in good condition are not exempt.
Ash
Black locust
Box elder
replacement plan that specifies a mixture of sizes and is intended to
simulate as natural woodland habitat.
F. Deciduous trees shall be replaced with deciduous trees, and evergreen
trees shall be replaced with evergreen trees. Where all of the trees
being removed are entirely deciduous or evergreen, the Planning
Commission may approve substituting up to 10% evergreen for
deciduous or deciduous for evergreen. Alternatives may be based on
site-specific conditions.
G. The proposed location of transplanted trees and required woodland
replacement trees must be provided on the landscape plan.
Transplanted and replacement trees shall be clearly distinguished from
landscape elements required per Article 24, Landscape Standards.
H. All replacement trees shall satisfy American Association of Nurserymen
standards, including:
(1) Nursery-grown.
(2) State Department of Agriculture inspected.
(3) Tree spade transplanted while in the dormant state, or if not in the
dormant state, having been balled and burlapped with a solid welllaced
root ball when in the dormant state.
(4) No. 1 grade, with straight unscarred trunk and a well-developed
uniform crown. Park-grade trees are not acceptable.
(5) Staked, fertilized, watered and mulched in accordance with
standard planting practices.
I. Where it is not reasonable and desirable to relocate or replace trees on
site, relocation or replacement may be made at another approved
location within the Township.
J. Where the Planning Commission finds it is not reasonable, practical and
desirable to relocate or replace trees on site or at another approved
location within the Township, the Planning Commission may direct the
applicant to pay into the Township's Woodlands Trust Fund.
§ 170-23.5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-23.6
1:654
Catalpa
Cottonwood
Elm
Mulberry
Poplar
Silver maple
Tree of heaven
Willow
§ 170-23.7. Review standards.
A. The preservation of wooded areas, individual trees, woody vegetation
and related natural resources shall have priority over development
when there are other on-site location/design alternatives. The Planning
Commission may impose conditions on the method and extent of the
proposed activity/use as necessary to ensure it will be conducted in a
manner that will minimize damage, encroachment or interference with
regulated trees.
B. Because natural systems do not occur in isolation, the location of
regulated trees with respect to topography, water features and other
significant natural features shall be viewed as having a high priority in
terms of preservation value.
C. The removal of regulated trees and wooded areas shall be limited to the
following:
(1) When necessary for the location of a structure or site improvement,
when a feasible and prudent alternative location does not exist.
(2) The tree is dead, diseased, injured or in danger of falling too close
to existing or proposed structures, interferes with existing utility
service, interferes with safe vision clearances or conflicts with
other ordinances or regulations.
(3) When a landmark tree does not meet the health/condition
standards contained herein.
D. The integrity of wooded areas shall be maintained even when such
woodlands cross property lines.
E. Existing trees, wooded areas and understory vegetation shall be
preserved within the required landscape greenbelt or buffers, unless
removal is approved by the Planning Commission. Preserved vegetation
may be credited toward landscape requirements contained in Article
24, Landscape Standards.
F. When a designated wooded area abuts a corridor identified as a natural
beauty road, as authorized by Wayne County, existing vegetation shall
§ 170-23.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-23.7
1:655
§ 170-23.8. Tree transplanting.
§ 170-23.9. Tree protection procedures.
§ 170-23.10. Replacement of trees damaged during construction.
Trees within preservation areas are subject to replacement when damaged
or removed during construction. Trees shall be replaced at a rate of 1 1/2
inches' caliper for each one inch DBH removed or damaged.
be maintained for an average width of 100 feet, and a minimum of 50
feet, beyond the future right-of-way.
G. The clearing limits and locations of tree protection barriers shall be
clearly identified on a plan.
A. Transplanted trees may be counted toward replacement trees, provided
trees meet the minimum size and quality requirements of Article 24,
Landscape Standards.
B. For deciduous trees over 10 caliper inches and evergreens greater than
30 feet tall, a statement regarding the method of transplanting shall be
included, and the work shall be performed by a qualified individual.
C. A Township representative shall review the trees prior to commencing
transplanting. The trees shall be reviewed again at their final location
to ensure the transplanting operation has been successfully completed.
A. Before development, land clearing, filling or land alteration, a tree
protection fence must be installed at the approved clearing limits, and
tree protection measures shall be inspected by the Township.
B. Protective fencing shall be located 10 feet outside the tree dripline.
C. Posts for fencing shall be staked at least two feet into the ground, with
posts spaced a maximum of 10 feet on center.
D. Tree protection shall remain in its approved location until removal is
authorized or directed by the Township.
§ 170-23.7 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-23.10
1:656
ARTICLE 24
Landscape Standards
[Amended 2-20-2007; 8-21-2008; 4-16-2009; 12-15-2011;
6-21-2012; 9-17-2015]
§ 170-24.1. Intent.
The intent of this article is to provide minimum standards for the design,
installation and maintenance of landscape elements throughout the
Township. Landscaping is viewed as a critical element to promote the
desired image of the community, enhance the visual appearance, articulate
outdoor spaces, preserve natural features, improve property values and
reduce impacts generated by certain land uses.
§ 170-24.2. Applicability.
§ 170-24.3. Incentive for preserving existing trees.
The standards below are intended to encourage the preservation of trees
that are not regulated by Article 23, Tree and Woodlands Replacement:
A. The standards contained herein shall apply to all parcels requiring site
plan review, special land use review, administrative review, subdivision
plat review or land divisions/reconfigurations.
B. The requirements in this article are minimum requirements and shall
not preclude the developer and the Township from mutually agreeing to
additional landscape.
C. Standards shall be required independently of each other and shall not
be double-counted to fulfill the requirements of different required
landscape elements.
D. When a building and/or parking area is increased by 25% or more over
the original site plan, the site shall be brought into full compliance with
the landscape standards.
E. For improvements or expansion of an existing site not meeting the
criteria in Subsection D above, landscaping shall be brought into
compliance with current standards to the extent possible.
A. Credit may be given for preserving healthy, nonregulated, quality trees
when the design intent of this article is met. The credit for tree
preservation shall be applied at the rate of one tree for each existing
tree between 2.5 to 7.9 inches DBH.
B. Trees requested as credit must be inspected by the Township to ensure
the trees are high quality and will fulfill the requirements of this article.
C. Trees preserved for landscape credit shall be clearly indicated on the
grading and landscape plans. Tree protection methods shall comply
with Article 23, Tree and Woodlands Replacement.
§ 170-24.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-24.3
1:657
§ 170-24.4. Greenbelt.
A greenbelt is the land abutting a public street, private street or access
drive that shall be reserved as a landscaped area to serve as an obscuring
screen, noise abatement and visual enhancement along roadway corridors.
§ 170-24.5. Buffer zones.
A buffer zone is a landscaped area located adjacent to a residential use and
intended to reduce negative impacts on adjacent residential properties.
D. To protect and encourage the continued health of the preserved trees,
the ground area within the dripline of the trees shall be maintained as
vegetation or other approved pervious surface.
A. Greenbelts are measured from the edge of a public street right-of-way,
private road easement or access drive/easement.
B. The greenbelt shall include one canopy tree and six shrubs per 40 linear
feet of road frontage. The frontage calculation shall include any
openings for driveways, sidewalks or easements.
C. A thirty-five-foot-wide greenbelt is required for residential zoning
districts, unless additional width is approved for a PUD, HPUD or OSC
development.
D. For nonresidential zoning districts, the width of the greenbelt shall be
equal to the required parking lot setback.
E. The Township may approve substitution of evergreen trees for up to
50% of the required greenbelt trees if the intent is to provide a moreeffective
buffer and provided a mixture of other species are included.
F. The greenbelt plantings shall be designed to simulate a natural
appearance and include a variety of species. Upright shrubs shall be the
dominant type to provide the greatest visual impact; low or spreading
varieties may be used as an accent material.
G. The greenbelt shall include only living materials, except approved
pathways, walls, fences or other similar ornamental features.
H. Gates, functioning or ornamental, are not permitted.
I. Public rights-of-way and easements adjacent to greenbelts shall be
planted with grass or living ground cover. Plant material and other
improvements located within the right-of-way must be approved by
Wayne County.
A. A buffer zone shall be required on any parcel that abuts a residential
zoning district or use. Buffers shall include landscape and a wall or a
berm in accordance with the following table. The Planning Commission
shall determine whether a wall or berm is most appropriate in
§ 170-24.3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-24.5
1:658
consideration of the proposed use, physical area available and impacts
to be abated.
District or Use Landscape Buffer
Height of Wall or
Berm
MF and SH B 4.5' to 6'
OS, B-1, B-3 and
NRMU
B 4.5' to 6'
ORT, I and CI A 5' to 8'
Off-street parking B 4.5'
Service and loading
areas
A 5' to 8'
Public utility buildings B 6'
Mining and quarrying A 6'
• Landscape Buffer A: two trees and four shrubs per 20 linear feet.
• Landscape Buffer B: one tree and four shrubs per 20 linear feet.
B. The buffer shall be required on the subject site, even if the adjacent site
is unimproved land.
C. The width of the buffer shall be equal to the required setback.
D. The height of the wall or berm shall be measured from the surface of
the parking area or land on the nonresidential side of the wall or berm.
E. When the subject site abuts two districts with different height
requirements for a wall or berm, the height of the wall or berm shall be
determined by the Planning Commission based on the best option for
minimizing off-site impacts.
F. Standards for walls.
(1) Walls shall be located on the lot line, except where underground
utilities interfere or where an alternate location provides a better
opportunity for screening.
(2) Walls shall be constructed of brick or comparable decorative
materials that match the primary building material used on the
site. Wood or wood products are not permitted.
(3) Walls shall be contiguous except for approved pedestrian or
vehicular connections.
G. Standards for berms.
(1) Berms shall have a minimum four-foot-wide crest on the top of the
berm.
§ 170-24.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-24.5
1:659
§ 170-24.6. Parking lots.
(2) The exterior face of the berm shall be constructed as an earthen
slope. The interior face of the berm may be constructed with a
retaining wall or terrace.
(3) Sides of the berm shall not exceed a 1:4 slope.
(4) Side slopes shall be established with grass or other ground cover. If
slopes are seeded, they shall be protected until the seed
germinates and a permanent lawn is established.
A. In the Industrial and Office, Research and Technology Districts, one
canopy tree shall be required for each 3,000 square feet of the total
paved surface, including parking, loading and driveways.
B. In districts other than Industrial and Office and Research and
Technology, one canopy tree shall be required for each 2,000 square
feet of the total paved surface, including parking, loading and
driveways.
C. At least two parking lot trees shall be provided on each site.
D. Required parking lot trees shall be placed within the parking lot
envelope, defined as the area including the parking lot surface and
extending 18 feet from the edge of the pavement.
E. At least 1/3 of the required trees shall be placed within the paved
portion of the parking lot.
F. Trees shall be protected from automobiles with curbing or other
suitable device.
G. Trees shall have a minimum clearance of four to six feet between the
ground and the lowest branches.
H. Landscape shall shield views of parked cars. Upright shrub varieties
shall be utilized.
I. Landscape islands shall be dispersed throughout the parking lot to
break up the pavement area and help direct vehicular circulation.
J. Parking lot islands shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) Minimum 150 square feet; 75 square feet if irrigated.
(2) Minimum 10 feet wide.
(3) Depth shall be two feet shorter than adjacent parking space.
(4) Radii shall be minimum 10 feet at ends facing main circulation
aisles and a minimum one foot for others.
§ 170-24.5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-24.6
1:660
§ 170-24.7. Building fronts and interior grounds.
§ 170-24.8. Detention ponds, retention ponds and sedimentation
basins.
K. Parking decks shall be screened along all sides by deciduous trees
placed 25 feet on center and a contiguous row of shrubs and/or hedges
along the foundation of the structure.
A. For all uses except single-family residential, 15% of the site, exclusive
of right-of-way, road easements and required landscape elements
(greenbelt, buffers and parking lots), shall be maintained as landscaped
in accordance with the following standards:
(1) One deciduous or evergreen tree per 400 square feet of required
interior landscape area.
(2) One shrub per 250 square feet of required interior landscape area.
(3) Detention facilities may account for up to 50% of the interior
landscape requirement.
B. Interior landscaping shall be grouped near building entrances, at
building foundations or along pedestrian walkways to articulate
circulation and reduce the visual impact of the building scale.
C. Planting beds shall be a minimum of eight feet wide.
A. Ponds shall be configured into the natural topography or shaped to
emulate a naturally formed depression.
B. The edge of the pond shall consist of sculptured landforms to filter and
soften views of the pond.
C. Plantings shall replicate a natural environment. Trees and shrubs shall
be clustered around the perimeter and contain a variety of plant
material.
D. Plantings shall be provided at a ratio of one deciduous tree, one
evergreen and 10 shrubs for every 50 linear feet of pond.
E. Trees and shrubs shall be planted above the freeboard line. If shrubs
are proposed below the freeboard line, they must be tolerant of wet or
moist soil conditions.
F. The side slopes and bottom of the pond shall be planted with watertolerant
native plant material above the permanent high-water mark. If
the pond does not hold water, the side slopes and bottom must contain
vegetative cover that is consistent with the perimeter of the pond.
G. Mown lawn shall not be permitted within a fifteen-foot buffer around
the perimeter of the pond. This area shall contain native flowers and
grasses maintained in a natural condition.
§ 170-24.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-24.8
1:661
§ 170-24.9. Street trees, medians, culs-de-sac and driveway
entrances.
§ 170-24.10. General requirements.
H. Landscape shall be arranged to provide access for and minimize
disruption of plant material during routine pond maintenance.
A. Street trees shall be provided within all public rights-of-way and private
road easements at a rate of one tree per 40 linear feet of road frontage.
B. Medians and boulevard entrances shall be planted with one canopy tree
or two ornamental trees per 30 linear feet.
C. Culs-de-sac shall be planted at a rate of one canopy tree or two
ornamental trees per 1,000 square feet.
D. Culs-de-sac, site entrances and boulevard medians shall be landscaped
with species tolerant of roadside conditions. The landscape plan shall
take into consideration sight distance, size of planting area, location of
pathways, maintaining adequate overhead clearance, accessibility to
fire hydrants, visibility of approved signs, and compatibility with the
visual character of the surrounding area.
E. Driveways to a residential development having four or more dwelling
units and other nonresidential developments shall be identified with a
combination of plant material, identification sign, low-intensity lighting
and architectural features to the extent permitted by other sections of
this chapter.
F. Public rights-of-way and easements shall be planted with sod or other
suitable live plant material and shall be maintained by the abutting
property owner or occupant. Medians, culs-de-sac and other similar
common areas shall be maintained by the property owner or
association.
A. When the required plant material results in a fraction, the number of
required trees and shrubs shall be rounded up to the nearest whole
number.
B. All plant material shall be hardy to Northville Township, be free of
disease and insects and conform to the American Standard for Nursery
Stock of the American Association of Nurserymen.
C. The root collar shall be set at the same height as the adjacent ground or
just slightly higher.
D. Burlap, wire, nails and twine shall be removed from the top and sides of
the root ball. If the root ball is wrapped in a vinyl product or treated
burlap, it must be removed from beneath the ball.
E. All landscaped areas shall be irrigated.
§ 170-24.8 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-24.10
1:662
F. Plant material shall be installed so at maturity it does not obscure
traffic signs or lighting, obstruct access for emergency vehicles,
interfere with adequate sight distance for motorists or disrupt drainage
patterns on the site or on adjacent properties.
G. Undeveloped portions of each site shall be covered by grass or other
living ground cover.
H. Berms shall undulate both vertically and horizontally to provide a
natural appearance. Additional plant material may be required to
diminish the appearance of the berm.
I. The minimum plant size shall be in accordance with the following
standards:
Type Minimum Plant Size
Deciduous canopy tree 3" to 3 1/2" caliper DBH
Deciduous ornamental tree 2" caliper DBH tree form/ 6' height
clump form
Evergreen tree 8' height
Deciduous shrub 30" height (B & B)
Upright evergreen shrub 30" height (B & B)
Spreading evergreen shrub 24" spread
J. A minimum four inches of topsoil, meeting the ASTM standard for
topsoil composition, shall be provided for all lawn areas, ground covers
and planting beds.
K. A minimum three inches of wood chips or similar (nonstone) natural
material shall be provided within planting beds.
L. Planting beds shall be limited to the area immediately surrounding the
plant material.
M. Plant materials shall be located at least four feet from a fence line or
property line.
N. Trees and shrubs shall be located 10 feet from the edge of a vehicular
route and five feet from a pedestrian route.
O. Plantings within 15 feet of a fire hydrant shall not exceed six inches in
height.
P. Mechanical equipment, such as ground-mounted HVAC units, air
compressors, pool pumps, transformers, satellite dish antennas, utility
substations and similar equipment, shall be screened on at least three
sides. Where practical, the height of the screen shall be equal to the
vertical height of the equipment at the time of planting.
Q. The overall landscape plan shall not contain more than 33% of any one
species.
§ 170-24.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-24.10
1:663
§ 170-24.11. Inspection and maintenance.
R. The use of native plant materials is strongly encouraged.
S. Dwarf, globe, pendulous species are not permitted.
T. Ornamental trees may be used to fulfill the tree requirement, provided
two ornamental trees shall be equivalent to one required tree.
U. Signs shall not be placed on, or within, berms.
V. Landscape screening shall consist of tightly spaced plantings that can
be reasonably expected to form a complete visual barrier within three
years of planting. Deciduous plant materials may be used to supplement
evergreens, provided a complete visual barrier is maintained
throughout the year.
W. The following trees are not permitted as they split easily, their wood is
brittle, their roots may cause maintenance issues or they are unusually
susceptible to disease or insect pests. These trees may, however, be
permitted when native to and associated with an appropriate
ecosystem, such as a wetland area.
Ash
Black locust
Box elder
Cottonwood
Elm
Ginkgo (female)
Honey locust (with thorns)
Horse chestnut (nut-bearing)
Mulberry
Poplar
Silver maple
Tree of heaven
Willow
X. If a project is constructed in phases, the landscape may also be finalized
in phases. The Township shall determine the extent and timing of
landscaping within each phase based on the necessity to buffer the
proposed development from adjacent uses, anticipated commencement
on subsequent phases, building heights and physical characteristics of
the site, such as topography or existing vegetation.
A. Upon completion of the landscape installation and prior to the issuance
of a certificate of occupancy, the owner shall provide written
certification by a landscape architect, registered in the State of
§ 170-24.10 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-24.11
1:664
§ 170-24.12. Waiver or modification of requirements.
Michigan, that all plant material has been installed as designed and
shown on the landscape plan approved by the Township. The Township
will then conduct the final inspection.
B. Landscape must be inspected and approved by the Township prior to
issuing a final certificate of occupancy. For residential projects,
landscape will be inspected and approved in conjunction with the
project being transferred to a homeowners' association.
C. During winter months, installation of landscaping may be deferred,
provided a performance guarantee is posted with the Township.
D. Landscaped areas and plant materials shall be kept free from refuse,
debris and invasive species. Plant materials, including lawn, shall be
maintained in a healthy growing condition, neat and orderly in
appearance. If any plant material dies or becomes diseased, it shall be
replaced within 30 days of written notice from Northville Township or
within an extended time period as specified in said notice.
E. Tree stakes, guy wires and tree wrap must be removed after one year.
A. The Planning Commission may determine that existing plant materials
which are intended to be preserved would meet the intent of this
article. The Planning Commission may also determine that dimensional
conditions unique to the parcel would prevent development of required
greenbelts, buffer zones, parking lot landscaping or interior
requirements. If such determination is made, the Planning Commission
may waive or modify the landscaping provisions of this article in
consideration of, but not limited to, the following criteria:
(1) Presence of existing natural vegetation.
(2) Topography.
(3) Existing wetland, floodplain and poor soils areas.
(4) Existing and proposed building placement.
(5) Building heights and views.
(6) Types and distance to adjacent land uses.
(7) Dimensional conditions unique to the parcel.
(8) Provision of adequate sight distances for motorists.
(9) Future land use proposed in the Township Master Plan.
(10) Drainage conditions.
(11) Health, safety and welfare of the Township.
§ 170-24.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-24.12
1:665

ARTICLE 25
Use-Specific Standards82
[Added 11-19-2015]
§ 170-25.1. Intent.
The intent of this article is to provide standards for specific uses, whether
regulated as a permitted or special land use.
§ 170-25.2. Uses.
A. Active adult/retirement community: single-family detached and/or
attached dwellings on smaller lots and targeted to residents who are
age 55 and older.
(1) The density shall not exceed five units per acre.
(2) At least 20% of the site, excluding required setbacks, shall be
designated as open space or recreation facilities.
(3) Attached units may contain up to four units.
(4) The following setbacks are required:
(a) Twenty-five feet front for garage (measured from the
sidewalk).
(b) Fifteen feet front for living space (measured from the
sidewalk).
(c) Five feet minimum side yard/total of 20 feet between units.
(d) Thirty-five feet rear/70 feet between units.
(5) Units shall have individual garages and entrances.
(6) A minimum four-foot-wide landscape area is required between
driveways.
(7) Parking or vehicular circulation is not permitted within the
required setbacks or separation between buildings.
(8) A thirty-foot-wide landscape buffer is required from all perimeter
property lines.
(9) Sidewalks are required and must be set back a minimum of five feet
from the edge of the road. A pedestrian system shall be provided
throughout the development, including access to open space,
recreation amenities and between dwelling units.
82.Editor's Note: Former Art. 25, Floodplain Control, was repealed 4-19-2012. See now Ch.
82, Floodplain Regulation.
§ 170-25.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-25.2
1:667
B. Adult regulated uses. Because of their nature, some uses are
recognized as having objectionable operational characteristics,
particularly when these uses are concentrated, thereby having
deleterious effects upon adjacent areas. Regulation of these uses is
necessary to ensure adverse effects will not contribute to blighting,
deteriorating and/or downgrading of adjacent areas. The primary
regulation is to prevent concentration of these uses by requiring the
following:
(1) Uses and structures shall be located at least 1,000 feet from the
property line of any of the following uses:
(a) Schools.
(b) Libraries.
(c) Parks, playgrounds or other recreation facilities.
(d) Day-care centers or preschools.
(e) Religious institutions.
(f) A Class C establishment licensed by the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission.
(g) Hotels or bed-and-breakfast inns.
(h) Dance clubs, movie theaters and other similar uses where
young people may gather.
(i) Another existing or approved adult regulated use.
(j) Any residential district or use.
(2) The building shall not exceed 5,000 square feet.
(3) The building and site shall be designed, constructed and
maintained so material such as a display, decoration or signs
depicting, describing or relating to specific sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas, as defined in this chapter, cannot be
observed by pedestrians or motorists from a public R.O.W. or from
an adjacent land use.
(4) Doors and windows shall remain closed.
(5) The use shall be located within a freestanding building. A multipletenant
building is not considered to be a freestanding building.
(6) Any adult regulated use, which allows customers to remain on the
premises while viewing live, filmed or recorded entertainment or
while using or consuming the products or services supplied on the
premises, shall provide at least one security guard on duty outside
the premises. The security guard provided shall patrol the grounds
and parking areas at all times while the business is in operation.
§ 170-25.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-25.2
1:668
C. Airports, heliports and other facilities for the operation of aircraft.
(1) The use shall be accessory to a nonresidential principal building or
use.
(2) Plans must be approved by the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) prior to submittal to the Township.
(3) The required FAA "clear zone" shall be provided on the same
property as the landing area.
(4) The landing area shall not be located within required parking or
setback areas.
(5) The landing area shall be set back at least 250 feet from any
residential zoning district, use or other applicable safety standards,
whichever are greater.
(6) Outdoor maintenance is not permitted from dusk to dawn.
D. Archery and shooting facilities.
(1) All walls, ceilings and floors shall be impenetrable to bullets and
arrows.
(2) For shooting ranges, all walls, ceilings and floors shall be treated
with noise-absorbent materials. The wall next to the firing line, the
ceiling directly above and three feet in front of the firing line shall
be treated with mineral fiber acoustical tile.
(3) The facility shall conform to applicable state and federal
requirements.
(4) Crossbows are not permitted.
E. Assisted living, nursing care and hospice facilities.
(1) Density shall not exceed 20 beds per acre.
(2) One hundred square feet of outdoor open space shall be provided
per unit. Required open space shall not be located within required
setbacks.
F. Bed-and-breakfast inns.
(1) Parking shall not be located in the required front yard and shall be
set back at least 50 feet from an adjacent residential district/use.
(2) Meals or other services provided on the premises shall only be
available to residents, employees and overnight guests.
(3) The house shall be the principal residence of the operator. One
nonresident employee is permitted.
(4) The appearance shall be consistent with surrounding homes.
§ 170-25.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-25.2
1:669
G. Cemeteries (including pet cemeteries, mausoleums, columbariums and
memorial parks/gardens).
(1) An approved site plan may be developed in phases and is not
subject to the approval limitations required by this chapter.
(2) Setback requirements.
Type
Adjacent to
Residential
Zoning Districts
or Uses
Adjacent to
Nonresidential
Zoning
Districts
From the
R.O.W
Subterranean,
flush and
monument
graves
25'
50' if adjacent to
existing
residential
dwellings1
25' 25'
Mausoleum,
columbarium,
chapel or
similar
structures
50'
100' if adjacent
to existing
residential
dwellings2
35' 200'3
Administrative
offices or
similar
structures
50'
100' if adjacent
to existing
residential
dwellings2
35' 50'
Roads and offstreet
parking
50' 50' 50'
Maintenance
facilities
200' 200' 200'
§ 170-25.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-25.2
1:670
NOTES:
1 The fifty-foot setback applies for existing homes located within
60 feet of the property line at the time of ordinance adoption.
The intent is to provide an additional buffer for nonconforming
residential parcels. The length of the fifty-foot setback shall be
determined by the Planning Commission based on topography,
sight lines and proximity of the house to the developed portion
of the cemetery.
2 The one-hundred-foot setback applies for existing homes
located within 60 feet of the property line at the time of
ordinance adoption. The intent is to provide an additional
buffer for nonconforming residential parcels. The length of the
one-hundred-foot setback shall be determined by the Planning
Commission based on topography, sight lines and proximity of
the house to the developed portion of the cemetery.
3 If certain facilities are combined, such as a mausoleum, chapel
and administrative offices, the setback shall be determined
by the Planning Commission based on site-specific conditions
such as visual impact from the road, presence of existing
vegetation, topography, etc.
(3) The design and layout shall be harmonious with the site's natural
features.
(4) Structures.
(a) Height shall not exceed 25 feet.
(b) The design, scale and mass shall minimize environmental
impacts and views from adjacent properties.
(c) Mausoleums and columbariums shall not exceed 1,250 square
feet per acre.
(5) Access.
(a) Access shall be provided from a major road.
(b) The principal entrance shall be identified by architectural
elements, landscaping and a sign.
(6) Roadways and parking.
(a) Roads shall be at least 20 feet wide, designed to promote low
vehicular speeds and respect natural features.
(b) Roads and parking shall be paved. For expansion of existing
cemeteries, the road surface shall be a material that
adequately controls erosion, prevents dust and adequately
accommodates stormwater runoff.
§ 170-25.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-25.2
1:671
(c) On-site parking must be provided for staff, visitors and funeral
processions.
(7) Landscaping/screening.
(a) Buffer Type A shall be provided for property lines that abut a
residential zoning district. Buffer Type B shall be provided
when abutting nonresidential zoning districts. Landscape
buffers are defined in Article 24, Landscape Standards.
(b) If the project is to be developed in phases, required site
improvements, such as perimeter landscape, fences or berms,
shall be required in conjunction with the phasing or as
necessary to provide appropriate screening to adjacent
residential properties.
(c) A rustic or decorative fence, wall, plant material or any
combination of these may be required to enhance privacy
between the cemetery and adjacent land uses. Fences or walls
shall be consistent with the character of the area. In a natural
setting, enclosures shall be designed to be virtually
transparent, to minimize disturbance to existing vegetation
and to allow vegetation and wildlife to pass through, such as a
wire farm fence. Along street R.O.W.'s or adjacent to
nonresidential uses, a more-formal treatment may be required,
such as a stone wall, wrought-iron fence with brick columns or
other similar materials.
(d) Existing vegetation shall be preserved within required
setbacks.
H. Child-care group home: (seven to 12 minor children), as defined in 1973
PA 116, MCLA § 722.111(1)(i).
(1) The facility must be located at least 1,500 feet from any of the
following uses:
(a) Another licensed group child-care home.
(b) An adult foster care small group home or large group home
licensed under the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act,
1979 PA 218, MCLA §§ 400.701 to 400.737.
(c) A facility offering substance abuse treatment and
rehabilitation service to seven or more people licensed under
Article 6 of the Public Health Code, 1778 PA 368, MCLA
§§ 333.6101 to 333.6523.
(d) A community correction center, resident home, halfway house
or other similar facility that houses an inmate population under
the jurisdiction of the Department of Corrections.
§ 170-25.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-25.2
1:672
(2) The facility has appropriate fencing in accordance with the
Township's fence standards.
(3) The facility shall be maintained in a manner consistent with the
characteristics of the neighborhood.
(4) The facility shall not exceed 16 hours of operation during a twentyfour-
hour period.
I. Commercial stables.
(1) A minimum of 20 acres is required.
(2) A minimum of one acre is required for each animal.
(3) Animals shall be confined to a stable and/or paddock enclosure.
(4) Animal enclosures must be set back at least 100 feet from all
property lines.
(5) Caretakers' or owners' quarters are permitted and shall comply
with the setback requirements for the district in which they are
located.
J. Composting facilities.
(1) Composting facilities shall comply with applicable state and federal
requirements.
(2) Facilities shall be set back at least 1,000 feet from residential
zoning districts/uses.
(3) Composting materials shall be set back at least 200 feet from any
zoning district, except the Industrial Zoning District.
(4) Individual windrows shall not exceed six feet in height and 10 feet
in width, measured from the base.
(5) Stacking for at least five vehicles must be provided on site.
(6) A six-foot-tall wall, privacy fence or berm, and landscaping, shall be
provided adjacent to all zoning districts/uses, except the Industrial
Zoning District.
(7) Anaerobic composting is not permitted.
(8) Vehicles shall be kept clean, maintained and operated to contain all
contents.
(9) Approval issued under the provisions of this chapter, and
amendments thereto, may be revoked upon just cause.
K. Concrete and asphalt plants.
§ 170-25.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-25.2
1:673
(1) An annual license certifying the capability to meet the standards of
this article and any additional standards of Chapter 110, Mining
and Quarrying, must be approved by the Board of Trustees.
(2) A description of the types, quantities, storage areas, secondary
containment measures and a spill response plan shall be provided
for the use, manufacture or storage of any hazardous materials.
(3) The plant shall be set back at least 600 feet from adjacent
residential zoning districts/uses and 300 feet from nonresidential
zoning districts/uses.
(4) Accessory buildings, internal roads, parking, stockpiles, storage
and other operations shall be set back at least 500 feet from
adjacent residential zoning districts/uses and 50 feet from a
nonresidential zoning districts/uses or a public road R.O.W.
(5) The plant, stockpiles, storage, parking and other operations and
accessory structures shall be set back at least 150 feet from
wetlands or watercourses.
(6) The facility and operations shall be screened from public view.
(7) The site shall have direct access to a paved public road.
(8) Internal roads, parking and storage areas shall be paved.
L. Crematoriums.
(1) Burial is not permitted on site.
(2) Buildings or structures shall be set back at least 50 feet from any
property line.
M. Day care and preschools.
(1) Facilities must be registered with the State of Michigan.
(2) The use shall not be permitted in the interior of a residential block
or within a multiple-family development.
(3) Buildings and parking must be set back at least 50 feet from an
adjacent residential district/use.
(4) Outdoor play areas must be set back at least 25 feet from an
adjacent residential district/use.
N. Domed recreation structures.
(1) The site shall be large enough to accommodate the intended use(s),
parking and adequate buffer areas without significant impact to
nearby properties in terms of noise, traffic, lighting, glare, views,
odors and trespassing, as determined by the Planning Commission.
(2) Dome height shall not exceed 70 feet.
§ 170-25.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-25.2
1:674
(3) The outer membrane of the dome shall be flame-resistant and
constructed of a material that does not emit excessive interior
lighting. The Planning Commission may require domes to install an
outer membrane that is partially or totally opaque.
(4) All repairs or patches to the outer membrane of the dome shall
match the original material and shall not be generally discernible
from the exterior.
(5) All outdoor mechanical equipment shall be screened from view and
noise reduced by a continuous, obscuring wall, fence and/or
evergreen hedge as determined by the Planning Commission.
O. Drive-in, drive-through or open-front businesses (excluding financial
institutions).
(1) One drive-through window is permitted.
(2) The drive-through facility and the parking lot shall be clearly
delineated.
(3) The drive-through shall be located on the side or rear of the
building and minimize visibility from the road.
(4) The materials used for the canopy structure shall be architecturally
compatible with the building design and match the primary
building material.
P. Financial institutions.
(1) Up to two drive-through teller lanes and one drive-through ATM are
permitted.
(2) The materials used for the canopy columns shall match the primary
building material.
(3) The drive-through facility and the parking lot shall be clearly
delineated.
(4) The drive-through shall be located on the side or rear of the
building and minimize visibility from the road.
Q. Fuel services, sales and storage.
(1) A minimum three-acre lot size is required.
(2) Aboveground storage tanks shall not exceed 300 gallons, shall be
located at least 75 feet from an occupied building or lot line and
shall be mounted on a concrete slab.
(3) Aboveground storage tanks shall be screened from public view.
(4) Below-ground fuel storage tanks shall be located at least 2,000 feet
from any drinking water well.
§ 170-25.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-25.2
1:675
R. Garden centers.
(1) Outdoor sale areas must be enclosed by a decorative fence or
screen wall.
(2) The setback requirement for the principal structure shall apply.
(3) Materials shall be sufficiently covered or contained.
(4) Materials shall be screened from public view or an adjacent
residential district/use.
(5) The height of all materials and equipment shall not extend above
the top of the screen wall or fence.
(6) All loading and truck maneuvering must be accommodated on site.
S. Golf courses and country clubs.
(1) Buildings and structures must be set back at least 100 feet from
adjacent residential zoning districts/uses and 50 feet from
nonresidential zoning districts/uses.
(2) Parking must be set back at least 30 feet from the road R.O.W. and
50 feet from all other property lines.
(3) Ingress and egress shall be directly onto a major road.
(4) The ball trajectory must be identified along all fairways and driving
ranges and shall not infringe on adjacent properties.
(5) Netting is not permitted. The facility shall be designed to minimize
errant balls.
(6) Driving ranges are permitted as an accessory use, provided it is not
illuminated.
T. Golf driving range.
(1) The expected ball trajectory must be identified and shall not
infringe on adjacent properties.
(2) The facility shall be designed to minimize errant balls. The
Planning Commission may allow netting upon a determination that
netting would be compatible with surrounding uses and obscured
from public views. The height of netting shall not exceed 80 feet
and shall be set back a minimum of 60 feet from the property line.
U. Home occupations.
(1) Only residents of the dwelling unit may be engaged in the home
occupation.
(2) Up to two clients or customers may be present at any time.
(3) Parking must be provided within a paved driveway.
§ 170-25.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-25.2
1:676
(4) Activities are limited to products or services produced within the
dwelling.
(5) Activities shall be conducted within a structure and shall not create
noise, dust, vibration, smell, smoke, glare, electrical interference,
fire hazard or any other hazard or nuisance which is more frequent
than is normally generated by residential uses.
(6) The home occupation shall not be conducted in a manner which
would cause the premises to differ from its residential character by
the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, parking, signs
or the emission of sounds, noises or vibrations.
(7) Traffic and delivery of goods shall not exceed that normally
generated by residential uses.
(8) Home occupations shall not occupy more than 25% of the total floor
area of the house or 50% of an accessory structure.
(9) All activities, including storage, shall be conducted completely
within the house or accessory structure.
(10) Permitted family child-care homes, group child-care homes and
state-licensed residential facilities are excluded from Subsection
U(1), (6) and (7) above.
V. Hospitals.
(1) A minimum twenty-acre site is required.
(2) Ingress and egress shall be directly onto a major road.
(3) Parking shall be set back at least 40 feet from the front property
line and 20 feet from the side and rear property lines.
(4) Ambulance, emergency and delivery areas shall not face a public
street and shall be obscured from residential uses by landscape,
walls and/or berms, as determined by the Planning Commission.
W. Kennels (commercial).
(1) The lot shall be at least two acres in size, except in the Consumer
Industrial Zoning District, where there is not a minimum lot size.
(2) Outdoor facilities and enclosures shall not be located in front of a
building.
(3) Outdoor facilities shall not be located within required side or rear
yard setbacks.
(4) Outdoor facilities shall be set back at least 100 feet from a
residential district/use.
X. Kennels (private): subject to Chapter 53, Animals.
§ 170-25.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-25.2
1:677
Y. Miniature golf.
(1) The height of structures shall not exceed eight feet as a permitted
use. If the height of any structure exceeds eight feet, a special land
use is required.
Z. Mobile home parks.
(1) The site shall not boarder a single-family residential district/use.
(2) No structure or land shall be used, erected or placed except for one
or more of the following uses:
(a) Mobile homes, including sales, provided it is located upon an
improved mobile home lot.
(b) One management or office building exclusively for conducting
business operations of the mobile home park.
(c) Utility building for laundry facilities and auxiliary storage
space for tenant and management needs.
(d) Community building for the exclusive use of tenants of the
mobile home park.
(e) Recreation facilities.
(3) A site plan, in accordance with Article 33, Site Plan Review, shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission for review, and the Planning
Commission shall forward a recommendation to the Board of
Trustees. The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing
in accordance with Article 40, Administration and Public Notice.
(4) The following conditions are required:
(a) A minimum forty-acre site.
(b) The site shall have access directly onto a road having an
existing or planned R.O.W. of at least 120 feet.
(c) Interior sidewalks are required and must be set back a
minimum of five feet from the edge of the road.
(d) All utility lines shall be underground.
(e) When off-street parking is adjacent to a residential district/use,
a wall or landscaped berm shall be required in accordance with
Article 24, Landscape Standards.
(f) Density shall not exceed 6.5 units per acre.
(g) Mobile home sites shall have a minimum fifty-foot width and a
minimum area of 5,500 square feet. If parks provide common
open space, the lot width and areas may be reduced by 20%,
§ 170-25.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-25.2
1:678
provided that the common open space shall be at least equal to
the total area by which any lots have been reduced.
(h) All structures shall be set back at least 50 feet from the road
R.O.W.
(i) A minimum 25,000 square feet of open space shall be provided.
The minimum open space shall be increased by 250 square feet
for each site over 50 units. Open space and recreational uses
shall be located and designed to facilitate access and usability.
AA. Movie theaters (outdoor).
(1) Stacking for at least 50 vehicles must be provided on site.
(2) The projected image shall not be visible from an adjacent
residential district or public roads.
BB. Religious institutions.
(1) The following standards shall apply, except in the B-3 Zoning
District:
(a) The principal building shall not exceed 50,000 square feet.
(b) Seating within the main assembly area shall not exceed 1,000
people.
(c) Parking shall not exceed 500 vehicles, and the use shall not
generate more than 1,000 vehicle trips per day.
(2) All activities shall take place within a fully enclosed building.
Exterior loudspeakers or amplified sound is not permitted.
(3) Site access shall be directly onto a road having an existing or
planned R.O.W. of 120 feet.
(4) The Planning Commission may allow up to 25% of the total parking
in the front yard upon a finding that this is compatible with
surrounding uses or preserves natural features better than
alternative parking locations. Bus and other similar service vehicle
parking is only permitted in the rear yard.
(5) A masonry wall or berm, which is sufficient to screen outside
activities and headlight glare, is required between adjacent
residential zoning districts/uses, all paved surfaces and outside
activity areas. The wall or berm shall be up to six feet tall, and the
landscape buffer shall include a minimum of one tree and four
shrubs per 20 linear feet.
(6) Accessory uses shall be limited to those commonly associated with
the principal use and may include living quarters for clergy,
ministry or other members of religious orders who carry out their
primary duties on the site, religious education classes, private
§ 170-25.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-25.2
1:679
schools, church-sponsored day care, unlighted outdoor recreation
facilities, religious office space, youth centers, and other similar
uses. Clinics, rescue missions, residences for those not engaged in
the ministry and other uses not specifically noted are prohibited.
CC. Roadside farm stands.
(1) Access shall be provided onto a major road.
(2) Off-street parking is required.
(3) Produce must be grown on site.
DD. Schools: (public, parochial and other private elementary, intermediate
or high schools licensed by the State of Michigan).
(1) Site access shall be directly onto a road having an existing or
planned R.O.W. of 120 feet.
(2) Site layout, setbacks, lighting, fencing and public address systems
shall be designed to assure compatibility with adjacent uses.
(3) Fences are not permitted around detention ponds when located
within the front or side yards. Detention ponds in the rear yard may
be fenced, provided the fence is ornamental and landscape is used
to minimize views.
(4) All bus loading and queuing shall be contained within the site and
designed to prevent conflicts with traffic operations along adjacent
streets.
(5) Pathway connections shall be provided to existing or planned
adjacent subdivisions.
(6) Any use having a seating capacity of 300 people or more must
provide road improvements required to maintain a Level of Service
D and limit traffic conflicts along adjacent streets.
EE. Senior apartments and independent living facilities.
(1) The density shall not exceed 12 dwelling units per acre.
(2) The facility shall provide at least 250 square feet of outdoor open
space per unit or a minimum of 10,000 square feet per site,
whichever is greater.
FF. Single-family detached houses.
(1) In R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts, garage doors facing the street shall
not constitute more than 40% of the facade and not more than 50%
of the facade facing the street in the R-4 District.
§ 170-25.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-25.2
1:680
(2) Garages shall not extend more than six feet beyond the front
facade.
(3) Variation of front facades and architectural style is required.
Identical or similar elevations shall not be repeated within six
houses along both sides of the street.
(4) Houses shall be reasonably compatible in terms of materials,
rooflines, scale and massing to other homes within 500 feet of each
lot line. Consideration shall be given to designs that respond to
unique land configurations and topography.
(5) The minimum width along the front elevation shall be 34 feet.
(6) The minimum width along the side and rear elevation shall be 24
feet.
GG. Stadiums (indoor or outdoor).
(1) The height of the structure shall not exceed 80 feet.
(2) The stadium shall be set back at least 200 feet from the road R.O.W.
(3) The stadium and parking shall be set back at least 200 feet from a
residential district/use.
(4) Vending and sales shall be confined within the site.
(5) All service areas shall be screened from public view by a wall,
landscaping or combination thereof.
(6) Site circulation shall be designed to accommodate one-way traffic
during pre- and post-event periods.
§ 170-25.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-25.2
1:681
HH. Structures for livestock, horses, llamas, alpaca and other similar
animals for private use: subject to Chapter 53, Animals.
II. Swim clubs/neighborhood pools (which were not part of the original
approval for the project).
(1) Clubs shall be operated as a nonprofit club or organization.
(2) The location and access to the site shall not adversely affect the
residential character of the neighborhood.
(3) Swimming pools must be completely within the ground, except for
slides and other accessory features.
(4) The following setbacks are required from lot lines:
(a) Fifty feet for principal buildings.
(b) Thirty feet for courts, pools and other structures.
(c) Twenty feet for parking lots and paved areas.
JJ. Swimming pools or clubs (not located within a neighborhood).
(1) Pools must be completely within the ground, except for slides and
other accessory features.
(2) A six-foot brick wall is required adjacent to a residential district/
use.
KK. Uses involving chemical processes.
(1) The parcel shall not be adjacent to a single-family zoning district/
use.
(2) The operations shall not cause noise, vibration or odors that are
noticeable to surrounding properties.
(3) The use and processes involved shall be approved by the Fire
Department.
LL. Uses involving outdoor storage (lumberyards, landscape, building
supply yards and similar uses).
(1) Outdoor storage shall be contained and screened from public view
by an obscuring fence, wall or landscape as determined by the
Planning Commission.
MM.Vehicle dealerships, display, sales or rental of automobiles, power
sports or other similar vehicles.
(1) Overhead doors must face the rear or side yard and be obscured
from public view.
(2) Vehicles must be parked in designated parking spaces located
behind the front building line and on a paved surface.
§ 170-25.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-25.2
1:682
(3) A pollution incident protection plan (PIPP) must be provided and
include methods to prevent groundwater contamination from
gasoline spills or leakage of other fluids.
(4) The location of storage tanks for gasoline, propane or other
flammable or hazardous materials shall be located in the rear yard,
screened from public view and approved by the Fire Department.
NN. Vehicle filling stations.
(1) Pumps or other equipment used for servicing vehicles shall be set
back at least 20 feet from a side or rear property line and 40 feet
from a residential district/use.
(2) The canopy columns shall be brick and architecturally compatible
with the site and surrounding area. Signs, color bands or
illumination are not permitted on the canopy.
(3) If the use is abandoned or terminated, all storage tanks must be
removed from the premises in accordance with applicable state or
federal regulations.
OO. Vehicle service facilities for automobiles, power sports or other similar
vehicles.
(1) Parking for vehicle repair shall be located behind the building. If
the rear yard abuts a residential district/use, parking may be
located on the side of the building, provided the side yard does not
border a residential district/use.
PP. Vehicle washes.
(1) All washing facilities shall be within an enclosed building.
(2) Vacuuming and drying facilities shall not be located in the front of
the building or within 25 feet of a residential district/use.
(3) Adequate stacking lanes shall be provided and not conflict with onsite
circulation or the public R.O.W.
QQ. Veterinary hospitals and clinics; pet care facilities and training.
[Amended 4-19-2018]
(1) When accessory to a single-family house, the following conditions
shall apply:
(a) A minimum of eight acres is required.
(b) The use shall be operated by a licensed veterinarian.
(c) All structures, including outside animal enclosures, shall be set
back at least 100 feet from abutting residential districts and 50
feet from all other property lines.
§ 170-25.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-25.2
1:683
(d) Activities shall be conducted within an enclosed building,
except for outdoor animal enclosures.
(e) Indoor boarding shall be limited to incidental treatment or
surgery. Outdoor boarding is not permitted.
(f) When located adjacent to a residential zoning district,
structures shall provide the following:
[1] A maximum transmission of 65 dB, measured at any point
on the outside of an exterior wall.
[2] Solid-core doors.
[3] Forced-air ventilation.
(2) When located within a B-1, B-3, NRMU, CI or I Zoning District,
outdoor facilities must be located within a rear yard, fully enclosed
around the perimeter and screened from view.
(3) When located within a B-1, B-3 or NRMU Zoning District (as a
special land use), the following conditions shall apply.
(a) Overnight boarding shall be accessory to the principal use.
(b) When located in a multiple-tenant building, it shall not be
located adjacent to restaurants or food-service establishments.
(c) Shall not be located adjacent to a residential zoning district or
use.
(d) Facilities shall provide appropriate waste removal methods.
(e) Dogs shall not be outside between 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(f) Soundproofing, additional setbacks, landscaping and other
applicable design considerations to minimize noise, odor and
visual impacts on adjacent properties or tenants may be
considered as part of the special land use review.
(g) An emergency evacuation plan must be filed with the township.
§ 170-25.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-25.2
1:684
ARTICLE 26
Off-Street Parking and Loading/Unloading
[Amended 7-15-2010; 12-15-2011; 9-17-2015]
The intent of this article is to limit the number of off-street parking spaces
and the impervious surface to the minimum necessary to meeting the
typical daily needs of each use, to provide adequate loading/unloading
facilities, and to promote the use and development of shared parking
facilities.
§ 170-26.1. General requirements.
The following general standards shall apply to all off-street parking and
loading areas:
§ 170-26.2. Method of measuring off-street parking.
A. Off-street parking shall be on the same lot as the building or use it
serves, unless otherwise authorized by the Township. The use of off-site
parking must be documented through a cross-access parking
agreement and recorded.
B. Off-street parking shall consist of a defined parking space, driveway,
garage, carport or combination thereof.
C. Barrier-free parking requirements shall comply with ADA standards
and the currently adopted building code.
D. All vehicles, unless otherwise permitted by this chapter, shall be parked
on a paved or permitted gravel surface.
E. Required off-street parking spaces shall not be changed to another use
unless an equal number of off-street parking spaces is provided in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
F. Off-street parking in connection with the operation of an existing
building or use shall not be reduced below the requirement for the use
it is intended to serve.
G. If use of any building, structure or use changes and additional parking
is required, additional off-street parking shall be provided in
accordance with the provisions of this article.
H. Designated parking areas shall not be used for: advertising/display of
vehicles or other items for sale or rent; storage or repair of wrecked,
junked or unlicensed vehicles; parking of semitrailers; repair or
maintenance of vehicles; storage of merchandise or materials; and
placement of waste receptacles.
I. In locations that can be served by bicycles, accommodations for
bicycles, such as bike racks, shall be provided.
§ 170-26.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-26.2
1:685
§ 170-26.3. Modifications of parking requirements.
A. The dimensional requirements for parking spaces shall be exclusive of
loading areas and driveway or aisle width.
B. When the number of required parking spaces results in a fraction, any
fraction up to and including 1/4 shall be disregarded, and fractions over
1/4 shall require one parking space.
C. Parking spaces required for employees shall be based on the maximum
number of employees on the premises at one time.
D. For the purpose of computing required parking spaces, "usable floor
area" shall be used as defined in Article 44, Definitions. A floor plan is
required to support the floor area calculation.
E. Where usable floor area is not defined, 85% of the gross floor area shall
be used to determine parking requirements.
F. If floor area is later converted to usable floor area, additional parking
may be required.
A. The Planning Commission may increase or decrease off-street parking
requirements when a parking study, or other applicable data, is
submitted to demonstrate that another standard would be more
appropriate based on the actual number of employees, expected level of
customer traffic or actual counts at a similar establishment.
B. Approval of fewer parking spaces by the Planning Commission shall be
subject to providing banked parking as follows:
(1) Banked parking shall be shown on the site plan, comply with the
requirements of this chapter and be set aside as landscaped open
space.
(2) Banked parking shall be located in a reasonable/convenient
location to serve the intended use.
(3) Stormwater facilities shall be designed to accommodate runoff
from the banked parking.
(4) Any required landscaping placed within the banked parking area
shall be replaced by the owner/applicant if the banked parking is
activated.
(5) Upon a finding by the owner or the Township that it is necessary to
convert banked parking to off-street parking, it shall be
constructed pursuant to the permitting requirements of the
Township.
C. The Planning Commission may, at its discretion, allow shared parking
with a use on an adjacent lot. In considering a request for shared
§ 170-26.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-26.3
1:686
§ 170-26.4. Off-street parking requirements by use.
The number of off-street parking spaces shall be determined in accordance
with the following schedule. For uses not specifically addressed, the offstreet
parking requirements shall be in accordance with a similar use, as
determined by the Planning Commission.
Use Number of Spaces
Residential
Single- and 2-family dwelling
units
2 spaces per dwelling unit (located outside
of an enclosed garage)
Multiple-family dwelling units
and senior independent units
2 spaces per unit (1 may be within a
garage) + 0.5 space per unit for visitor
parking + any spaces required for office,
clubhouse or recreation amenities
*Visitor parking shall be distributed
throughout the site and shall not include
driveways or resident assigned parking.
Nursing home, hospice and
similar senior uses
1 space per 3 beds
Senior assisted living 1 space per 2 beds + 1 space per
employee/contract employee
parking, the Planning Commission shall determine that all of the
following conditions exist:
(1) Peak usage will occur at different periods of the day;
(2) The shared parking is conveniently located in proximity to all uses
being served;
(3) The location of the shared parking will not create vehicular/
pedestrian conflicts or physical barriers.
D. For shared off-site parking arrangements, an agreement must be signed
by all property owners and recorded. The agreement must clearly
indicate the provisions of the agreement as well as a length of
applicability.
E. The number of spaces provided shall not exceed the minimum number
required by this chapter, unless otherwise approved by the Planning
Commission. In granting additional parking spaces, the Planning
Commission shall determine such parking will be required to
accommodate the use on a typical day, based on documented evidence
provided by the applicant.
§ 170-26.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-26.4
1:687
Use Number of Spaces
Mobile home park 2 spaces for each mobile home + 1
additional off-street visitor parking space
for every 3 mobile homes
*Visitor parking shall be distributed
throughout the site and shall not include
driveways or resident assigned parking.
Institutional and Assembly
Assembly uses (auditoriums,
billiard halls, fraternity/
sorority, meeting halls,
religious institutions, roller or
ice skating rinks, stadiums,
theaters and other similar
uses)
1 space per 3 seats of capacity authorized
by the Building Code for all areas that can
be used for assembly, or 6 feet of
bleachers/pews, whichever is greater
*The number of parking spaces required
for the collective uses shall be determined
by the Planning Commission after
consideration of the expected activities,
number of participants and accessory uses.
An operations plan shall be provided to
support the amount of parking provided.
Clubs and membership
organizations, fraternal
orders, civic clubs and other
similar uses
1 space per 2 persons of capacity
authorized by the Building Code or 15
spaces per 1,000 square feet of usable floor
area, whichever is greater
Elementary and middle
schools
1 space per employee/administrator +
spaces required for assembly, auditorium
and/or outdoor recreation areas + a
minimum of 10 pick-up/drop-off spaces and
waiting or loading for school buses
High schools, vocational
schools or colleges
1 space per employee/administrator + 1
space per 4 students + spaces required for
assembly, auditorium and/or outdoor
recreation areas + a minimum of 10 pickup/
drop-off spaces and waiting or loading
for school buses
State-licensed residential
facilities
Spaces to accommodate residents and
staff, as determined by the capacity of the
facility
Business and Commercial
Athletic clubs (freestanding
building)
1 space per 200 square feet of usable floor
area
Banquet facilities, conference
centers, exhibit halls and
similar uses
1 space per 2 persons of capacity
authorized by the Building Code or 15
spaces per 1,000 square feet of usable floor
area, whichever is greater
§ 170-26.4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-26.4
1:688
Use Number of Spaces
Bars, nightclubs, breweries,
distilleries, wineries and
other similar establishments
20 spaces per 1,000 square feet of usable
floor area
Beauty salon/spa or
barbershop
2 spaces per chair or 1 space per 300
square feet of usable area, whichever is
greater
Convenience retail,
comparison retail, retail
services and shopping
centers
4.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of usable
floor area + 4 stacking spaces for each
drive-through
*When more than 5% of the in-line floor
area is devoted to restaurant or food
service uses, additional parking must be
provided using the applicable food service
standard.
*Parking for out-lot restaurants shall be
calculated separately.
Day care and preschool 1 space per 325 square feet of usable floor
area + 1 space per employee
Funeral homes 1 space per 50 square feet of service
parlors, chapels and reception areas + 1
space per funeral vehicle
Mini/self-storage warehouse 3 spaces + 1 space per each employee
Motel/hotel, bed-andbreakfast
1 space per guest room + 1 space per
employee + spaces required for restaurant,
conference, banquet or exhibit space as
required by this article
*If the restaurant has a separate exterior
entrance and sign, the required parking
spaces for restaurants shall be provided.
Oil change facility 1 space per each employee + 2 stacking
spaces per service bay
Restaurant with a bar area
and/or entertainment
facilities
20 spaces per 1,000 square feet of usable
floor area + spaces required for outdoor
seating, banquet or meeting rooms
Restaurant without a bar 15 spaces per 1,000 square feet of usable
floor area + any spaces required for
outdoor seating
Restaurant with drivethrough
10 stacking spaces from the location where
orders are placed + requirements for
indoor and outdoor seating
Restaurant with fewer than 6
tables and/or booths
6 spaces + 1 space for each employee +
any spaces required for outdoor seating
§ 170-26.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-26.4
1:689
Use Number of Spaces
Vehicle dealerships, display,
sales and rental
2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet of interior
sales area + 1.5 spaces per 1,000 square
feet of exterior display
Vehicle filling stations 1 space per 250 square feet of usable floor
area for sales or convenience retail + any
spaces required for accessory uses
Vehicle service facilities 2 spaces per service bay + 1 space per
employee + 1 space per tow truck + any
spaces required for accessory uses
Vehicle wash (automatic) 1 space per employee + 12 stacking spaces
for freestanding vehicle washes and 6
stacking spaces when accessory to a
fueling station + designated spaces for
vacuums
Vehicle wash (self-serve/coinoperated)
2 stacking spaces per wash bay +
designated spaces for drying or vacuums
Offices
Financial institutions 1 space per 200 square feet of usable floor
area + 4 stacking spaces for each drive-up
teller
Hospitals 1.75 spaces per bed + 1 space per 200
square feet of usable floor area for office,
research or other outpatient uses
Medical office (doctors,
dentists or other similar
professions)
1 space per 200 square feet of usable floor
area
Outpatient medical care,
emergency care or other
similar uses
2 spaces per exam or outpatient procedure/
operating room + 1 space for laboratory or
recovery room + 1 space for each 2 rooms
for employee parking or 1 space per 200
square feet of usable floor area, whichever
is greater
Professional office 1 space per 300 square feet of usable floor
area
Industrial
Light industrial, assembly,
manufacturing, testing labs
and research development
centers
5 spaces + 2 spaces per 1,000 square feet
of usable floor area + 1 space for each
corporate vehicle or 1.2 spaces per
employee during peak shift, whichever is
greater
Wholesale/warehousing
(nonretail)
1 space per employee or 1 space per 1,500
square feet of usable floor area
Recreation
§ 170-26.4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-26.4
1:690
Use Number of Spaces
Driving range 1 space per 2 tees + parking required for
other uses
Golf course 6 spaces for each hole and 1 space for each
employee + spaces required for banquet
rooms, restaurants and other uses
Indoor recreation
(gymnasiums, swimming
pools, court sports, ice
skating, bowling alleys or
other similar uses) and
outdoor recreation facilities
1 space per 3 persons of capacity
authorized by the Building Code
Miniature golf course 2 spaces for each hole + 1 space for each
employee + spaces required for other uses
Public park facilities As determined by the Planning Commission
in consideration of the type of facilities and
programming
Swimming pool/clubs 1 space per 3 persons of capacity
authorized by the Building Code
Swimming pool clubs, tennis
clubs or similar uses operated
by resident/homeowners'
organizations
As determined by the Planning Commission
in consideration of the size, intensity of
uses and proximity of the facility to
residences
§ 170-26.5. Off-street parking design standards.
A. Off street parking shall be designed in accordance with the following.
Parking
Pattern
Aisle Lane
Width (c)
Parking Space
Width (c)
Parking Space
Length
Parallel parking 12' 8' 23'(b)
30° to 53° 12' 9'(a) 20'(b)
54° to 74° 17' 9'(a) 20'(b)
75° to 90° 24' 9' 18'(b)
NOTES:
a. Nine and 1/2 feet may be required for uses which involve
significant loading and unloading or use of shopping carts, as
determined by the Planning Commission.
b. The length of spaces on the outer edge of a curbed area may be
reduced 1 1/2 feet to account for vehicle overhang.
c. Width is exclusive of curb and gutter.
§ 170-26.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-26.5
1:691
B. Ninety-degree and parallel parking patterns shall provide two-way
movement; all other configurations shall provide one-way traffic
movement.
C. Stacking spaces shall be nine feet wide and 20 feet long. Stacking
spaces shall not interfere with drive/parking aisles, circulation, access
to waste receptacles and loading areas.
D. All parking spaces shall provide adequate access by means of drive
aisle lanes. Backing directly onto a street or primary circulation aisle,
where it could create interference with traffic flow, is not permitted.
E. Ingress and egress to a parking lot shall be from a public street or a
recorded easement for ingress and egress. Access shall not be across
land zoned for single-family residential uses.
F. Layout shall provide access for fire apparatus.
G. When located adjacent to a residential district, entrances to and from
an off-street parking lot shall comply with the required setback as
required in § 170-18.2S.
H. Where the parking space fronts a sidewalk, a minimum eight-foot-wide
sidewalk is required.
I. The parking lot layout shall accommodate pedestrian circulation.
Pedestrian crosswalks shall be clearly defined and shall be
distinguished by textured paving, pavement striping or other
decorative treatment.
J. When a use involves shopping carts, decorative cart corrals shall be
provided and evenly distributed throughout the parking lot.
K. Cross-access connections between adjacent parking lots, or a future
connection when adjacent parking lots do not exist but can reasonably
be expected to be constructed, are required. Cross-access easements
shall be recorded for connected lots under separate ownership or
management.
L. All lighting shall be designed, located and/or shielded to prevent
spillover onto adjacent properties and shall be arranged to prohibit
adverse effects on adjacent public roadways. Lighting shall be further
subject to the standards in Article 21, Lighting Standards.
M. Barrier-free parking requirements: spaces shall be provided in
accordance with Michigan Barrier-Free Design and the Michigan
Building Code.
N. Carports shall be identified on the site plan. Carports shall be designed
to screen headlight glare, and the carport design shall be compatible
with the overall site and adjacent uses.
§ 170-26.5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-26.5
1:692
§ 170-26.6. Off-street parking construction and maintenance.
§ 170-26.7. Off-street loading and unloading.
O. The height of a parking structure shall not exceed four levels above
grade. An enclosed rooftop level is considered a level.
A. The entire parking area, including parking spaces and aisle lanes, shall
be constructed with asphalt or concrete surfacing and curbs and
gutters in accordance with Chapter 72, Design and Construction
Standards, of the Code of the Charter Township of Northville.
B. The parking area shall be surfaced within six months from the date the
permit is issued. The Building Department may grant a single extension
for an additional six months in the event of adverse weather conditions
or unusual delays beyond the control of the property owner.
C. Off-street parking areas shall be designed to dispose of all surface
water in such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent
property or toward buildings.
D. Construction or expansion of a parking lot shall be subject to approval
under the site plan provisions of Article 33.
E. Repaving or reconstruction of an existing parking lot that does not
require site plan approval shall require approval by the Engineering
Department. Plans for repaving or reconstruction of an existing parking
lot shall convey the following:
(1) Existing and proposed grades.
(2) Method of handling stormwater runoff, including catch basins,
runoff calculations, pipe sizes and connections to existing drainage
structures.
(3) Surface and base materials.
F. Pavement markings, signs and other similar items must be properly
maintained to ensure visibility and clarity.
A. Area for loading/unloading shall be provided and maintained for every
use involving the receipt or distribution of goods.
B. Loading/unloading activities shall be separate from required parking
and shall not interfere with a public R.O.W., ingress/egress easements,
drive aisles, traffic flow or internal circulation patterns.
C. Loading/unloading areas shall be located in the rear yard. For existing
sites where location in the rear yard is not possible, loading and
unloading may be provided within an interior side yard, provided it is
minimized from public view, or within an exterior side yard, provided a
minimum fifty-foot setback is provided.
§ 170-26.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-26.7
1:693
D. The minimum size for loading/unloading areas shall be 10 feet by 50
feet, unless a smaller area is authorized by the Township for uses with
lesser delivery requirements, and shall maintain 14 feet of overhead
clearance.
E. When facing a residential district, loading/unloading areas shall be
screened by a decorative wall or berm and/landscaping.
F. The turning radius of the largest anticipated service vehicles shall be
identified on the site plan to demonstrate there are no conflicts with the
internal circulation, parking and accessory structures.
G. Delivery truck loading/unloading shall be limited to the hours of 6:00
a.m. to 10:00 p.m. The use of parked semi-trailers or shipping
containers for storage of merchandise is prohibited.
§ 170-26.7 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-26.7
1:694
ARTICLE 27
Access Management
[Amended 9-17-2015]
§ 170-27.1. Intent.
§ 170-27.2. Applicability.
§ 170-27.3. Driveway location.
§ 170-27.4. Driveway spacing.
A. The standards of this article are intended to promote public safety and
efficient flow of vehicular traffic by minimizing conflicts from turning
movements resulting from the poor location and/or the proliferation of
curb cuts and driveways.
B. The Township recognizes the driveway standards herein may be more
restrictive than those required by Wayne County. When conflicts arise,
the more-stringent standard shall apply in recognition that the countywide
standards may not meet the comprehensive transportation and
land use goals of the Charter Township of Northville.
A. This article shall apply to all vehicular access points intersecting a
public road, driveways for nonresidential uses, driveways for multiplefamily
developments, and shared residential driveways that serve more
than two residential lots or dwelling units. This article shall not apply to
individual driveways serving one or two dwelling units or an essential
public service structure.
A. Driveways shall be located to minimize interference with the movement
of traffic, to provide adequate sight distance, and to provide the mostfavorable
driveway grade.
B. Driveways, including residential driveways, shall be set back at least
four feet from a lot line.
A. For sites located adjacent to vacant land, or land that may be
redeveloped in the future (including potential out-lots), the access shall
be located to ensure the driveway spacing requirements can be met for
adjacent site(s) or provisions for a shared driveway shall be made.
B. Minimum spacing requirements between a driveway and an
intersection, either adjacent to or on the opposite side of the street, are
identified in the table below. Measurements shall be taken from the
near edge of the proposed driveway, measured at the throat
perpendicular to the street, to the near lane edge of the intersecting
curb (or pavement edge for uncurbed sections).
§ 170-27.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-27.4
1:695
Minimum Driveway Spacing from Street Intersection
Location of Driveway
Full-Movement
Driveway
Channelized
Driveway
Restricting Left
Turns
Along major thoroughfare,
(intersecting street is a major
thoroughfare)
250' 125'
Along major thoroughfare
(intersecting street is not
major thoroughfare)
200' 125'
Along a collector road 125' 75'
Along a collector, local street
or private road
75' 50'
C. If a parcel does not have enough street frontage to meet the spacing
requirement from an intersection, the Township may require the
driveway to be constructed:
(1) Along a side street;
(2) As a shared driveway with an adjacent property;
(3) Along the property line farthest from the intersection; or
(4) As a service road as described in § 170-27.7 below.
D. Minimum spacing between driveways shall be determined based upon
the posted speed limits along the parcel frontage. Measurements are
taken from center line to center line.
E. Where it can be demonstrated that preexisting conditions prohibit
compliance with the minimum spacing between driveways, the
Township may modify the driveway spacing requirements.
Modifications shall be the minimum amount necessary, provided a
minimum spacing of 80 feet is maintained between.
§ 170-27.4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-27.4
1:696
§ 170-27.5. Alignment of driveways.
To reduce left-turn conflicts, driveways shall be aligned with those across
the street. If alignment is not possible, driveways should be offset at least
250 feet along major arterials and 150 feet along other streets. Longer
offsets may be required based on the expected inbound left-turn volumes.
Speed Limit Driveway Spacing
25 mph 130'
30 mph 185'
35 mph 245'
40 mph 300'
45 mph 350'
§ 170-27.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-27.5
1:697
§ 170-27.5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-27.6
1:698
§ 170-27.6. Number of driveways.
§ 170-27.7. Shared driveways and service roads.
A. The number of driveways serving a property shall be limited to the
minimum number necessary to provide reasonable access and access
for emergency vehicles, while preserving traffic operations and safety
along the public roadway.
B. One access shall be provided for each separately owned parcel. Access
may be an individual driveway, shared driveway or service drive.
C. Additional driveways may be permitted as follows:
(1) One additional driveway may be allowed for parcels with more than
300 feet of road frontage. After the first 300 feet of frontage, an
additional driveway may be permitted for an additional 300 feet of
road frontage, provided the following conditions are met:
(a) The Township determines additional access is justified without
compromising traffic operations, based upon a traffic impact
study.
(b) There are no other reasonable access opportunities.
(c) The additional driveway will comply with driveway spacing or
offset requirements contained in this article.
A. When required due to parcel constraints or to be consistent with
recommendations of a corridor or subarea master plan, and if the
Township determines reducing the number of access points may have a
beneficial impact on traffic operations and safety, a shared driveway or
service road connecting two or more properties/uses may be required.
The use of service roads, in conjunction with driveway spacing, is
intended to preserve traffic flow along major thoroughfares, minimize
traffic conflicts and retain reasonable access to property.
B. Service roads shall comply with the following standards:
(1) Service roads shall generally be parallel or perpendicular to the
front property line and may be located either in front of, adjacent to
§ 170-27.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-27.7
1:699
or behind principal buildings. The setbacks of existing buildings
and anticipated traffic flow for the site shall be considered in
determining the best location for the service road.
(2) The service road shall be constructed to the property line of the
subject property.
(3) The proposed elevation of the service road must be identified at the
property line.
(4) The service road shall be located within a recorded easement
permitting traffic circulation between properties, and a
maintenance agreement shall be established. The minimum
easement width shall be 40 feet wide; however, a wider easement
may be required based on anticipated traffic volume and other
requirements.
(5) The width of the service road shall be 26 feet wide, measured from
the face to face of curb.
(6) The service road is intended to be used exclusively for circulation,
not as a parking/maneuvering aisle.
(7) The requirements of this article shall apply to driveway locations
along the service road.
(8) Temporary access may be permitted where a continuous service
road is not yet available, provided a financial guarantee, acceptable
to the Township, is provided to assure elimination of temporary
access when the service road is continued. The financial guarantee
shall be provided to the Township prior to issuing an occupancy
permit.
§ 170-27.7 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-27.7
1:700
§ 170-27.8. Driveway design.
A. For high traffic generators, or for driveways along high-volume roads,
two egress lanes may be required.
B. Where a boulevard entrance is provided, an island having a minimum of
180 square feet shall be provided to separate the ingress and egress
lanes. The island shall be designed to accommodate the largest vehicle
that may use the driveway.
C. In locations where opposing boulevards are present, the nose of new
medians shall be set back at least 50 feet from the edge of the roadway.
D. Right-turn deceleration lanes and/or tapers may be required.
§ 170-27.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-27.8
1:701

ARTICLE 28
Private Roads
[Amended 4-16-2009; 9-17-2015]
§ 170-28.1. Intent.
The purpose of this article is to establish the procedures, design standards
and maintenance obligations for roads that are not intended to be dedicated
to the public.
§ 170-28.2. Applicability.
The procedures and standards of this article shall apply to all private roads
or shared driveways, including developments with attached or detached
dwelling units regulated by the Condominium Act (Act 59 of 1978, MCLA
§ 559.101 et seq.).
§ 170-28.3. Submittal requirements.
The following items shall be provided to the Planning Department:
§ 170-28.4. Design standards.
A. Parcel numbers and the name of the owner for all properties having
legal interest in the private road.
B. Plans, designed by a registered engineer or land surveyor, showing
location, dimension, and design of the private road. The plan shall
identify existing and proposed elevations for all areas to be disturbed or
altered by construction of the private road.
C. A topographic survey on USGS datum at intervals of not more than two
feet.
D. The minimum stopping and intersection sight distances shall meet the
criteria outlined in the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Manual.
E. The location, caliper size and species of all trees larger than eight
inches and located within the private road easement.
F. The location of all public or private utilities located within the private
road easement and within 20 feet of the easement.
G. The location of any lakes, streams, drainageways or wetlands within
100 feet of the proposed private road easement.
H. A declaration of restriction for private road construction and
maintenance in a format acceptable to the Township.
§ 170-28.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-28.4
1:703
A. Recorded easements shall be established for the joint use of all
resultant parcels for the purposes of ingress, egress and private or
publicly owned utilities.
B. Private road easements shall be 60 feet wide, except for private roads
serving four units or fewer, then the width of the easement may be
reduced to a minimum of 40 feet, provided all of the following
conditions exist:
(1) The easement is unlikely to become a public street in the future.
(2) The easement does not have the potential to serve additional lots in
the future.
(3) A reduced easement width, between 40 and 59 feet, will result in
the preservation of natural features, including topography,
woodlands and common space.
(4) The reduced easement width is adequate to accommodate required
pavement width, underground utilities, and required parking,
required turnaround, required pedestrian facilities, lighting and/or
landscaping.
C. Private roads serving four units or fewer shall meet the following
design standards:
(1) Minimum 22 feet in width.
(2) Minimum of four inches of asphalt on eight inches of aggregate.
(3) Asphalt type and base material shall be approved by the Township
Engineer.
(4) Open ditches or curbs are permitted, provided drainage is
adequately conveyed, as determined by the Township Engineer.
D. Private roads serving five units or more shall be designed to meet
Wayne County's typical residential road design standard.
E. Culs-de-sac shall be designed to meet Wayne County's typical
residential cul-de-sac design standard.
F. A private road shall provide a cul-de-sac turnaround or other
configuration approved by the Fire Department.
G. The private road shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from any
adjoining lot (excluding lots that are traversed by the access easement)
or parcel which does not derive access from the private road.
H. All areas disturbed by the construction of a private road shall be
provided with topsoil, seeded with grass, and protected against erosion.
I. Tree replacement shall be provided in accordance with Article 23, Tree
and Woodlands Replacement.
§ 170-28.4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-28.4
1:704
J. Fourteen feet of overhead tree clearance shall be provided for the width
of the road.
K. Geometric standards.
(1) Grades shall not exceed 7%, with a maximum grade of 2% for a
minimum distance of 30 feet from the intersection with a public
right-of-way or another private road. The Township may approve a
grade of up to 10% for low-traffic-volume roads, provided that
there are under 500 vehicles per day and where significant
topographic features would be preserved.
(2) The minimum horizontal curve shall be defined by the desired
design speed but should never be less than a radius of 165 feet. A
minimum radius of 50 feet shall be provided for roads with a ninetydegree
turn.
(3) Vertical curves shall be designed for grade changes greater than
1%.
(4) The minimum tangent distance (straightaway) between two curves
shall be 100 feet.
(5) Minimum stopping and intersection sight distances shall meet the
design criteria contained in the most-recent edition of the
American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO) Manual, "A Policy on Geometric Design for
Highways and Streets."
L. Intersection design standards.
(1) Private roads shall intersect an existing or proposed private or
public road at a ninety-degree angle and provide a radius of 50 feet.
Where constrained by environmental features, a reduced angle of
intersection is permitted, provided the angle is greater than 80°.
M. Road names are required for any private road serving two or more lots.
Proposed road names shall be submitted to the Township for approval.
N. All signs within the private road easement shall be identified on the site
plan and be in accordance with the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices. Street signs shall be provided at all intersections.
These signs shall contrast with public street signs in terms of color and
shall indicate the road is private. The Township may require the posting
of no-parking signs.
O. Sidewalks or bike paths are encouraged and may be required by the
Planning Commission.
P. Gates or any other structure intended for the purpose of restricting
access, or which have the appearance of restricting access, are not
permitted.
§ 170-28.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-28.4
1:705
§ 170-28.5. Shared residential driveways.
For the purpose of this article, a "shared residential driveway" is a driveway
that provides vehicular access to two single-family dwelling units or two
primary residential buildings and shall comply with the following standards:
Figure 28.1
Lot Width and Setback Measurements
A. The shared driveway must be located within a recorded easement. The
minimum width of the easement is 25 feet, unless a wider easement is
required to adequately address drainage, as determined by the
Township Engineer.
B. The driveway surface shall be at least 18 feet wide, measured edge to
edge, unless otherwise approved by the Township in consideration of
§ 170-28.4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-28.5
1:706
§ 170-28.6. Gated entranceways.
Gates, functioning or ornamental, or any other structure intended to restrict
access are prohibited, except such structures are permitted on roads with
higher traffic volumes and for larger residential lots which are not part of a
uniform development and provided the following standards are met:
§ 170-28.7. Maintenance agreement.
An agreement for financing ongoing maintenance shall be provided by
the property owners benefiting from the private road or shared driveway.
The Township's private road agreement shall be recorded with the Wayne
significant topographic, wetland or other natural features on the site
and provided the reduced drive width and easement is adequate to
serve existing and future underground utilities.
C. The shared driveway shall be constructed of materials suitable to
accommodate emergency vehicles.
D. Adequate sight distance shall be provided along the intersecting road.
E. A shared access easement and maintenance agreement is required for
all property owners that benefit from the shared residential driveway.
The agreement must clearly state that the drive may not serve
additional lots in the future unless upgraded to a private road, in
accordance with all applicable standards. The agreement shall be
recorded with Wayne County and a recorded copy provided to the
Township prior to approval of the private driveway.
A. Properties shall be located along a major thoroughfare, be at least three
acres in size and have a minimum 250 feet of road frontage.
B. Structures shall be set back a distance equal to the front yard setback
required for the zoning district.
C. The height of the gate shall not exceed eight feet in height.
D. The height of any support or decorative structures shall not exceed 10
feet, measured from the ground level to the highest part of the
structure.
E. A landscape plan is required. Landscape shall be designed to obscure
the structure from the road and be integrated into an overall landscape
plan for the entire road frontage. A minimum of two trees and six
shrubs shall be provided for each 40 linear feet of road frontage.
F. The gate shall not contain any barbed wire, electric current or charges
of electricity.
G. An emergency access shall be approved by the Department of Public
Safety.
§ 170-28.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-28.7
1:707
County Register of Deeds prior and provided to the Building Department
prior to the issuance of a building permit.
§ 170-28.8. Requirements for building permit.
§ 170-28.9. Nonconforming private roads and access easements.
A. Prior to issuing building permits for locations served by a private road,
the road and utilities shall be completed to the satisfaction of the
Department of Public Services and Department of Public Safety.
B. In the event the road or utilities are not completed, a performance
guarantee in the form of a cash bond or bank letter of credit may be
provided, at the discretion of the Department of Public Services. The
requirements of Chapter 58, Article VIII, shall apply to such
performance guarantee.
A. Existing private roads and shared driveways lawful prior to the
adoption of this article but not in compliance with the standards herein
are considered to be legal nonconforming roads or easements. The
intent of this article is to permit legal nonconforming roads and
easements to continue and undergo routine maintenance for safety
purposes, as determined by the Township Engineer.
B. This article is intended to discourage the extension of nonconforming
roads or increase in the number of lots or building sites served by such
a road. Any reconstruction, widening or extension of a nonconforming
private road or access easement shall be in conformity with this section.
C. This article is also intended to allow a new dwelling unit to be
constructed on an existing lot of record having frontage along the
nonconforming private road or shared driveway prior to the adoption
date of this section, provided the road is reasonably capable of
providing sufficient access for the uses permitted in the zoning district
and emergency service vehicles.
D. For purposes of determining whether a lot along a private road or
access easement qualifies as an existing lot, as used in this section, at
least one of the following conditions must have existed at the time this
article was adopted, October 10, 1991:
(1) The lot consists of a condominium unit for which a master deed had
been recorded with the Wayne County Register of Deeds in
accordance with the requirements of the Michigan Condominium
Act and other applicable laws and ordinances.
(2) The lot consists of a parcel that was described by metes and bounds
as recorded by a deed or as a land contract and registered with the
Wayne County Register of Deeds.
§ 170-28.7 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-28.9
1:708
(3) The lot has been assigned a unique parcel number by the Wayne
County Register of Deeds and was individually assessed and taxed
on that basis.
§ 170-28.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-28.9
1:709

ARTICLE 29
Wireless Communications
§ 170-29.1. Intent.
The regulations of this article are intended to conform with federal laws
and administrative rules that govern facilities needed to operate wireless
communications systems and to set forth procedures and standards for
review and approval for the location of such facilities within the Charter
Township of Northville. It is the Township's intent to reasonably regulate the
location and design of such facilities to retain the integrity of neighborhoods
and the character, property values and aesthetic quality of the Township.
Given the increase in the number of wireless communications facilities
requested as a result of the new technology and the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996, it is the policy of the Township that
all users should collocate on attached wireless communications facilities
and wireless communications support structures. Co-location is proposed
in order to assure the most economic use of land and to prevent the
proliferation of duplicative services. In recognition of the Township's
concern that technological advances may render certain wireless
communications facilities obsolete or unnecessary in the future,
requirements are set forth for the removal of unused or unnecessary
facilities in a timely manner and provide security for removal.
§ 170-29.2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this section:
ATTACHED WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — Wireless
communications facilities affixed to existing structures, including, but not
limited to, existing buildings, towers, water tanks, or utility poles.
CO-LOCATION — Location by two or more wireless communications
providers of wireless communications facilities on a common structure,
tower or building, to reduce the overall number of structures required to
support wireless communications antennas within the Township.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES — All structures and
accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for
the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may include, but
shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone devices,
personal communications transmission equipment and exchanges,
microwave relay towers, telephone transmission equipment building and
commercial mobile radio service facilities. This definition does not include a
reception antenna for an individual lot as otherwise defined and regulated
in this chapter.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SUPPORT STRUCTURES — Structures
erected or modified to support wireless communications antennas. Support
structures within this definition include, but shall not be limited to,
monopoles, lattice towers, light poles, wood poles and guyed towers, or
§ 170-29.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-29.2
1:711
other structures which appear to be something other than a mere support
structure.
§ 170-29.3. Zoning districts and approval process for wireless
communications facilities.
Wireless communications facilities may be located within the Township in
accordance with the following table:
Type/Location of Wireless
Communications Facility
Districts
Permitted Approval Procedure
Attached to existing structures:
Attached to an existing
conforming structure that
will not be materially altered
or changed in appearance
All non-singlefamily
residential
districts
Administrative sketch plan
review by the Building and
Planning Departments
Attached to an existing
utility pole within a public
right-of-way that will not be
modified or materially
altered and not impair sight
lines or compromise safety
All districts Administrative sketch plan
review by the Building and
Planning Departments,
provided letter of
acceptance is provided by
the utility company
Co-location upon an attached
wireless communications
facility previously approved
for such co-location
All districts Administrative sketch plan
review by the Building and
Planning Department
Located on a municipally owned site:
Attached to an existing
structure or monopole up to
100' in height1
All districts Administrative sketch plan
review by the Building and
Planning Department
Monopole 101' to 150' in
height1
All districts Site plan review by the
Planning Commission
Located on a site owned by another governmental entity, religious
institution or public school:
Monopole up to 80' in
height1
All districts Site plan review by the
Planning Commission.
Monopole 81' to 100' in
height1
All districts Special land use and site
plan review by the Planning
Commission
New facility not addressed above:
Monopole up to 120' tall1 OS and B-3
Districts
Special land use and site
plan review by the Planning
Commission
§ 170-29.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-29.3
1:712
Type/Location of Wireless
Communications Facility
Districts
Permitted Approval Procedure
CR, ORT, I-1
and CI
Districts
Permitted use, site plan
approval by the Planning
Commission
Monopole 120' to 150' tall1 CR, ORT, I-1
and CI
Districts
Special land use and site
plan review by the Planning
Commission
Monopole or lattice tower
150' to 200' tall1
I-1 and CI
Districts
Special land use and site
plan review by the Planning
Commission
NOTES:
1 Height may be increased 10 feet where determined necessary to
provide future co-location.
§ 170-29.4. Sketch plan requirements.
For situations requiring sketch plan review, the following information shall
be provided:
A. Signed certification by a professional engineer licensed by the State of
Michigan with regard to the manner in which the proposed structure
will fall in the event of damage, accident or injury, i.e., fall line, and that
the setback area provided shall accommodate the structure should it
fall or break and provide a reasonable buffer in the event the structure
fails.
B. A description of the performance guarantee to be posted at the time of
receiving a building permit for the facility to ensure removal of the
facility when it is abandoned or is no longer needed. The applicant shall
demonstrate that funds will be available to the Township for removal of
any structure used for wireless communications in an amount which
reasonably reflects the cost of removing the facility and restoration of
the property or structure upon which the facility is located. Adequate
funds shall also be provided to cover the Township's administrative
costs in the event that the applicant or its successor does not remove
the wireless communications facility in a timely manner. The security
shall, at the election of the Township Board, be in the form of cash,
security bond, letter of credit or an agreement in a form approved by
the Township Attorney and recordable at the Wayne County Register of
Deeds. The security shall establish a commitment by the applicant,
owner of the property, or their successors, to remove the facility in a
timely manner as required by this article. It shall further be provided
that the applicant, owner or successor shall be responsible for payment
of any costs or attorney fees incurred by the Township in securing
removal.
§ 170-29.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-29.4
1:713
§ 170-29.5. Design standards applicable to all facilities.
In addition to the criteria of site plan review listed in Article 33, Site
Plan Review, all wireless communications facilities shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with the following standards:
C. A map that illustrates existing and known proposed wireless
communications facilities within Northville Township and adjacent
communities to determine potential co-location or to demonstrate the
need for the proposed facility. Any such information that is a trade
secret and/or other confidential commercial information which, if
released, would result in commercial disadvantage to the applicant may
be submitted with a request for confidentiality in connection with the
development of governmental policy [MCLA § 15.243(1)(g)]. This
chapter shall serve as the promise to maintain confidentiality to the
extent permitted by law. The request for confidentiality must be
prominently stated in order to bring it to the attention of the
community.
D. In recognition of the Township's policy to promote co-location, a written
agreement, transferable to all successors and assigns, that the operator
shall make space available on the facility for co-location.
E. The name, address and phone number of the person to contact for
engineering, maintenance and other notice purposes. This information
shall be continuously updated during all times the facility is on the
premises.
A. Facilities shall be located and designed to be harmonious with the
surrounding area. The Planning Commission may require design of the
structure to either diminish the visual impact or to create an
architectural feature that will contribute to or enhance community
character.
B. A permit for the construction and use of a new wireless communications
facility shall not be granted until the applicant demonstrates a feasible
co-location is not available for the coverage area and capacity needs.
C. All new and modified wireless communications facilities shall be
designed and constructed to accommodate co-location, with a written
agreement in a format approved by the Township Attorney.
D. Landscaping shall be provided to screen the base of the structure,
accessory buildings and enclosure from adjacent uses and public rightsof-
way.
E. Elevations of the accessory buildings shall be provided. In residential
and commercial districts, all accessory buildings shall be constructed of
brick.
§ 170-29.4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-29.5
1:714
F. Fencing shall be provided for protection of the support structure and
security from children and other persons who may otherwise access the
facilities.
G. Any nonconforming situations existing on the site, such as outdoor
storage, signs, inadequate landscaping, unpaved parking, lack of a
sidewalk/pathway, lighting that does not meet current standards or
similar conditions shall be brought into conformance prior to the
erection of the wireless communications facility. If existing buildings or
structures are not in conformance with the current Township
standards, improvements shall be made to decrease the nonconformity
or additional landscaping shall be provided to reduce the impact of the
nonconformity and the wireless facility.
H. The operator shall comply with applicable federal and state standards
relative to the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions.
I. The applicant shall demonstrate that the requested height of the new or
modified support structure and antenna shall be the minimum height
necessary for reasonable communications by the applicant, including
additional height to accommodate future co-location where
appropriate.
J. Minimum required setbacks for new facilities or support structures:
(1) From any residential district: the height of the structure, plus 25
feet, provided the engineering information required in § 170-29.4A
is provided. The person or body with authority to approve the
facility may decrease this setback to that provided in Subsection
J(3) below upon a finding that no residential use exists or is
expected on the adjacent site.
(2) From any existing or proposed rights-of-way or other publicly
traveled roads or nonmotorized improved pathways: half the height
of the structure, plus 25 feet, provided the engineering information
required in § 170-29.4A is provided; otherwise, the setback shall be
the height of the facility.
(3) From nonresidential district: 1/2 the height of the structure, plus
10 feet, provided the engineering information required in
§ 170-29.4A above demonstrates such setback is adequate.
K. Accessory buildings shall be a maximum of 14 feet high and shall be set
back in accordance with the requirements for principal buildings in that
zoning district.
L. There shall be unobstructed access to the support structure for
operation, maintenance, repair and inspection purposes, which may be
provided through or over an easement. This access shall have a width
and location determined by such factors as the location of adjacent
thoroughfares and traffic and circulation within the site; utilities
needed to service the tower and any attendant facilities; the location of
§ 170-29.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-29.5
1:715
§ 170-29.6. Removal.
As a condition of every wireless communications facility approval, adequate
provision shall be made for the removal of all, or part, of the facility by users
and owners upon the occurrence of one or more of the following events:
buildings and parking facilities; proximity to residential districts and
minimizing disturbance to the natural landscape; and the type of
equipment which will need to access the site.
M. Where an attached wireless communications facility is proposed on the
roof of a building, and if the equipment enclosure is proposed as a roof
appliance or penthouse on the building, it shall be designed,
constructed and maintained to be architecturally compatible with the
principal building. The equipment enclosure may be located within the
principal building or may be an accessory building. If proposed as an
accessory building, it shall conform with all district standards for the
principal building, including setbacks.
N. The support system shall be constructed in accordance with all
applicable building codes and shall include the submission of a soil
report from a geotechnical engineer licensed in the State of Michigan.
This soil report shall include soil borings and statements confirming the
suitability of soil conditions for the proposed use. The requirements of
the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications
Commission and the Michigan Aeronautics Commission shall be noted.
O. A maintenance plan, and any applicable maintenance agreement, shall
be presented and approved as part of the plan for the proposed facility.
Such plan shall be designed to ensure the long-term, continuous
maintenance to a reasonably prudent standard.
A. When the facility has not been used for 180 days or more, the removal
of antennas or other equipment from the facility or the cessation of
operations (transmission and/or reception of radio signals) shall be
considered as the beginning of a period of nonuse.
B. Six months after new technology is available, at reasonable cost as
determined by the Township Board, which permits the operation of the
communications system without the requirement of the support
structures.
C. The situations in which removal of a facility is required, as set forth in
Subsection A above, may be applied and limited to portions of a facility.
D. Upon the occurrence of one or more of the events requiring removal,
specified in the subsections above, the property owner or persons who
had used the facility shall immediately apply or secure the application
for any required demolition or removal permits and immediately
proceed with and complete the demolition/removal and restoration of
the premises to an acceptable condition, as determined by the Planning
Department.
§ 170-29.5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-29.6
1:716
§ 170-29.7. Co-location.
§ 170-29.8. Nonconforming facilities; penalties for not permitting
co-location.
If a party who owns or otherwise controls a wireless communications facility
fails or refuses to alter a structure to accommodate a proposed and
otherwise feasible co-location, such facility shall thereupon and thereafter
be deemed to be a nonconforming structure and use and shall not be
altered, expanded or extended in any respect. In addition, if a party refuses
to allow co-location in accordance with the intent of this article and this
action results in construction of a new tower, the Township may refuse to
approve a new wireless communications support structure from the party
for a period of up to five years. Such a party may seek and obtain a
variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals if and to the limited extent
the applicant demonstrates entitlement to variance relief. Relief shall mean
a demonstration that enforcement of the five-year prohibition would
unreasonably discriminate against the providers of functionally equivalent
E. If the required removal of a facility, or a portion thereof, has not been
lawfully completed within 60 days of the applicable deadline, and after
at least 30 days' written notice, the Township may remove or secure the
removal of the facility, or required portions thereof, and the actual cost
and reasonable administrative charge shall be drawn from, collected
and/or enforced from or under the security posted at the time
application was made for establishing the facility.
A. It is the policy of the Charter Township of Northville to minimize the
overall number of newly established locations for wireless
communications facilities and wireless communications support
structures within the Township and to encourage the use of existing
structures for attached wireless communications facilities. Co-location
shall be required unless an applicant demonstrates that co-location is
not feasible.
B. Co-location shall be deemed feasible where all of the following
conditions are met:
(1) The wireless communications provider or property owner where
co-location is proposed will accept market rent or other market
compensation for co-location, and the wireless communications
provider seeking the facility will pay such rates.
(2) The site on which co-location is being considered, taking into
consideration reasonable modification or replacement of a facility,
is able to provide structural support.
(3) The co-location being considered is technically reasonable, e.g., the
co-location will not result in unreasonable interference, given
appropriate physical and other adjustments in relation to the
structure, antennas and the like.
§ 170-29.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-29.8
1:717
wireless communications services or that such enforcement would have
the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless communications
services.
§ 170-29.8 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-29.8
1:718
ARTICLE 30
Special Land Uses
[Amended 9-17-2015]
§ 170-30.1. Intent.
This article sets forth a set of procedures and standards for special uses,
which, because of their unique characteristics, require specific
consideration. Special land uses are considered to be more intense, or
potentially more disruptive, compared to uses which are permitted by right
in a particular zoning district. These review procedures and standards are
intended to regulate the use of land and site design based on characteristics
of a particular use and to prevent adverse impact on adjoining or nearby
properties.
§ 170-30.2. Procedure.
§ 170-30.3. Special land use submittal requirements.
In addition to the special land use application and required fee, the
following shall be submitted to the Planning Department:
A. Special land uses require public notice and a public hearing as set forth
in § 170-40.7, Public notice.
B. If an ordinance interpretation or variance is needed from the Zoning
Board of Appeals, action shall be obtained prior to initiating the special
land use review.
C. At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the special
land use application and the preliminary site plan for compliance with
the special land use standards of § 170-30.4.
D. The Planning Commission is authorized to approve the special land use,
approve the special land use with conditions, deny, or postpone action.
E. The Planning Commission may, at its discretion, impose conditions on
the approval when it deems they are necessary to achieve or assure
compatibility with adjacent uses and/or structures or to implement the
Master Plan. The conditions run with the land and will remain through
subsequent owners, except an expiration date for the special land use
may be specified if the special land use is considered to be temporary.
F. Final site plan approval is required by the Planning Commission, as
defined in Article 33, Site Plan Review. Conditions of the special land
use approval must be clearly stipulated on the final site plan.
A. A preliminary site plan identifying the size, configuration and location
of existing and proposed buildings, parking, service areas, access
drives, landscape, natural features and other significant features of the
site.
§ 170-30.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-30.3
1:719
§ 170-30.4. Standards.
The Planning Commission shall consider the following standards when
reviewing a special land use request:
B. Written responses to the special land use standards contained in
§ 170-30.4.
A. Compatibility with adjacent uses. The proposed special land use shall
be designed and constructed in a manner that is harmonious with the
character of the adjacent property and the surrounding area. The
special land use shall not create a significant detrimental impact, as
compared to the impacts of permitted uses.
B. Compatibility with the Master Plan. The proposed special land use shall
be compatible with and in accordance with the goals and objectives of
the Township Master Plan and any associated subarea and corridor
plans.
C. Traffic impact. The proposed special land use shall be located and
designed in a manner that will minimize the impact on traffic, taking
into consideration pedestrian access and safety, vehicle trip generation,
types of traffic, access location and design, circulation and parking
design, street capacity and traffic operations at nearby intersections
and access points.
D. Impact on public services. The proposed special land use shall be
adequately served by essential public facilities and services, such as
streets, pedestrian or bicycle facilities, police and fire protection,
drainage systems, refuse disposal, water and sewerage facilities, and
schools.
E. Compliance with Zoning Ordinance standards. The proposed special
land use shall be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to
meet the intent of the zoning districts, and the site shall be able to
comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter.
F. Impact on the environment. The proposed special land use shall not
unreasonably impact the quality of the natural features and the
environment in comparison to the impacts associated with typical
permitted uses.
G. Specific special land use requirements. The proposed special land use
shall comply with any specific requirements relating to a particular use.
H. The Planning Commission shall also consider the following factors
when reviewing a special land use:
(1) The nature and character of the activities, processes, materials,
equipment or conditions of operation typically associated with the
use.
(2) Vehicular circulation and parking areas.
§ 170-30.3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-30.4
1:720
§ 170-30.5. Amendments, expansions or change in use.
The following provisions apply when there is an amendment or a proposed
expansion to an approved special land use or when there is a proposed
change from one special land use to another:
§ 170-30.6. Variances.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the authority to grant a variance
to allow a special land use that was denied by the Planning Commission, nor
shall the Zoning Board of Appeals have the authority to grant a variance to
any conditions placed on special land use approval.
§ 170-30.7. Effect of approval.
If construction has not commenced within one year of final site plan
approval, the special land use and site plan approvals become null and void
and a new application for special land use shall be required.
§ 170-30.8. Extensions.
A single one-year extension may be approved by the Planning Commission.
Requests for extensions must be made in writing prior to the expiration
date of the approval. An extension shall be granted if the applicant provides
evidence that the use and site plan have a reasonable likelihood to be
established during the one-year extension period. The applicant may be
required by the Township to submit a new site plan if the Township finds
there have been applicable amendments to this chapter since the special
land use was approved.
(3) Outdoor activity, storage and work areas.
(4) Hours of operation.
(5) Production of traffic, noise, vibration, smoke, fumes, dust, glare
and light.
A. In determining whether a proposed site plan amendment or expansion
requires a new special land use approval, any site plan changes that are
determined by the Township to be major changes, as defined in
§ 170-33.8, shall require a new special land use approval.
B. The applicant shall be responsible for informing the Township of any
change in an approved use, operations or activities, prior to the
changes taking place.
C. In determining whether a proposed change to the use requires a new
special land use approval, consideration shall be given to a departure
from the operation or use as described in the approved application or
any change that may cause external impacts such as, but not limited to,
additional traffic, changes to traffic patterns, hours of operation, noise,
outdoor storage or display.
§ 170-30.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-30.9
1:721
§ 170-30.9. Investigations.
The Township may make periodic investigations of developments authorized
by special land use permit to determine continued compliance with all
requirements imposed by the Planning Commission and this chapter.
§ 170-30.10. Maintenance.
The property owner shall be responsible for maintenance of the property
in accordance with the approved site plan until the property is razed, until
new zoning regulations supersede the regulations upon which approval was
based, or until a new use or site plan is approved. Any property owner who
fails to maintain an approved site plan shall be deemed in violation of the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 170-30.11. Revocation.
Revocation of a special land use may occur if its recipient fails to
continuously abide by its terms and conditions. The procedure for
revocation is as follows:
§ 170-30.12. Discontinuance.
A special land use approval that ceases to operate continuously after one
year shall be considered discontinued and the special land use approval
shall be deemed null and void.
A. The Township shall notify the recipient, in writing, of any violations of
Township codes or provisions of the special land use.
B. The recipient shall have 30 days to correct all deficiencies to the
satisfaction of the Township.
C. If deficiencies are not corrected within 30 days, the Township may
revoke the special land use or, if the conditions warrant, allow
additional time.
D. A repeat violation may cause immediate revocation of the special land
use.
§ 170-30.9 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-30.12
1:722
ARTICLE 31
Fences
[Added 5-21-2009; amended 12-17-2015]
§ 170-31.1. General standards applying to all fences.
§ 170-31.2. Swimming pools, spas, hot tubs and other similar
facilities.
A. Fences with a height of 36 inches or less do not require a permit,
provided the fence is used as a decorative landscape feature and the
fence complies with the following standards:
(1) Sections shall not exceed 20 feet in length.
(2) Sections shall not be closer than 10 feet to each other.
(3) Total length of all sections shall not exceed 100 feet.
B. Fences with a height greater than 36 inches and up to seven feet
require a zoning compliance permit.
C. Fences with a height greater than seven feet require a building permit.
D. The finished side of the fence shall abut the adjacent lot, road right-ofway
or easement.
E. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, fences shall not contain
barbed wire, electric current or charges of electricity.
F. The issuance of a fence permit is not intended, nor should it be
construed, to abolish or modify the applicant's duties as contained in
covenants and restrictions arising from a deed or other document. The
Township does not have the authority to enforce private covenants or
deed restrictions.
G. Chain-link fences are not permitted, except in the Consumer Industrial
Zoning District and provided the chain-link fence is vinyl coated with
black or dark green color.
H. Except as permitted in residential zoning districts, privacy screens are
not permitted.
A. Fences and enclosures are not permitted within a front yard.
B. A fence or enclosure, as specified per the Building Code,83 is required
for any swimming pool, spa, hot tub or other similar facility that
contains more than 24 inches of water at any location.
C. Fences and enclosures shall comply with the requirements contained in
the presently adopted Building Code.
83.Editor's Note: See Ch. 58, Building Construction.
§ 170-31.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-31.3
1:723
§ 170-31.3. Parks, schools, playgrounds or other public areas.
§ 170-31.4. Utilities, communications and other similar facilities.
§ 170-31.5. Fences in residential zoning districts.
A. Fences are not permitted within the required front yard setback.
B. Height shall not exceed four feet in residential zoning districts.
C. Height shall not exceed five feet in nonresidential zoning districts.
D. Vision shall not be obstructed by more than 25% when viewed
perpendicular to the plane of the fence. The open areas shall be evenly
distributed over the total area of the fence.
E. Backstops for ball fields are exempt for these standards.
A. Height shall not exceed eight feet.
B. Fences may consist of a solid surface, if needed to provide security.
Solid-surface fences shall be screened with landscape to minimize the
appearance.
A. Fences located on lots greater than two acres shall comply with the
following:
(1) Fences abutting a road:
(a) Height shall not exceed four feet. Decorative projections are
permitted along the top of the fence, provided the total height
of the projections and the fence do not exceed 54 inches.
(b) Vision shall not be obstructed by more than 25% when viewed
perpendicular to the plane of the fence. The open areas shall
be evenly distributed over the total area of the fence.
(c) Fences are not permitted within the required front yard
setback.
(2) Fences that do not abut a road:
(a) Height shall not exceed six feet.
(b) Vision shall not be obstructed by more than 50% when viewed
from any particular plane. The open areas shall be evenly
distributed over the total area of the fence.
B. Fences on lots two acres or less shall comply with the following:
(1) Fences located in the front yard:
(a) Height shall not exceed 36 inches.
(b) Sections shall not exceed 20 feet in length.
§ 170-31.3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-31.5
1:724
§ 170-31.6. Fences in nonresidential zoning districts.
(c) Sections shall not be closer than 10 feet to each other.
(d) The total length of all sections shall not exceed 100 feet.
(e) Vision shall not be obstructed by more than 50% when viewed
perpendicular to the plane of the fence. The open areas shall
be evenly distributed over the total area of the fence.
(2) Fences located in a side or rear yard:
(a) Height shall not exceed four feet. Decorative projections are
permitted along the top of the fence, provided the total height
of the projections and the fence do not exceed 54 inches.
(b) Vision shall not be obstructed by more than 50% when viewed
perpendicular to the plane of the fence. The open areas shall
be evenly distributed over the total area of the fence.
C. Privacy screens shall comply with the following:
(1) Length shall not extend more than 16 feet beyond the rear building
line.
(2) Shall not be located within the required side yard.
(3) Shall be limited to two sides of the area it is screening.
(4) Height shall not exceed five feet, as measured from the bottom of
the privacy screen.
(5) Vison shall not be obstructed by more than 75% when viewed from
a particular plane of the fence. The open areas shall be evenly
distributed over the total area of the fence.
A. Vision shall not be obstructed by more than 25% when viewed
perpendicular to the plane of the fence. The open areas shall be evenly
distributed over the total area of the fence.
B. In the Industrial and ORT Zoning Districts, fences must comply with the
following standards:
(1) Height shall not exceed six feet.
(2) Landscape shall be provided to minimize the appearance of the
fence.
(3) Shall not be located within the required side or rear yard setback.
(4) Shall not extend beyond the front building line.
(5) The extent of the fence shall be the minimum necessary to support
the on-site business operations.
§ 170-31.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-31.6
1:725
§ 170-31.7. Enforcement.
The Building Official, or his designee, is authorized to serve a notice of
violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction,
alteration, extension, repair or moving of a fence in violation of the
provisions of this chapter. Such order shall direct the discontinuance of the
illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.
C. In the CI Zoning District, fences must comply with the following
standards:
(1) Height shall not exceed six feet.
(2) Fences may be located on the property line, unless a setback is
needed to provide required landscape screening.
(3) Shall not extend beyond the front building line.
(4) Chain-link fences are permitted, provided they are vinyl coated
with black or dark green color.
D. In all other nonresidential zoning districts, fence height shall not
exceed four feet.
§ 170-31.6 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-31.7
1:726
ARTICLE 32
Impact Assessment
[Amended 9-17-2015]
§ 170-32.1. Intent.
The intent of an impact assessment is to provide relevant information that is
necessary to evaluate the proposal's impact upon the natural environment,
traffic operations, public facility needs and the future land use of the
surrounding area.
§ 170-32.2. Applicability.
§ 170-32.3. Written impact assessment requirements.
A. An impact assessment includes a written component and a traffic
analysis, as defined in §§ 270-32.3 and 270-32.4. An impact assessment
shall be prepared by the applicant for any of the following projects:
(1) Rezoning requests that represents a departure from the Township's
Master Plan.
(2) Projects that would be expected to generate 100 directional vehicle
trips (i.e., 100 inbound or 100 outbound trips) during the peak hour
of the traffic generator or the peak hour on the adjacent streets.
(3) A PUD.
(4) Special land uses in the Industrial Zoning District.
(5) A manufactured housing development.
(6) Sand and gravel mining operations.
B. The requirement for an impact assessment may be appealed to the
Northville Planning Commission. The appeal may be to waive the
requirement or eliminate the need for submittal of some of the
information. To receive a modification, the applicant shall demonstrate
that the impacts will be relatively minor and/or the existing
infrastructure has ample capacity available.
A. Name(s) and address(s) of person(s) that prepared the impact
assessment. Documentation regarding wetlands, woodlands, traffic or
fiscal impacts must be prepared by a person(s) with applicable
experience.
B. Except for traditional rezoning requests, a map conveying the following
shall be provided:
(1) Land uses, building arrangement or lots, the relationship between
land uses areas, and the type and density of dwelling units.
§ 170-32.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-32.3
1:727
§ 170-32.4. Traffic study requirements.
(2) Site circulation, including pedestrian/facilities, streets, drives and
parking area(s).
(3) Open spaces, general landscaping plans, preservation of natural
features, and location and types of recreational facilities or
amenities.
(4) General utility layout, including stormwater management, sanitary
sewer and public water.
C. A written description of the site's natural features, such as, but not
limited to, topography, soils, wildlife, regulated woodlands, existing
vegetation, wetlands, view sheds, lakes, streams and ponds.
D. A description of natural drainage patterns, changes to site drainage,
and the method of stormwater management to be installed.
E. A written description of how the project will comply with the site
performance standards contained in Article 3, General Use Provisions,
and Chapter 117, Noise.
F. A description of the proposed uses and other accessory facilities, to
determine compatibility with existing and future land uses, including,
but not limited to, lighting, views from the street and adjacent land
uses, and buffering to minimize impact on adjacent properties.
G. A description of any hazardous substances expected to be used, stored
or disposed of on the site. The information shall describe the type of
materials, location within the site and method of containment.
Documentation of compliance with federal and state requirements and
a pollution incident prevention plan (PIPP) shall be submitted for any
use that stores more than 25 gallons or 220 pounds of hazardous
materials or wastes. Any discharge of wastewater to a storm sewer,
drain, lake, stream or other surface water shall be documented and
appropriate permits obtained from the Department of Environmental
Quality. A detailed description of any underground storage tanks and
the materials to be stored shall be documented and appropriate permits
obtained from the State Police Fire Marshal Division, Hazardous
Materials Section. If flammable or combustible liquids are to be stored
in fixed aboveground storage containers with a capacity greater than
1,100 gallons, this shall be documented and appropriate permits
obtained from the State Police Fire Marshal Division. Storage of
pesticide or fertilizer in quantities greater than 55 gallons or 100
pounds shall be documented and appropriate permits obtained from the
Michigan Department of Agriculture, Pesticide and Plant Pest Division.
All necessary permits shall be included within the appendix of the
environmental impact assessment. Best management practices and
containment of hazardous materials shall be documented.
§ 170-32.3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-32.4
1:728
A. A rezoning traffic assessment shall be required for rezoning requests
that would result in potential uses that are projected to generate more
peak-hour or daily trips than currently zoned uses would generate. The
assessment shall compare the peak-hour and daily trip generation
characteristics between existing and proposed zoning. The trip
generation data shall be based on the most-intense uses permitted in
the requested rezoning district. If the request is for conditional zoning,
the trip generation shall be calculated based on planned use(s).
Projected trip generation shall be based upon equations/rates outlined
in the most-recent version of the Institute of Transportation Engineers
(ITE) Trip Generation Manual.
B. A traffic impact study shall be required for projects that would be
projected to generate 100 directional vehicle trips (i.e., 100 inbound or
100 outbound trips) during the peak hour of the traffic generator or the
peak hour on the adjacent streets. Forecasted trip generation shall be
based upon equations/rates outlined in the most-recent version of the
Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual.
The ITE data may be supplemented by actual trip generation data from
similar establishments in Michigan. Any supplemental data must be
reviewed and approved by the Township prior to use in the study
analyses.
C. The applicant is required to contact Township staff and the traffic
engineering consultant prior to preparation of a traffic impact study to
discuss available data, extent of study area and inclusion of other
projects or growth factors as part of the background conditions.
D. Existing conditions, including daily and peak-hour traffic volumes on
adjacent street(s), intersections within the vicinity that are expected to
be impacted, and a description of any sight distance limitations along
the site's frontage, shall be summarized in the study report.
E. Existing traffic counts shall be taken on a Tuesday, Wednesday or
Thursday of nonholiday weeks. Additional counts, i.e., on a Saturday for
a proposed commercial development, may also be required. The
following times/situations should also be avoided where possible so that
the traffic count data would represent a typical day: construction
detours in the area, summer days for a site near a school, etc. The firm
performing the impact study must make every effort to complete traffic
counts during average or higher than average volume conditions, i.e.,
regarding weather or seasonal variations for the area under study.
Traffic data older than two years old will not be accepted. Traffic data
between one and two years old may be accepted when the applicant can
document that volumes have not changed more than 2%.
F. Projected trip generation of the proposed use shall be provided for the
a.m./p.m. peak-hour and average daily traffic generated. The forecasts
shall be based on the data and procedures outlined in the Institute for
Transportation Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual. The applicant
may use other commonly accepted sources of data or supplement the
§ 170-32.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-32.4
1:729
standard data with data from similar projects in Michigan. For rezoning
requests when such change represents a departure from the future land
use map, the study should contrast the trip generation of typical uses
permitted in the requested zoning district with uses permitted in the
current zoning district. The determination of typical uses shall be made
by the Planning Department.
G. All traffic impact studies will include an analysis of background
conditions for the year that the project is to be completed (or in phases
if applicable). Background traffic includes historic annual percentage
increases and/or acknowledges the traffic impacts of other uses
approved or in the review process, but not yet constructed, which may
affect traffic operations for roadways and intersections near the subject
site, as determined by the Township. This may include projects in
adjacent communities. Improvements identified to address any poor
background conditions must be the minimum required to adequately
address those conditions.
H. The projected traffic generated shall be distributed onto the existing
street network to identify expected turning movement volumes at site
driveways and nearby intersections and illustrated in the report. A
description of the application of standard engineering procedures for
determining the distribution shall also be included. The expected trip
distribution shall be approved by the Township prior to continuation of
the analyses. The assignment of forecasted site traffic shall be clearly
illustrated in graphic form in the study report.
I. Capacity analysis at the proposed access points using the procedures
outlined in the most-recent edition of the Highway Capacity Manual
published by the Transportation Research Board shall be provided.
Before and after capacity analyses shall also be performed at all street
intersections where the expected project traffic will comprise at least
5% of the existing intersection traffic volumes and/or for roadway
sections and intersections experiencing congestion or a relatively high
accident rate, as determined by the Township or Wayne County
Department of Public Services staff. The "after" analysis shall include a
scenario with no improvements and separate analysis for various
mitigation options or packages of improvements. Any proposed change
to signal timing should include documentation of acceptance by Wayne
County staff.
J. Traffic crash data at analyzed intersections covering the past three
years shall be summarized in collision diagrams if the segment of
roadway adjacent to or near the subject site has experienced crash
problems.
K. The location and design of proposed access for a driveway or new street
intersection shall be provided with a map and narrative description. In
addition, analysis shall include any sight distance limitations,
dimensions from adjacent driveways and intersections within 250 feet
and other data to demonstrate that the design and number of proposed
§ 170-32.4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-32.4
1:730
driveways are the fewest necessary. The driveway(s) shall provide safe
and efficient traffic operation and be in accordance with the standards
of this chapter.
L. The potential need for bypass lanes or deceleration tapers/lanes,
including attachment of any correspondence by the Wayne County
Department of Public Services.
M. The Fire Department shall approve the size and location of fire lanes
and emergency vehicle access.
N. The Township requires analysis using traffic capacity/simulation
software (i.e., SYNCHRO) rather than an isolated intersection capacity
analysis. Such analyses' submittals shall include electronic copies of the
simulation files.
§ 170-32.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-32.4
1:731

ARTICLE 33
Site Plan Review
[Amended 12-20-2007; 4-16-2009; 9-17-2015; 9-26-2019]
§ 170-33.1. Intent.
The intent of this article is to provide a consistent and uniform method
of review for proposed development plans to ensure full compliance with
regulations and standards contained in this chapter, with other applicable
ordinances and laws, efficient use of land, protect natural resources and to
prevent adverse impacts on adjoining or nearby properties. It is the intent
of these provisions to encourage cooperation and communication with the
applicant in facilitating the development process in accordance with the
Township's land use objectives.
§ 170-33.2. Applicability.
A. Site plan review is classified into four types.
(1) Exempt. Select projects are exempt from site plan review given
their relatively low impact on adjacent land uses and that
compliance with applicable zoning regulations can be addressed
through the building permit review process. A building permit is
required.
(2) Administrative. Certain smaller projects, conditional site plan
approvals, building/site expansions or minor changes in use may be
reviewed administratively by the Planning Department and/or
Building Official. At the discretion of the Director of Community
Development, certain administrative reviews may be submitted to
the Planning Commission.
(3) Sketch plan. The process for smaller-scale projects, expansions or
changes in use where the applicant is permitted to provide less
detailed information than a full site plan. The level of information
required is only what is deemed necessary to verify compliance
with applicable standards.
(4) Full site plan. The process for larger and more-intense projects,
including most new developments, larger expansions and
redevelopment of an existing site.
B. A zoning compliance permit may be required for certain uses that do
not require site plan review as described in § 170-42.1.
§ 170-33.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-33.2
1:733
Site Plan Review Requirements
Development
Activity Required Review
Full Site
Plan
Sketch
Plan Admin. Exempt
New
Development
Single-family
dwelling and
accessory
structures on a
single residentially
zoned lot
•
Residential
developments,
excluding platted
subdivisions
•
Construction of any
nonresidential
building or use
•
Accessory
buildings and
structures up to
100 square feet in
all zoning districts
except R-1 through
R-4
•
Accessory
buildings and
structures greater
than 100 square
feet in all zoning
districts except R-1
through R-4
•
Construction of
essential public
service buildings
and storage areas
•
Expansions or
Building
Alterations
Addition to a
single-family
dwelling unit
•
§ 170-33.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-33.2
1:734
Site Plan Review Requirements
Development
Activity Required Review
Full Site
Plan
Sketch
Plan Admin. Exempt
An increase up to
1,000 square feet
or 10% of the
existing floor area,
whichever is less
•
An increase in the
floor area greater
than that specified
above
•
An increase in
parking or loading
area of up to 10%
or 6,000 square
feet of pavement
area
•
An increase in
parking or loading
area over 10% or
6,000 square feet
of pavement area
•
Changes to
building height
that do not add
additional floor
area
•
Architectural
changes to a nonsingle-
family
residential
structure
•
§ 170-33.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-33.2
1:735
Site Plan Review Requirements
Development
Activity Required Review
Full Site
Plan
Sketch
Plan Admin. Exempt
Internal
construction or
change in the floor
plan that does not
increase usable
floor area, increase
the intensity of use
or affect parking
requirements and
meets all site
design standards of
this chapter
•
Barrier-free design
improvements to a
non-single-family
residential
structure
•
Change in Use
Any change in the
use of land or a
building to a more
intensive use, in
terms of parking,
noise, traffic
volumes and
similar impacts
•
A change in use for
a site that does not
comply with
current site design
standards such as
landscaping,
signage, lighting or
drainage
•
§ 170-33.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-33.2
1:736
Site Plan Review Requirements
Development
Activity Required Review
Full Site
Plan
Sketch
Plan Admin. Exempt
A change in use to
a similar or less
intense use,
provided the site
shall not require
any significant
changes such as
parking,
landscaping,
lighting, signs, bike
paths or sidewalks
•
Improvements to
outdoor recreation
uses and parks
A change from a
nonconforming
use, building or
site to a more
conforming
situation
•
Other Types of
Projects
Accessory open-air
businesses
•
Pathway or
sidewalk
construction or
relocation
•
Construction of an
entrance feature
associated with a
non-single-family
residential use
(walls,
landscaping, etc.)
•
Fences associated
with a non-singlefamily
residential
use
•
§ 170-33.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-33.2
1:737
Site Plan Review Requirements
Development
Activity Required Review
Full Site
Plan
Sketch
Plan Admin. Exempt
Grading,
excavation, filling,
soil removal,
creation of ponds
or clearing of
vegetation within
an area up to 100
square feet,
provided such
activity is normally
and customarily
incidental to an
existing singlefamily
use
•
Grading,
excavation, filling,
soil removal,
creation of ponds
or clearing of trees
other than that
specified above
•
Home occupations •
Landscape changes
that are consistent
with the intent of
this chapter and an
approved site plan
•
Minor
modifications to an
approved site plan
as defined in
§ 170-33.4, Site
plan
•
Parking lot
modifications,
provided there is
not a reduction in
the total number of
spaces
•
§ 170-33.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-33.2
1:738
§ 170-33.3. Procedures.
Site Plan Review Requirements
Development
Activity Required Review
Full Site
Plan
Sketch
Plan Admin. Exempt
Residential-care
facilities licensed
by the state that
require special
land use approval
•
Sign relocation or
replacement,
provided it meets
applicable
dimensional and
location standards
of the Sign
Ordinance,84 the
materials are
consistent with the
building and fits
into the overall
landscape plan
•
Site improvements
such as walls,
fences, lighting or
curbing consistent
with ordinance
standards
•
Utility system
improvements
•
Relocation of a
waste receptacle to
a more
inconspicuous
location or
installation of
screening around
the waste
receptacle
•
84.Editor's Note: See Ch. 145, Signs.
§ 170-33.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-33.3
1:739
A. If an ordinance interpretation or variance is needed from the Zoning
Board of Appeals, action from the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be
obtained prior to initiating the site plan review process.
B. The site plan shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of this
article, including all appropriate information identified on the site plan
application. A site plan that does not meet the stipulated requirements
shall be considered incomplete and shall not be eligible to begin the
review process.
C. The complete site plan submittal will be distributed to all applicable
Township reviewers for administrative review. Written reports will be
prepared to identify deficiencies and make appropriate
recommendations necessary to comply with Township standards.
Review comments will be complied and returned to the applicant to
revise and resubmit the plan, if required.
D. Upon satisfying all nondiscretionary items, the application will be
placed on the next available Planning Commission meeting agenda for
action by the Planning Commission.
E. The Planning Commission shall review the site plan in relation to
applicable standards and the intent and purpose of this chapter. The
Commission shall consider the comments and recommendations from
the various Township reviewers.
F. The Planning Commission is authorized to approve the site plan,
approve the site plan with conditions, deny or postpone action as
follows.
(1) Postpone. Upon determination by the Planning Commission that a
site plan is not sufficiently complete for approval or denial, upon a
request by the applicant, the Planning Commission may postpone
consideration until a later meeting.
(2) Denial. Upon determination that a site plan does not comply with
standards and regulations set forth in this chapter, or extensive
revisions are necessary to comply with said standards and
regulations, the site plan shall be denied.
(3) Approval. Upon determination that a site plan is in compliance with
the requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinances
and laws, the site plan shall be approved. All final site plans shall be
signed by the Director of Community Development prior to
proceeding with construction/engineering plan submittal.
(4) Approval subject to conditions. The Planning Commission may
approve a site plan, subject to one or more conditions necessary to
address minor modifications to the site plan, ensure that public
services and facilities can accommodate the proposed use, protect
significant natural features, ensure compatibility with adjacent
land uses or otherwise meet the intent and purpose of this chapter.
§ 170-33.3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-33.3
1:740
§ 170-33.4. Site plan submittal requirements
In addition to the site plan application and required fee, the information
identified on the following site plan application checklist shall be submitted
to the Planning Department to initiate the site plan review process. The
proposed site plan shall comply with the applicable standards contained in
this chapter.
General Information
Proof of ownership or authorization from the landowner to submit the
development proposal
The legal description of the property
Plan(s) developed using 1983 State Plane Coordinates
A location map illustrating the subject parcel(s), surrounding parcels and
the street system
Professional seal, signature, address and phone number of professionals
involved in preparation of the site plan
A boundary survey and lot dimensions in accordance with PA132 of 1970
Notation of any variances received
If public sanitary sewer system is not proposed, Health Department
approval is required
Existing Site Conditions Information
Gross and net acreages
Site analysis map depicting slopes, drainage flow, watercourses, natural
features, sight distance limitations, etc.
Elevations on USC&GS datum, provided at two-foot maximum intervals
and extending 100 feet beyond the site boundary
Revised plans reflecting the Planning Commission conditions shall
be submitted for review. Upon addressing all Planning Commission
conditions, the final site plans shall be signed by the Director of
Community Development prior to proceeding with construction/
engineering plan submittal.
G. Optional meetings.
(1) The applicant may request a preapplication meeting with
appropriate staff to discuss the project, applicable standards,
technical issues, submittal requirements and review procedures.
The applicant shall submit a meeting request form, plans to
describe the scope of the project and a list of specific questions.
(2) The applicant may request to be placed on the Planning
Commission agenda at a regularly scheduled meeting, if time
permits, to introduce the site plan concept and receive informal
comments or direction from the Planning Commission.
§ 170-33.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-33.4
1:741
Surface configuration/elevation of land and roads
Elevation and details of bridges and culverts which provide passage of
stormwater onto or away from the site, and under abutting roads,
including details of sections, length and elevation
All recorded and unrecorded easements
Details of streets/roads abutting the site (width, surface, plantings within
the R.O.W., etc.)
All public and private roads, existing and proposed R.O.W., easements and
driveways within 250 feet of site
The 100-year floodplain elevation
Existing utilities and associated structures, including storm and sanitary
sewers, water mains, electric and telephone lines located adjacent to the
site, including relationship to R.O.W. or easement lines
Limits of wetlands regulated
Locations of concentrated stormwater inflow into the site
Any other special or unusual conditions which might significantly affect
the site design
Lighting (Article 21)
Photometric plan and fixture details
Tree and Woodland Protection (Article 23)
Limits of grading identified
Tree inventory identifying all trees eight inches DBH or greater by size,
common and botanical name and general condition
A table identifying trees by number, species and size and whether they are
to remain, be removed or be transplanted
Trees to be removed graphically identified on plan; replacement
calculations provided
Landscape plan graphically distinguishes woodland replacement trees
from landscape requirements
Landscape (Article 24)
Greenbelt, buffer, parking lot, detention, entranceway and interior
landscaping requirements identified in a table and graphically on plan(s)
Dimensions for height and length of any walls or fences
Plant schedule indicating number, size and species of all proposed plant
material
A note that all planting areas are to be irrigated
Location, detail and method of screening waste receptacles
Parking/Loading (Article 26)
§ 170-33.4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-33.4
1:742
Identify turning radii of the largest anticipated vehicle to verify adequate
geometry has been provided to accommodate turning movements through
the site
Dimensions of typical parking spaces, aisles and islands; islands shall be
two feet shorter than adjacent parking space
Location of directional signs and pavement markings
Location, size and screening details for loading/unloading areas
Parking calculations based on proposed use; banked parking or proposed
modifications to required number of parking spaces shall be clearly
identified
Net usable floor area calculation supported by floor plan(s)
Provide access for fire apparatus
Site Access (Article 27)
Identify access points within 500 feet of site, on both sides of street
Evidence indicating sight distance requirements of MDOT or Wayne
County are met, as applicable
Provide shared access with adjacent uses, where appropriate (including
shared-access easement and agreements)
Dimensions for driveways, including width, radii, throat length, length of
any deceleration lanes or tapers and all curb radii within site
Public Streets/Private Roads (Article 28)
Traffic impact assessment or study, if required per Article 32, Impact
Assessment
Location and dimensions of streets/roads, including pavement width,
radii, tangent length
Pavement cross-section details
Proposed road names
Architecture
Elevations and material sample board
Rooftop equipment will be screened from public view
Details of rooftop equipment screening
Nonmotorized Circulation
Alignment, type and width of sidewalks or pathways required per the
Township pathway plan
Provision of appropriate pedestrian circulation and facilities within the
site
Sidewalks adjacent to parking spaces shall be a minimum of eight feet
wide
§ 170-33.5. Sketch plan submittal requirements.
§ 170-33.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-33.5
1:743
A. Sketch plan approval shall follow the same procedures for site plan
review. The intent of this section is to require the upgrade of existing
sites that do not conform to current site plan standards. Conformity
with current site plan standards is expected when it is feasible.
B. In addition to the sketch plan application and required fee, information
identified on the sketch plan application checklist shall be submitted to
the Planning Department to initiate the sketch plan review process. The
proposed site plan shall identify the applicable submittal items
identified in the table below and comply with the applicable standards
contained in this chapter.
General Information
Proof of ownership or authorization from the landowner to submit the
development proposal
The legal description of the property
Plan(s) developed using 1983 State Plane Coordinates
A location map illustrating the subject parcel(s), surrounding parcels
and the street system
Professional seal, signature, address and phone number of
professionals involved in preparation of the site plan
A boundary survey and lot dimensions in accordance with PA 132 of
1970
Notation of any variances received
If public sanitary sewer system is not proposed, Health Department
approval is required
Existing Site Conditions
Gross and net acreages
Site analysis map depicting slopes, drainage flow, watercourses,
natural features, sight distance limitations, etc.
Elevations on USC&GS datum, provided at two-foot maximum
intervals and extending 100 feet beyond the site boundary
Surface configuration/elevation of land and roads
Elevation and details of bridges and culverts which provide passage
of stormwater onto or away from the site, and under abutting roads,
including details of sections, length and elevation
All recorded and unrecorded easements
Details of streets/roads abutting the site (width, surface, plantings
within the R.O.W., etc.)
All public and private roads, existing and proposed R.O.W., easements
and driveways within 250 feet of site
The 100-year floodplain elevation
§ 170-33.5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-33.5
1:744
§ 170-33.6. Building design requirements.
Existing utilities and associated structures including storm and
sanitary sewers, water mains, electric and telephone lines located
adjacent to the site, including relationship to R.O.W. or easement lines
Limits of wetlands regulated
Locations of concentrated stormwater inflow into the site
Any other special or unusual conditions which might significantly
affect the site design
A. The purpose of these requirements is to establish standards for the
design and appearance of all buildings in the Township, except for
single-family and duplex structures, in order to enhance and maintain a
cohesive design appearance throughout the Township. These
requirements are further intended to encourage architectural creativity
within the context of creating a high-quality, harmonious environment.
The standards contained in this section shall apply to new construction,
building additions and building alterations. The Planning Commission
may approve alternatives on a project-by-project basis, provided it is
determined the application of these alternatives are consistent with the
intent and purpose of this section.
(1) Building design, massing and form.
(a) Buildings shall be sited in a manner that protects existing
natural features such as topography and vegetation and so the
buildings complement these features as the focal point of the
development.
(b) Elevations shall illustrate the building design, height, and
description of all construction materials. Elevations shall be
provided for all sides of the building.
(c) Colored elevations and site cross sections to illustrate the
spatial relationship of the building to the perimeter of the site
shall be submitted for Planning Commission review and
approval.
(d) Buildings shall consider the scale and proportion of existing
structures in the area. Roof configuration and materials shall
be architecturally compatible with adjacent buildings and
enhance the predominant streetscape character.
(e) Buildings shall possess architectural variety but respect the
overall cohesive community character. All buildings shall
provide architectural features, details and ornaments such as,
but not limited to, archways, colonnades, cornices, variation
along the building plane and varied rooflines.
§ 170-33.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-33.6
1:745
(f) Building walls over 80 feet in length shall be broken up by use
of varying rooflines, recesses, projections, windows,
architectural features, use of complementary building
materials/colors, trees or other means approved by the
Planning Commission.
(g) Building entrances shall be emphasized and enhanced in order
to provide a sense of place.
(h) Overhead doors shall not face directly onto a main road, and
visibility shall be minimized from public view. If, due to site
constraints, no other feasible location exists, or overhead
doors are visible to the public, the design must include
architectural elements to reduce the visual appearance of the
doors.
(i) Additional landscape may be required to reduce the visual
impact of the building mass when visible from public views.
(2) Building materials.
(a) Building materials and colors shall be harmonious with the
surrounding area.
(b) Classic building materials and earth-toned colors shall be
utilized for the structure. Complementary-colored accents may
be permitted for awnings, doors and other similar detail
elements, as approved by the Planning Commission. The use of
high-intensity, metallic or fluorescent colors is prohibited.
(c) The primary building material shall be full-dimensional brick; a
minimum 80%, excluding the roof and windows. The primary
building material on the front facade shall be the same and
integrated into each of the building facades.
(d) Accent materials shall be natural stone (limestone, granite,
marble or other similar stone products), precast stone, integral
colored split-face block, smooth or textured architectural metal
panels, cement-board siding or equivalent as determined by
the Planning Commission.
(e) EIFS, Fypon®, other synthetic siding materials, tilt-up panels
and corrugated or long-span, high-profile fluted or ribbed
metal panels are not permitted.
(f) Front building facades shall provide a minimum of 15% glass
windows but shall not exceed 80% glass. Calculations are
exclusive of the roof area.
(g) Reflective glass is not permitted on any facade.
(3) Roof design.
§ 170-33.6 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-33.6
1:746
(a) The location and height of the rooftop equipment shall be
illustrated on the plans and shall be screened from view by
parapet walls or other architectural elements that complement
the overall building design. A note that all rooftop equipment
will be screened must be provided on the plans.
(b) Standing-seam metal roofs shall only be permitted if
compatible with the overall character of the building,
compatible with the surrounding area and architectural
elements are used to significantly reduce the roof mass when
viewed from the street.
(c) Overhead roof canopies for gas stations or other uses shall be
compatible with the architectural characteristics and color
scheme of the principal building. Lighting fixtures shall be
recessed into the canopy.
(4) Awnings and canopies.
(a) Awnings or canopies shall be consistent with the overall
building design and provide uniform appearances as part of
multiple tenant developments, rather than being specific to
individual tenants. The size and location shall be subject to
Planning Commission approval.
(b) Awnings and canopies shall be darker colors.
(c) Backlit or internally illuminated awnings or canopies are not
permitted.
(d) Awnings and canopies shall not contain words, numerals,
figures, devices, designs, artwork, graphics or trademarks
used to convey attention or attract attention to a particular
business or product.
(e) Awnings and canopies shall be attached to the building.
(5) Building additions or alterations.
(a) Additions and building alterations shall complement the
existing building design with regard to height, proportion,
scale, design features and materials.
(b) For additions to an existing structure, the Planning
Commission may allow the use of existing materials, provided
the design of the addition is consistent with the existing
building.
(c) If an existing building does not comply with the current
building materials, any alteration or addition shall be brought
into greater compliance with current requirements, as
determined by the Planning Commission.
§ 170-33.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-33.7
1:747
§ 170-33.7. Standards for approval.
The following standards shall form the basis for site plan or sketch plan
review and approval, approval with conditions or denial:
A. Adequacy of information and compliance with ordinance requirements.
The plan includes all required information in a complete and
understandable form, and provides an accurate description of the
proposed uses, structures and site improvements. The plan complies
with all applicable ordinance requirements.
B. Site design characteristics. All elements of the site design shall be
harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to topography, parcel
configuration, adjoining property, traffic operations, adjacent streets
and driveways, pedestrian access and the type and size of buildings.
The site is designed in a manner to promote normal and orderly
development of surrounding property for uses permitted by this
chapter.
C. Site appearance and coordination. Site elements are designed and
located to be aesthetically pleasing and harmonious with adjacent
existing or future developments. All site features, including circulation,
parking, building orientation, landscaping, lighting, utilities, common
facilities and open space shall be coordinated with adjacent properties.
D. Pedestrian access and circulation. Pedestrian circulation systems shall
connect to existing or planned nonmotorized facilities and are designed
to be reasonably insulated from the vehicular circulation system.
E. Vehicular access and circulation. Drives, streets, parking, site access
and other vehicle-related elements are designed to minimize traffic
conflicts on adjacent streets and promote safe and efficient traffic
circulation within the site.
F. Building design and architecture. Building design and architecture
relate to and are harmonious with the surrounding area with regard to
texture, scale, mass, proportion, materials and color.
G. Parking and loading. Off-street parking lots and loading zones are
arranged, located and designed to accommodate the intensity of
proposed uses, minimize conflicts with adjacent uses, enhance the
character of the area and promote shared use of common facilities by
adjoining properties.
H. Landscaping and screening. Landscaping and screening are provided in
a manner to adequately buffer adjacent land uses and screen off-street
parking, mechanical equipment, loading and unloading areas and
storage areas from adjacent residential areas and public rights-of-way.
I. Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting fixtures are designed, arranged
and shielded to minimize glare and light trespass, prevent night
blindness and vision impairments and maximize security.
§ 170-33.7 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-33.7
1:748
§ 170-33.8. Engineering requirements.
No person shall start building or constructing anything without site plan
or sketch plan approval required by this chapter or until there has been
compliance with the requirements of this section. The Department of Public
Services shall have jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this section. Any
and all construction and development on a site requiring site plan or sketch
plan approval shall be consistent with the approved site plan.
§ 170-33.9. Building requirements.
J. Impact upon public services. The impact upon public services will not
exceed the existing or planned capacity of such services, and adequate
public services, including, but not limited to, utilities, streets, police
and fire protection, public schools and sidewalks/bicycle paths, are
available or provided to the site, and are designed with sufficient
capacity and durability to properly serve the development.
K. Emergency access. All sites and buildings are designed to allow
convenient and direct emergency access.
L. Project phasing. All phases of development shall be designed in logical
sequence to insure that they function independently in a safe,
convenient and efficient manner without being dependent upon
subsequent improvements in a later phase or on other sites.
M. Nonconforming sites. Redevelopment of existing sites shall be brought
into conformance with all site improvement provisions of this chapter
relative to and proportionate to the extent of redevelopment, as
determined by the Planning Commission or Township reviewers.
A. After final site plan or sketch plan approval, and before commencement
of construction, detailed drawings for roads, parking areas and utilities
shall be approved by the Engineering Department.
B. The applicant shall be required to obtain all other necessary agency
permits, including but not limited to the Michigan Department of
Environmental Quality, the Wayne County Office of Public Services, the
Wayne County Department of the Environment and applicable utility
companies. Copies of applications and approvals from all applicable
outside agencies shall accompany engineering plan submittal.
C. Construction of any improvements shall not begin until the required
Township fees have been paid and a preconstruction meeting has been
held.
D. If changes made during the engineering review conflict with
requirements and conditions of the approved site plan or sketch plan,
the revisions shall be reviewed and approved by the Township staff or
the Planning Commission as defined by this article.
§ 170-33.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-33.9
1:749
§ 170-33.10. Performance guarantee.
Whenever the Township Board permits or requires a performance
guarantee as security for required improvements, the performance
guarantee shall be in the form of a letter of credit, certified check or
cash escrow. Any such security shall be in an amount equal to 120% of
the estimated cost of completion of the required public improvements,
including lot improvements. The issuer of the letter of credit or the escrow
agent, as applicable, shall be acceptable to the Township Attorney.
§ 170-33.11. Use and property maintenance in accordance with an
approved plan.
No owner, tenant, occupant or person shall use or allow to be used a part or
all of any property which is the subject of an approved site plan or sketch
plan, other than as set forth on the approved plan.
A. Any structure to be erected in pursuance of an approved final site plan
or sketch plan shall be subject to the Township requirements for
submission of architectural plans, code compliance, inspection and
inspection fees.
B. A building permit for a structure located within a proposed
condominium project shall not be issued until the master deed has been
reviewed and approved by the Township and the Township has received
a recorded copy from the applicant. Prior to recording the master deed,
the Township may issue permits for site grading. No permit shall be
issued, or work undertaken, prior to recording of the master deed
pursuant to this section shall grant any rights or any expectancy
interest in the approval of the master deed.
A. The owner, tenant, occupant or person responsible for any property
which is the subject of an approved site plan or sketch plan shall
maintain the property and the improvements thereon in accordance
with the approved site, sketch plan or an approved amendment thereof.
This responsibility shall include the duty to maintain in a condition
substantially similar as approved, including the duty to replace, if
necessary, all improvements such as but not limited to, healthy
landscaping, walls, fences, pavement, pavement markings, signs,
lighting, building exterior, drainage facilities and all other elements of a
site. Any owner, tenant, occupant or person who fails to so maintain a
structure or land consistent with an approved site plan shall be deemed
in violation of the use provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to
the same penalties appropriate for a use violation.
B. For condominium projects, the master deed shall contain provisions
describing the responsibilities of the condominium association,
condominium owners, and public entities, with regard to maintenance
of the property in accordance with the approved site plan on a
continuing basis. The master deed shall further establish the means of
permanent financing for required maintenance and improvement
§ 170-33.9 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-33.11
1:750
§ 170-33.12. General provisions.
activities which are the responsibility of the condominium association.
Failure to maintain a structure or land consistent with an approved
site plan shall be deemed in violation of the use provisions of this
chapter and shall be subject to the same penalties appropriate for a use
violation.
A. Expiration of site or sketch plan. Final site plans or sketch plans shall
expire 365 days after the date of approval, unless construction has
commenced. The date of approval is established by the most recent date
stamp on the final plans. If construction has commenced, the final site
plan or sketch plan approval shall continue for a period of five years
from the date thereof. If such construction lapses for more than 180
contagious days, said approval shall expire immediately.
B. Extension of site or sketch plan approval. Upon written request
received by the Township prior to the expiration date, the Director of
Community Development may grant a single extension of up to 365
days, provided the plan complies with current standards, including any
amendments to this chapter since the site plan was approved.
C. Resubmission. A site plan that has been denied shall not be resubmitted
for a period of 365 days from the date of denial, except on grounds of
new evidence or the applicant has made material modifications to the
site plan.
D. Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not have the authority to
consider appeals of site plan determinations.
E. Modifications to approved plans. Minor changes to the approved final
site plan or sketch plan may be approved administratively by the
Director of Community Development, provided such changes do not
materially alter the approved site design, intensity of use or demand for
public services. Minor changes include items such as, but not limited to,
adjustments to building location, modifications to approved plant
material, provided the intent of the landscape plan is maintained,
adjustment to pathway location, modification to approved building
material, provided it does not result in a visual change to the
appearance of the building, modification to building size or interior
floor plan, provided the changes do not result in the need for additional
parking and changes required or requested by the Township, county,
state or federal agencies. Modifications that are not determined to be
minor shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission as an amended
site plan or sketch plan, as defined in this article.
F. Rescinding approval. Approval of a site plan or a sketch plan may be
rescinded by the Planning Commission upon determining the site has
not been constructed or maintained in compliance with approved
permits, site or sketch plans or special land use approval. Such action
shall be subject to the following:
§ 170-33.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-33.12
1:751
§ 170-33.13. Landfill permit.
If the grading for an approved final site plan involves filling the site with
a quantity of more than 10,000 cubic yards of earth procured from off the
site, a landfill permit shall be obtained in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 101, Landfills.
(1) A public hearing, in accordance with Article 40, Public Notice, is
required prior to rescinding an approval. At the hearing, the
landowner, or the owner's designated agent, shall be given an
opportunity to present evidence in opposition to the rescission of
the site plan or sketch plan that was previously approved.
(2) After the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make a
decision with regard to rescinding the approval. Written notice of
the decision shall be made to the owner or the owner's designated
agent.
G. Fees. The applicant shall be responsible for payment of all fees
associated with the processing and review of a submittal required per
this article, as established by the Township Board of Trustees.
§ 170-33.12 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-33.13
1:752
ARTICLE 34
Land Division, Combination or Reconfiguration
[Amended 12-20-2007; 9-17-2015]
§ 170-34.1. Intent.
This article is intended to establish a procedure and review standards
for the division and combination of land in a manner consistent with the
Township Master Plan and the purposes of this chapter, to protect property
values and to ensure safe and adequate vehicular access to individual lots.
§ 170-34.2. Applicability.
This article regulates divisions of land and combination of lots. The
following shall be exempted from the requirements of this article:
§ 170-34.3. Submittal requirements.
A. A parcel proposed for subdivision through a recorded plat pursuant to
Chapter 152, Subdivision Control, and the Land Division Act, PA 288,
1967, as amended (MCLA § 560.101 et seq.).
B. A split that results in all parcels that are 40 acres or more in size,
provided such parcels meet the accessibility requirement of
§ 170-34.4D.
C. A parcel proposed as a site condominium pursuant to this chapter and
the Michigan Condominium Act (MCLA § 559.101 et seq.).
A. A PA 132 boundary survey of the subject property, drawn at a scale of at
least one inch equals 100 feet, and prepared by a registered land
surveyor or civil engineer licensed in the State of Michigan. The survey
shall include the information listed in Subsection C below.
B. Documentation from the Wayne County Department of Environment on
the suitability of land for installation of a septic tank and individual well
if public utilities are not available. Locations must be shown on the land
division plan.
C. The survey shall contain the following information:
(1) A location map, at an appropriate scale, illustrating the subject
lot(s) in relationship to surrounding parcels and street system.
(2) Name and address of the property owner, and applicant, if not the
property owner.
(3) Name, address and professional seal of the registered land
surveyor or engineer who prepared the plan and easement
information.
(4) A legal description of the existing lot and each resultant lot.
§ 170-34.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-34.3
1:753
(5) Land area of existing and resultant lot(s) including, and exclusive
of, public rights-of-way or easements.
(6) A drawing that clearly identifies existing and proposed lots,
including net and gross area dimensions, lot width, setbacks and
width-to-depth ratio.
(7) Existing buildings, including setbacks, size and whether the
structure is to be retained or removed.
(8) Documentation that resulting lots have a net area equal to or
greater than the median net area of all lots within 500 feet of the
subject parent parcel, as required by § 170-34.4C(5)(b).
(9) Approximate location of possible MDEQ-regulated wetlands.
(10) Type, location and dimensions of all existing and proposed
easements, including reference to the liber and page number for
recorded easements, the legal description, and an explanation of
the purpose for which the easement is, or was, created.
(11) Existing access points within 150 feet of the subject parcel,
adjacent to or across the street.
(12) Documentation of adequate sight distance at access points.
(13) Design information for private roads, in accordance with Article 28,
Private Roads.
D. If applicable, variances shall be obtained prior to approving a land
division application.
E. Applications for land divisions are reviewed and approved
administratively by Township staff for compliance with the
requirements contained in this article. The Township shall approve or
deny the application within 45 days of a complete submittal.
F. If a private road or shared driveway is required to provide access to any
of the proposed lots, a private road or shared driveway must be
approved in accordance with Article 28, Private Roads, prior to
submitting an application for a land division. Private roads require
approval by the Township Board.
G. The applicant is responsible for recording applicable easements and the
new deed with the Wayne County Register of Deeds.
H. Building permits shall not be issued until the Township receives
recorded copies of the easements and new deed, as applicable.
I. Compliance with Article 23, Tree and Woodlands Replacement, is
required as part of the building permit review and inspection process.
J. Approval of a land division under this article and the Land Division Act
is not a confirmation that resulting parcels comply with Township,
§ 170-34.3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-34.3
1:754
§ 170-34.4. Review standards.
county, and state ordinances or regulations. The burden to assure all
residential lots are buildable under said regulations is the obligation of
the applicant and shall not be used as the basis for seeking a variance.
K. Once lots are combined, or a structure is built on more than one lot, the
lot shall be considered a single lot of record, and future partitioning of
the lot shall require approval under the requirements of this article.
A. The land division or combination shall not create a nonconforming
situation and, when possible, shall eliminate any existing
nonconforming situations or reduce the degree of nonconformity.
B. The application must comply with Section 108 of the Michigan Land
Division Act, Michigan Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended (MCLA
§ 560.108). Accordingly, the following conditions apply:
(1) The division, together with any previous divisions of the same
parent parcel or parent tract, shall result in a number of parcels not
more than the sum of the following, as applicable:
(a) For the first 10 acres or portion thereof in the parent parcel or
parent tract, four parcels.
(b) For each whole 10 acres in excess of the first 10 acres in the
parent parcel or parent tract, one additional parcel, for up to a
maximum of 11 additional parcels.
(c) For each whole 40 acres in excess of the first 120 acres in the
parent parcel or parent tract, one additional parcel.
(2) For a parent parcel or parent tract greater than 20 acres, the
division may result in a total of two parcels, in addition to those
permitted by Subsection B(1) above, if one or both of the following
conditions apply:
(a) No new driveways are required to an existing public road for
any of the resulting parcels under Subsection B(1) of this
section.
(b) One of the resulting parcel(s) under Subsection B(1) and this
subsection comprises more than 60% of the area of the parent
parcel or parent tract.
(3) A parcel of 40 acres or more created by the division of a parent
parcel or parent tract shall be considered "exempt" and shall not be
counted toward the number of parcels permitted under
Subsections B(1) and (2) and is not subject to the approval
requirements of this chapter, if the parcel is accessible.
(4) A parcel or tract created by an exempt split or a division is not a
new parent parcel or parent tract and may be further split without
§ 170-34.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-34.4
1:755
being subject to the platting requirements of this chapter if all of
the following requirements are met:
(a) Not less than 10 years have elapsed since the parcel or tract
was recorded.
(b) The splitting does not result in more than the following number
of parcels, whichever is less:
[1] Two parcels for the first 10 acres or fraction thereof in the
parcel or tract plus one additional parcel for each whole 10
acres in excess of the first 10 acres in the parcel or tract.
[2] Seven parcels; or 10 parcels if one of the resulting parcels
under this subsection comprises not less than 60% of the
area of the parcel or tract being partitioned or split.
(c) The splitting satisfies the requirements of Subsection C below
(resulting lots).
(5) A parcel or tract created under the provisions of Subsection B(4)
above may not be further split without being subject to the platting
requirements of this chapter, except in accordance with the
provisions of Subsection B(4) above.
(6) A lot, out-lot or other parcel of land in a recorded plat shall not be
partitioned or divided into more than four parts under the
provisions of this chapter. A division to a subdivision lot that
creates more than four parts shall require approval as a subdivision
plat under Chapter 152, Subdivision Control.
C. Resulting lots.
(1) The depth-to-width ratio of parcels that are 10 acres in size or less
shall not exceed 3:1, except where such action would reduce an
existing nonconformity.
(2) Each parcel shall provide the minimum lot width as required by
Article 18, Schedule of Regulations, exclusive of any access
easement.
(3) Parcels located at the end of a private access easement shall
provide a forty-foot setback from all property lines, as required by
Figure 28.1, Article 28, Private Roads.
(4) Parcels shall resemble rectangles. Irregular-shaped parcels may be
permitted if the boundaries are dictated by site conditions.
Irregularly shaped parcels may not be permitted solely for the
purpose of meeting parcel area requirements.
(5) Each resulting parcel located within a single-family zoning district
shall meet the following area standards:
§ 170-34.4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-34.4
1:756
(a) Contain a net area required for the zoning district in which it is
located, exclusive of any area occupied by a public street rightof-
way or an access easement.
(b) The net area of each parcel shall not be less than the median
net area of other lots within 500 feet of the parent parcel,
measured from any point along a lot line and located within the
same zoning district. Public land used for recreation or
institutional purposes shall not be included in the median lot
area calculation. If the median net area is more than twice the
minimum lot area required for the district in which the subject
parcel(s) is(are) located, then the required lot area shall be
twice the area required for the district. If there are
condominiums within the five-hundred-foot area, the
calculation for net area shall be calculated as the gross land
area in the condominium project divided by the number of
units in that project. This standard is intended to ensure
harmony with the surrounding land development pattern,
permit good transition between zoning districts, and respect
the reasonable expectation of nearby landowners that future
lot areas will be harmonious with the established pattern.
(6) For a resulting parcel(s) located within any zoning district other
than single-family residential, a conceptual plan must be provided
which demonstrates that the resultant parcel(s) can support a
functionally usable building envelope and a project that complies
with minimum zoning standards for setbacks, parking, greenbelts,
buffer zones, stormwater regulations and site access.
D. Accessibility.
(1) All resultant lots shall have frontage along a public street, private
road or shared driveway. Private roads and shared driveways shall
comply with the provisions of Article 28, Private Roads.
(2) Where a new private road or shared driveway easement is required
to serve the proposed lots, the private road or shared driveway
must first be approved in accordance with Article 28, Private
Roads. Where a private road is proposed to serve the newly created
lots, the roadway must be constructed in accordance with Article
28 or a performance guarantee must be posted with the Township
in order for the lots to be considered "accessible."
(3) New access points shall meet the spacing and alignment standards
of Article 27, Access Management, or a shared access system shall
be provided.
(4) Documentation shall be provided that minimum stopping and
intersection sight distances meet the design criteria of the 1984
American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO) Manual, "A Policy on Geometric Design of
Highways and Streets."
§ 170-34.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-34.4
1:757
E. Approval of a proposed land division shall be subject to the dedication
of any easements necessary for roads, public utilities, nonmotorized
paths or other required public facilities. An accurate legal description
shall be provided for all easements, prepared by a registered land
surveyor or civil engineer, that includes recitation of the purpose of the
easement, with grant to the Township, its successors and assigns, in
perpetuity, of the right to occupy and use such easement for
installation, maintenance and operation of public utilities.
§ 170-34.4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-34.4
1:758
ARTICLE 35
Site Condominiums
[Amended 4-16-2009; 9-17-2015]
§ 170-35.1. Intent.
The intent of this article is to provide regulatory standards for site
condominiums similar to those required for platted subdivision. Site
condominiums are permitted in the State of Michigan by Public Act 59 of
1978, as amended (MCLA § 559.101 et seq.), and are subject to state and
federal regulations and the requirements of this chapter.
§ 170-35.2. Applicability of regulations.
§ 170-35.3. Utilities.
The site condominium plan shall grant utility easements, or the right of
access to utility easements, as required to construct, operate, inspect,
maintain, repair, alter, replace and/or remove pipelines, mains, conduits and
other installations of a similar character for the purpose of providing public
utilities. Public utilities shall include, but not be limited to, conveyance
of sewage, water and stormwater runoff across, through and under the
property subject to such easement and excavating and filling ditches and
trenches necessary for the location of such structures.
§ 170-35.4. Review procedures.
The project must be reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by
the Township Board according to the following procedure:
A. Site condominium projects shall comply with all dimensional
requirements of Article 18, Schedule of Regulations, for the zoning
district in which they are located. Applicable standards shall be applied
in the same manner as they would be applied to platted lots in a
subdivision.
B. All other applicable requirements of this chapter shall apply.
C. Sewer, water, storm drainage, other utility services, and roads shall
conform to the design, layout and improvement standards described in
Chapter 152, Subdivision Control.
D. Private roads and access points shall meet the road design,
construction, and maintenance requirements of Article 28, Private
Roads.
A. The plans shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of this
article, including all appropriate information identified on the site plan
application. A site plan that does not meet the stipulated requirements
shall be considered incomplete and shall not be eligible to begin the
review process.
§ 170-35.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-35.4
1:759
B. A site condominium plan and private road is approved by the Township
Board, upon a recommendation from the Planning Commission, in
accordance with the following sequence.
C. Concept plan review.
(1) The applicant shall submit a concept plan, with information listed
in § 170-35.5, General site condominium submittal requirements,
for review by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission
shall forward a written recommendation to the Township Board to
approve, approve with conditions or deny the concept plan and
private road.
(2) The private road easement and maintenance agreement shall be
reviewed by the Township Attorney.
(3) The Township Board shall consider the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, review the concept plan and approve,
approve with conditions or deny the concept plan. All conditions
imposed by the Planning Commission shall be resolved prior to
approval of the concept plan by the Township Board.
D. Final site plan review.
(1) The Planning Commission shall review the final site plan and shall
forward a written recommendation to approve, approve with
conditions or deny the final site plan to the Township Board.
(2) If the final site plan includes major modifications from the approved
concept plan, the site plan shall be resubmitted for concept plan
review. A determination of a major modification shall be made by
the Township and shall follow the requirements outlined in Article
33, Site Plan Review, for modifications to approved plans.
(3) The final site plan must include all information listed in § 170-35.5,
General site condominium submittal requirements.
(4) Township Board approval is required for the private road, including
approval of the private road easement and maintenance
agreement.
E. The applicant shall submit the approved final site plan to those outside
agencies with review or permit authority over the project. Agency
reviews shall include, but are not limited to, the Wayne County
Department of Public Services, Wayne County Department of the
Environment and Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. If
outside agency review comments result in modifications to the site
layout, grading, detention location or other similar changes, the plan
may be referred back to the Planning Commission to confer compliance
with the design intent of the original approval.
F. Construction plan review. The Township Engineer shall review
construction plans, establish any necessary bonding requirements and
§ 170-35.4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-35.4
1:760
§ 170-35.5. General site condominium submittal requirements.
In addition to the site condominium application and required fee, the
information identified on the application checklist shall be submitted to the
Planning Department in order to initiate the site plan review process. The
proposed site plans shall identify the applicable submittal items identified
in the table below and comply with the applicable standards contained in
this chapter.
confirm that the applicant has obtained all required permits from
outside agencies, prior to the issuance of a building permit. As-built
plans for the project, including all roads and utilities, shall be submitted
in accordance with the requirements of this article. The final master
deed shall be submitted in accordance with § 170-35.11.
G. Amendments.
(1) Proposed amendments to an approved condominium site plan shall
be submitted to the Township Planning Department for a
determination of whether such amendments constitute a major or
minor modification to the approved site plan. Minor amendments
require an administrative review. Major amendments require a new
concept plan submission.
(2) Major amendments or modifications to an approved final or
concept plan include, but are not limited to, modifications which
substantially alter the alignment of a road, change the size or
location of drainage facilities, encroach into areas that were
identified as being preserved, increase the length of a cul-de-sac,
increase traffic volumes, change traffic circulation, increase the
density or intensity of the project, or modify any condition of site
plan approval. Minor amendments or modifications include
changes that are determined to be only minor adjustments to the
location of roads, the size or location of approved drainage facilities
or other changes which do not increase traffic volumes, alter
circulation or increase the intensity or density of a project. The
determination of whether a proposal constitutes a major or minor
amendment shall be made by the Township Planning Department.
A. Concept plan submittal requirements.
General Information
Proof of ownership or authorization from the landowner to submit the
development proposal
The legal description of the property
A site location map
Professional seal, signature, address and phone number of
professional(s) involved in preparation of the plan
Dimensions of project boundaries
§ 170-35.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-35.5
1:761
Existing Site Information
Site analysis map depicting slopes, drainagecourses, water bodies,
natural features and sight distance limitations
Existing and proposed property lines within 200 feet of the proposed
site
Zoning district classification for all parcels within and adjacent to the
site
Existing buildings or other structures on or within 100 feet of the
proposed site
Boundaries of wetlands regulated by the MDEQ (established by a
qualified wetland consultant)
Topography drawn at two-foot intervals or less for the subject site
and a general description of topography within 100 feet of the site;
topography shall be based on USC&GS datum
Lot Information
Number, dimensions and square footage of each lot
Identify limits of ownership, general common elements and limited
common elements
Identify front, side and rear yard setbacks (i.e., building envelopes)
Dimension distances from a shoreline or wetland boundary
Conventional plan alternative (for lot clustering option)
Streets
Traffic impact study, if applicable, per Article 32 of this chapter
(Impact Assessment)
Name, location and right-of-way/easement widths of existing or
proposed public or private streets in or within 250 feet of the proposed
site
Proposed street names
Connection to adjoining street system
Lighting
Streetlight locations and fixture detail
Lighting information per Article 21 of this chapter (Lighting
Standards)
Landscape and Woodlands Replacement
A landscape plan illustrating greenbelts, street trees, detention and
other applicable landscape requirements
Limits of grading identified
Identify all trees eight inches DBH or greater by size, common and
botanical name and general condition
§ 170-35.5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-35.5
1:762
§ 170-35.6. Boundary relocation.
The relocation of boundaries between adjoining condominium units, as
defined and restricted in Section 148 of the Condominium Act (MCLA
§ 559.148), is only permitted if expressly permitted by the condominium
documents and shall conform to all setback requirements of Article 18,
Schedule of Regulations, for the district in which the project is located. The
request shall be submitted to the Township Board for review and approval.
Table identifying trees by number, species and size and whether they
are to remain, be removed or be transplanted
Woodland replacement trees shall be graphically distinguished from
landscape requirements
Utilities
General layout of water and sanitary lines
General plans for stormwater
General plans for storm drainage
Nonmotorized Circulation
Locations of proposed sidewalks, bike paths, and similar facilities
Miscellaneous
Proposed location and detail of mailbox clusters (if provided)
Proposed entrance features, including walls, signs or lighting
B. Final site plan submittal requirements.
Typical elevations, design guidelines or pattern book for home design
Detailed engineering plans
Street design details, including curve radii, cross sections, gradients,
distance, etc.
Documentation of dedication or reservation
Location and sizes of sewer lines, or location of septic fields for sewage
disposal by a method approved by the Wayne County Health
Department or the MDNR; utility information shall be shown for the
plat, plus 200 feet outside of the plat.
Location and sizes of water lines, or location of wells for proposed
water supply by a method approved by the Wayne County Health
Department; utility information shall be shown for the project and for
a distance 200 feet outside of the project.
Location, sizes, and other information on existing and underground
utilities; utility information shall be shown for the project, plus 200 feet
outside of the project.
Planned unit development (PUD) Agreements and open space
community development agreements, if applicable
Master deed and bylaws
§ 170-35.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-35.6
1:763
The applicant shall be responsible for modifying the bylaws and master
deed to reflect changes approved by the Township and for recording the
new documents with the Wayne County Register of Deeds.
§ 170-35.7. Subdivision of unit sites.
Subdivision of condominium unit sites or lots is permitted, subject to
approval by the Township Board and the submittal of the amended bylaws
and master deed to determine the effect of the subdivision on conditions
of zoning or site plan approval, and shall be made as part of the bylaws
and recorded as part of the master deed. The applicant shall be responsible
for modifying the bylaws and master deed to reflect changes approved by
the Township and for recording the new documents with the Wayne County
Register of Deeds.
§ 170-35.8. Water and wastewater.
The condominium project shall comply with and meet all federal, state and
county standards for a fresh water system and wastewater disposal.
§ 170-35.9. Master deed and bylaws.
The master deed and bylaws shall be reviewed for compliance with the
applicable Township requirements and to ensure that an assessment
mechanism has been included to guarantee adequate funding for
maintenance of all common elements. The common area funding
responsibility of the association shall include any necessary drainageways
and the cost to periodically clean out such drainageways to keep them
functioning as intended in the approved drainage plan. The master deed
shall clearly state the responsibility of the owner and co-owners and shall
state that all amendments to the condominium must conform with
Township, county and state laws and regulations. The master deed shall
also include any variances granted by Township, county or state authorities
and include a hold-harmless cause from these variances. Master deeds
submitted to the Township for review shall not permit contraction of the
condominium, whereby co-owners can withdraw from the condominium and
responsibility for maintenance of common elements, without resubmission
of the master deed and bylaws to the Township Board for review and
approval. Fees for these reviews shall be as established from time to time
by the Township Board. The bylaws and master deed must be approved by
the Township Board.
§ 170-35.10. As-built plan and occupancy.
After completion of all site improvements, the developer shall submit an asbuilt
plan. The Chief Building Official shall allow occupancy of the project
upon verification that all improvements have been properly installed. The
Chief Building Official may allow occupancy of the project before all
required improvements are installed, provided that a financial performance
guarantee is given to the Township in the form of cash, irrevocable
§ 170-35.6 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-35.10
1:764
unconditional bank letter of credit (so long as the terms and conditions
of such letter of credit are acceptable to the Township) or other similar
instrument acceptable to the Township. The financial guarantee shall
provide for the installation of improvements. The performance guarantee
shall provide for the improvements. The requirement of Chapter 58, Article
VIII, shall apply to such performance guarantee.
§ 170-35.11. Consolidated master deed and final site plan.
Upon approval of the final condominium site plan, the applicant shall
furnish the Township Clerk a recorded copy of the bylaws and master deed.
A site plan shall be provided on a Mylar sheet of at least 24 inches by 36
inches.
§ 170-35.12. Survey and monument requirements for site
condominiums.
§ 170-35.13. Compliance with other statutes and ordinances.
All condominium projects shall comply with federal, state and local laws,
statutes and ordinances.
A. Monuments shall be set at all boundary corners and deflection points
and at all road right-of-way or private road easement intersection
corners and deflection points. Unit irons shall be set at all condominium
unit corners and deflection points of condominium lot lines.
B. The Township Engineer may grant a delay in the setting the required
monuments or irons up to one year, on condition that the petitioner
deposit cash, a certified check or an irrevocable bank letter of credit
payable to the Township in an amount to be determined by the
Township based on the actual cost to set the monuments and irons.
Such deposit shall be returned to the developer upon receipt of a
certificate by a surveyor, registered in the State of Michigan, that the
monuments and irons have been set as required. If the developer
defaults, the Township shall promptly require a registered surveyor to
set the monuments and irons in the ground as shown on the
condominium site plans, at a cost not to exceed the amount of the
financial guarantee.
C. Road rights-of-way and private road easements shall be described
separately from individual condominium units and shall be accurately
delineated by bearings and distances on the condominium plan and the
final site plan. Road rights-of-way shall be for roadway purposes and for
the purposes of locating, installing, maintaining, and replacing public
utilities. The petitioner shall dedicate any required easements to the
Township for all public water and sanitary sewer lines and
appurtenances.
§ 170-35.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-35.13
1:765

ARTICLE 36
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-35.13
1:767

ARTICLE 37
Temporary Uses, Events, Structures and Buildings
[Amended 9-17-2015; 9-26-2019]
§ 170-37.1. Intent.
The intent of this article is to establish procedures and consistent regulation
of temporary uses and structures. This article provides procedures for
allowing temporary uses and structures, while ensuring that they are truly
temporary in nature, minimize adverse impact on surrounding uses and
retain a high-quality environment.
§ 170-37.2. Submittal requirements.
Temporary use requests will be reviewed administratively by Township staff.
The staff will coordinate reviews by Township Police, Fire, Planning and
Building Departments. A building compliance permit may be required as
defined by § 170-42.1(E)(6) and (7).
A. A completed application and required fee.
B. A written statement describing the requested use, operations plan,
traffic control and the proposed time period.
C. A plot plan or sketch that illustrates the following, plus any other
information needed to demonstrate compliance with the specific use
requirements contained within this article:
(1) The site boundary.
(2) Adjacent uses and zoning districts.
(3) Location of fire hydrants.
(4) Existing and proposed buildings or structures.
(5) Boundaries of proposed sales or activity areas.
(6) Proposed lighting.
(7) Parking calculations based on the standards of Article 26, Off-
Street Parking and Loading.
(8) Proposed traffic circulation.
(9) Location and method of waste disposal.
(10) Any other information deemed necessary by the Planning and
Building Departments.
D. Proof of ownership or, if the applicant is not the owner of the land,
written permission from the owner to use the property for said use.
E. Information establishing reasonable liability insurance is carried.
§ 170-37.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-37.2
1:769
§ 170-37.3. Seasonal sales on sidewalks.
§ 170-37.4. Temporary sales within parking lots.
F. Outside agency permits and approvals, if necessary.
A. Sales shall be located on a sidewalk of a permitted principal building.
B. Sales shall only be allowed in the B-1 and B-3 districts, or for an
approved retail use such as a PUD, and only as an accessory use to a
permitted retail use.
C. An annual permit shall be obtained from the Planning Department.
D. All merchandise or services sold during the sale shall also be sold
within the store or be live seasonal items such as flowers, fruit/
vegetables, pumpkins, Christmas trees or other similar products.
E. Sales shall not obstruct traffic, ingress/egress to the building, and the
sidewalk shall remain ADA compliant.
F. Merchandise/display shall be a maximum 10 feet from the building.
G. The minimum required five-foot-wide unobstructed sidewalk, or eight
feet wide if the sidewalk abuts a parking space, shall be maintained for
pedestrian traffic.
H. Sale items shall not occupy more than 75% of the length of the sidewalk
in front of the store.
I. If outdoor display of merchandise is located under a canopy, the canopy
must be suppressed per fire department requirements.
J. All structures associated with the outdoor display shall be temporary,
yet have a finished appearance that is consistent with the image of the
building. Pallets or cardboard boxes shall not be used for displays.
K. All items associated with a sale shall be removed within five days after
the conclusion of the sale.
L. Sales are permitted May 1 through December 31 (within a calendar
year).
A. Sales shall only be allowed in the B-1 and B-3 districts, or for an
approved retail use such as a PUD, and only as an accessory use to a
permitted retail use.
B. All merchandise sold during the sale shall be regular merchandise that
is sold within the store or be live seasonal items such as flowers,
pumpkins, Christmas trees or other similar products.
C. The area occupied by the sale shall not exceed 10% of the floor area of
the permanent retail space, or 2,000 square feet, whichever is less, and
§ 170-37.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-37.4
1:770
§ 170-37.5. Grand openings.
New businesses may have a one-time grand opening event subject to the
following conditions:
§ 170-37.6. Outdoor cafes and eating areas.
the longest dimension of a tent shall not exceed the width of the
permanent retail space of the business.
D. Sales shall be located in a manner that does not conflict with vehicular
or pedestrian circulation.
E. The minimum amount of required parking shall be maintained outside
of the sale area.
F. The hours of operation shall be the same as the principal business.
G. One temporary sign, not to exceed 12 square feet in size, is permitted.
H. Sales shall not exceed 60 days total within a calendar year.
A. The event shall not exceed 10 days and shall be conducted within 30
days of opening the business.
B. Two temporary signs, or one temporary sign and one nonmoving
inflatable, are permitted, provided they are not illuminated. Temporary
signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in size.
C. The event shall not negatively impact traffic, site circulation or
surrounding properties.
A. Permits shall be granted for May 1 through October 31. All furniture
and fixtures shall be removed after October 31.
B. Amplified music is not permitted within 300 feet of a residential lot or
dwelling as measured from the seating area to the adjacent residential
lot line.
C. Where there is wait staff or alcohol service, outdoor seating areas shall
be enclosed. Enclosures shall consist of metal railing, wood railing,
brick walls or other high-quality material.
D. The proposed area must meet Michigan barrier-free design rules.
E. When located on a sidewalk, the minimum required five-foot-wide
unobstructed space shall be maintained for pedestrian traffic. The
width of the unobstructed space shall be at least eight feet in locations
where a sidewalk abuts parking.
F. Parking shall be provided per Article 26, Off-Street Parking and
Loading/Unloading.
§ 170-37.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-37.7
1:771
§ 170-37.7. Temporary construction buildings or structures.
Temporary construction buildings or structures shall be reviewed in
accordance with the following standards:
§ 170-37.8. Temporary sales office.
Temporary sales offices shall be reviewed in accordance with the following
standards:
A. Temporary construction buildings or structures are permitted for a
period of up to 12 months.
B. Adequate parking, paved or gravel surface, must be provided based on
the nature of the use and appropriate ordinance standards.
C. Landscaping may be required based on site location, visibility and
duration of the trailer.
D. If electricity is required, an electrical permit is required.
E. Trailers must meet the following requirements.
(1) One trailer per builder or contractor.
(2) Setback requirements for the zoning district must be met.
(3) Anchored per Building Department requirements.
(4) Must have skirting.
(5) Roads and parking areas must be an all-weather surface capable of
supporting a fire apparatus.
(6) Meet presently adopted Michigan Building Code, Michigan OSHA
and Michigan barrier-free requirements.
(7) Must have one ten-pound ABC fire extinguisher.
(8) Obtain C permit or street protection permit from Wayne County.
F. Storage of materials under the trailer is not permitted.
G. All equipment, materials, goods, poles, wires and other items
associated with the temporary building shall be removed from the
premises within five days of issuing a final certificate of occupancy.
A. Permitted in residential developments only when construction of a
model home for sales operations occurs simultaneously with the permit
for a temporary sales trailer. Upon issuing a temporary certificate of
occupancy for the model home, the approval for the temporary sales
office shall expire.
B. Adequate parking, paved or gravel, must be provided based on nature
of the use and appropriate ordinance standards.
§ 170-37.7 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-37.8
1:772
§ 170-37.9. Garage sales, estate sales, auctions and other similar
events.
When proposed on an individual homeowner's lot, a permit is not required.
§ 170-37.10. Portable moving and storage containers and roll-off
dumpsters.
C. Landscaping may be required based on site location, visibility and
duration of time that the sales office will remain on site.
D. If electricity is required, an electrical permit is required.
E. Trailers must meet the following requirements.
(1) Anchored per Building Department requirements.
(2) Must have skirting.
(3) Setback requirements for the zoning district must be met.
(4) Located in an area that provides minimal impact from the road or
adjacent property.
(5) Roads and parking areas must be an all-weather surface capable of
supporting a fire apparatus.
(6) Water meter and plumbing permit.
(7) Meet presently adopted Michigan Building Code, Michigan OSHA
and Michigan barrier-free requirements.
(8) Trailers with more than three risers must have a guardrail.
(9) Must have one ten-pound ABC fire extinguisher.
(10) Obtain C permit or street protection permit from Wayne County.
F. Storage of materials under the trailer is not permitted.
A. A single portable moving and storage container may be placed on an
occupied lot for the purpose of loading or unloading personal
belongings to be transported to another location for a period of up to 14
days.
B. Portable moving and storage containers or roll-off dumpsters used in
conjunction with a home improvement or construction project are
permitted for the duration of an active building permit.
C. In the event of remodeling that does not require a Township permit,
flood damage, fire damage, asbestos removal or similar catastrophes or
emergency repairs, a single portable moving and storage container or
roll-off dumpster is permitted on an improved driveway surface for a
period of up to 30 days.
§ 170-37.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-37.10
1:773
§ 170-37.11. Membrane structures (tents, canopies and other
similar structures).
D. Containers shall be located on an improved driveway surface and shall
not be located in the public right-of-way or a private road easement.
A. Rental of membrane structures for the purpose of special events such
as graduations, weddings and other similar events or the use of
membrane structures for temporary storage is permitted on residential
properties for a period of time up to seven days.
B. Membrane structures used for the purpose of parking or storage of
vehicles, recreation vehicles and/or equipment, maintenance
equipment and utility trailers are prohibited.
§ 170-37.10 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-37.11
1:774
ARTICLE 38
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-37.11
1:775

ARTICLE 39
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-37.11
1:777

ARTICLE 40
Administration and Public Notice
[Amended 4-16-2009; 11-19-2009; 11-19-2015]
§ 170-40.1. Intent.
This article sets forth the responsibility and scope of authority for the
Township Board of Trustees, Township Planning Commission, Township
Zoning Board of Appeals and zoning enforcement officials, including the
Building Officials, Director of Community Development, Ordinance
Enforcement Officer and designees.
§ 170-40.2. Withholding of approval.
The Planning Commission, Board of Trustees or Zoning Board of Appeals
(ZBA) may withhold approval for any use, site plan, special land use or other
approval required by this chapter pending approvals required by state,
county or federal agencies/departments.
§ 170-40.3. Board of Trustees.
The Township Board of Trustees shall have the following responsibilities
and authority pursuant to this chapter:
§ 170-40.4. Township Planning Commission.
A. Pursuant to the authority conferred by the Michigan Zoning Enabling
Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended, the Township Board of
Trustees shall adopt the Zoning Ordinance and text or map
amendments recommended by the Planning Commission or by court
decree.
B. Township Board approval is required for all development options in
accordance with Article 20, site condominiums in accordance with
Article 35, and subdivision plats in accordance with Chapter 152,
Subdivision Control.
C. The Township Board shall set fees for permits, applications and
requests for action pursuant to the regulations set forth in this chapter.
In the absence of establishing a fee for a specific permit or application,
the Director of Community Development or other appropriate
enforcement officer shall assess the fee based on the estimated costs of
processing and reviewing the permit or application.
D. In accordance with Michigan Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended,
members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the
Township Supervisor with approval by the Township Board.
E. In accordance with Michigan Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended,
members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the
Township Supervisor with approval by the Township Board.
§ 170-40.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-40.4
1:779
A. The Planning Commission shall have the powers and duties provided for
zoning commissions pursuant to the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act,
Public Act 110 of 2006.
B. Members of the Planning Commission shall be nominated by the
Township Supervisor and approved by the Board of Trustees. The
qualifications, terms, filling of vacancies, compensation and operation
of the Planning Commission shall be in accordance with Act 110 of
2006, as amended.
(1) The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members. All
members shall be qualified electors of the Township. No more than
one member of the Township Board shall be a member of the
Planning Commission.
(2) Members shall serve three-year terms.
(3) The Planning Commission shall annually elect a Chairperson and
Vice Chairperson from its membership and create and fill such
other offices or committees as it may deem advisable.
(4) Members may be removed by the Board of Trustees for
misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office upon written
charges and after public hearing.
(5) Members shall disqualify themselves from a vote in which the
member has a conflict of interest. Failure of a member to disqualify
themselves from a vote in which the member has a conflict of
interest constitutes malfeasance in office.
(6) The Planning Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of
business and shall keep a record of its transactions, findings and
recommendations.
C. The Planning Commission shall have the following responsibilities and
authority pursuant to this chapter:
(1) Formulation of the Zoning Ordinance, reviewing amendments to
the Zoning Ordinance, holding hearings on a proposed Zoning
Ordinance or amendment and reporting its findings and
recommendations to the Board of Trustees.
(2) Review and approval of special land uses in accordance with Article
30 and site plans in accordance with Article 33.
(3) Making recommendations to the Township Board for all
development options in accordance with Article 20, site
condominiums in accordance with Article 35, and subdivision plats
in accordance with Chapter 152, Subdivision Control.
(4) The formulation and adoption of a Master Plan as a guide for
development of the Township.
§ 170-40.4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-40.4
1:780
§ 170-40.5. Zoning Board of Appeals.
(5) Other matters relating to land development referred to it by the
Township Board.
A. The ZBA is created pursuant to the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act,
Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended.
B. Members of the ZBA shall be nominated by the Township Supervisor
and approved by the Board of Trustees. The qualifications, terms, filling
of vacancies, compensation and operation of the ZBA shall be in
accordance with Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended.
(1) The ZBA shall consist of seven members. All members shall be
qualified electors of the Township.
(2) The first member shall be a member of the Township Planning
Commission.
(3) The second member may be a member of the Township Board of
Trustees.
(4) The remaining members shall be representative of the population
and various interests in the Township. An employee or contractor of
the Board of Trustees may not serve as a member of the ZBA.
(5) Members shall serve three-year terms, except for members of the
Planning Commission and Board of Trustees, whose terms shall be
limited to the time they are members of those bodies.
(6) The ZBA shall annually elect a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.
The Board of Trustees member shall not serve as the Chairperson.
(7) Members may be removed by the Board of Trustees for
misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office upon written
charges and after a public hearing.
(8) Members shall disqualify themselves from a vote in which the
member has a conflict of interest. Failure of a member to disqualify
themselves from a vote in which the member has a conflict of
interest constitutes malfeasance in office.
(9) The ZBA shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall
keep a record of its transactions, findings and recommendations.
C. The ZBA shall have the following responsibilities and authority
pursuant to this chapter:
(1) To act on all questions pertaining to the administration of the
Zoning Ordinance, interpretation of zoning district boundaries and
appeals from any decisions made by an administrative official or
body charged with enforcement of this chapter.
§ 170-40.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-40.5
1:781
§ 170-40.6. Zoning enforcement officials.
As specified throughout this chapter, certain actions necessary for the
implementation of this chapter shall be administered by the Director of
Community Development, Building Official, and other employees,
inspectors and officials of the Township. In carrying out their designated
duties, all such enforcement officers shall administer this chapter precisely
as written and shall not make changes or vary the terms of this chapter.
Responsibilities of the Director of Community Development, Chief Building
Official, code enforcement and designees shall be as follows:
(2) To hear and decide non-use-variance requests related to the
standards in this chapter.
(3) The ZBA shall not have the authority to overturn a Planning
Commission decision to deny a site plan or special land use or to
modify any conditions attached to respective approvals.
(4) Comply with the provisions of Article 41, Zoning Board of Appeals.
D. Denial of a decision by the ZBA may be appealed to the Wayne County
Circuit Court in accordance with court procedures. Any appeal must be
filed before 30 days after the signed decision or 21 days after the
minutes are approved, whichever comes first.
A. Provide citizens and public officials with information relative to this
chapter and related matters.
B. Provide applicants with appropriate forms and procedures related to
site plan review, rezoning and other zoning matters.
C. Review and forward to the Planning Commission all applications for site
plan review, special land use review, petitions for amendments to this
chapter and other applications which must be reviewed by the Planning
Commission.
D. Forward to the ZBA all materials related to applications for appeals,
variances or other matters on which the ZBA is required to act.
E. Forward to the Board of Trustees all recommendations of the Planning
Commission concerning matters on which the Township Board is
required to take final action.
F. Periodically report to the Planning Commission on the status of the
Township's planning and zoning administration.
G. Maintain a current Zoning Map, Zoning Ordinance text and office
records by recording all amendments and filing all official minutes and
documents in a timely manner.
H. Review applications to determine compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 170-40.5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-40.6
1:782
§ 170-40.7. Public notice.
Any action requiring a public hearing shall comply with the Michigan
Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006, as amended, and other public
notification provisions of this section.
I. Perform inspections of structures, uses and premises to ensure
proposed actions or conditions are, and will remain, in compliance with
this chapter.
J. Investigate alleged violations of this chapter and enforce appropriate
corrective measures when required, including issuance of violation
notices, issuance of stop-work orders and revoking permits.
K. Issue certificates of occupancy in accordance with § 170-42.6 when all
applicable provisions have been met.
L. Perform other related duties required to administer this chapter.
A. Public hearing notices shall include the following:
(1) Describe the nature of the request, such as rezoning, text
amendment, special land use, planned unit development, variance,
appeal, ordinance interpretation or other purpose.
(2) Include a list of all existing street addresses within the subject
property. Street addresses do not need to be listed when 11 or more
adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, text amendments or
when the request is for an ordinance interpretation not involving a
specific property. If the property does not have an address, another
means of identification may be used.
(3) Indicate the date, time and location of the public hearing.
(4) Describe when and where written comments will be received
concerning the request.
B. The public notice shall be published and mailed in accordance with the
following:
(1) Notice shall be published and mailed a minimum of 15 days prior to
the public hearing.
(2) Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Township.
(3) Notice shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of
property for which approval is being considered.
(4) Notice shall be sent to all persons to whom real property is
assessed within 300 feet of the subject property and to one
occupant of all structures within 300 feet of the subject property,
regardless of whether the property or occupant is located within
the Township. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term
§ 170-40.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-40.7
1:783
§ 170-40.8. Fees.
Any application for action pursuant to the regulations set forth in this
chapter shall be subject to, and accompanied by, a fee as established by the
Township Board of Trustees.
"occupant" may be used. Notification is not required to more than
one occupant of a structure; except if the structure contains more
than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different
individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, one
occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive the notice. In
the case of a single structure containing more than four dwelling
units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different
individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may
be given to the manager or owner of the structure, who shall
be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the
structure.
(5) Rezoning requests involving 11 or more adjacent properties, a text
amendment, an ordinance interpretation request that does not
involve a specific property and appeals of an administrative
decision shall only require notice in the newspaper.
(6) If an ordinance interpretation or appeal of an administrative
decision involves a specific property, notice shall also be given to
the person bringing the appeal.
(7) Notice shall be deemed mailed by its deposit during normal
business hours for delivery with the United States Postal Service or
other public or private delivery service.
C. Any approvals granted pursuant to this article shall be effective seven
days after publication, pursuant to the provisions of Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006, as amended.
A. Fees shall be collected in advance of any reviews, inspections or
issuance of permits or approvals.
B. Upon notification of deficient fees, any applications or permits under
review shall be suspended, and new applications will not be accepted
until the required fees are collected.
C. Applicants are responsible for covering reasonable costs and expenses,
which may include, but shall not be limited to, attorney fees,
engineering fees, planning fees, meetings, costs and fees for other
services or consultants who may be required to assist the Township for
studies or reports pertaining to the matters in question.
D. The assessment and payment of application or permit fees shall be in
addition to the requirements for a performance guarantee as specified
in § 170-33.10.
§ 170-40.7 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-40.8
1:784
§ 170-40.9. Penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be responsible
for a municipal civil infraction, per the requirements Chapter 58, Article IX.
Each day that a violation continues after notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense, subject to the following penalties:
§ 170-40.10. Declaration of public nuisance.
Any structure that is erected, repaired, altered, or converted, or any use
of premises or land which is begun or changed subsequent to the time of
passage of this chapter and in violation of any of the provisions thereof, is
hereby declared a public nuisance per se and may be abated by order of any
court of competent jurisdiction.
E. Fees shall not be assessed for applications or permits filed in the public
interest by a municipal department or Township official.
F. Unused fees, which are not used by the Township, shall be refunded to
the applicant after site plan approval or project closeout, as
appropriate.
A. The following civil fines shall apply, unless a different fine is specified in
connection with a particular section:
(1) The first offense shall be $300, plus costs and other sanctions.
(2) Any repeat offense shall be $500, plus costs and other sanctions,
for each offense.
B. In addition to ordering the responsible defendant to pay a civil fine,
costs, damages and expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be
authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or
enjoin a violation of this chapter.
C. Each act of violation, and each day upon which any such violation shall
occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
D. In addition to any remedies provided for by the Code of the Charter
Township of Northville, any equitable or other remedies available may
be sought.
E. The Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to impose costs, damages
and expenses as provided by law.
F. A municipal civil infraction shall not be a lesser included offense of a
criminal offense or of an ordinance violation which is not a civil
infraction.
§ 170-40.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-40.10
1:785

ARTICLE 41
Zoning Board of Appeals
[Amended 4-16-2009; 11-19-2009; 12-17-2015]
§ 170-41.1. Intent.
The intent of this article is to outline procedures and standards for the
Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) when considering requests for variances and
appeals.
§ 170-41.2. Public notice and approvals.
§ 170-41.3. Appeals.
Any person or entity aggrieved by a decision of the Township staff or
Planning Commission may appeal the decision to the ZBA.
A. The ZBA shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with § 170-40.7.
Any person may testify at the hearing, either in person, by duly
authorized agent or by submitting written comments.
B. A use variance requires approval from 2/3 of the entire ZBA
membership (five votes).
C. All other actions by the ZBA require approval by majority vote of the
entire ZBA membership (four votes).
D. The number of votes is based on the entire ZBA membership,
regardless of the number of members present at a meeting.
A. An appeal shall be made within 30 days of a decision by the Township.
B. The grounds of the appeal shall be specified in writing by the appellant.
C. All documentation upon which the action was taken shall be provided to
the ZBA.
D. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed, except if the person from whom the appeal is taken certifies
to the ZBA, after the appeal has been filed, that a stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings may be
stayed only by a restraining order issued by the ZBA or circuit court.
E. The ZBA shall reverse, modify or refer back with findings a decision of
the Township staff or the Planning Commission only if it finds that the
action or decision appealed meets at least one of the following
conditions:
(1) Was arbitrary or capricious.
(2) Was based on an erroneous finding of fact.
(3) Constituted an abuse of discretion.
§ 170-41.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-41.3
1:787
§ 170-41.4. Variances.
Types of variances and review criteria are identified below. The ZBA shall
have the authority to grant a lesser variance than requested. In addition,
the ZBA may require conditions related to the site, operation and/or use to
mitigate the impact of any variance.
(4) Was based on erroneous interpretation of this chapter.
A. Non-use variances. The ZBA may authorize a variance from this chapter
when the applicant demonstrates all of the following conditions exist:
(1) Practical difficulty. A practical difficulty exists on the subject site,
such as exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape or area, or
presence of floodplain or topographic conditions, and strict
compliance with the requirements of this chapter would render
conformity unnecessarily burdensome. The practical difficulty shall
have bearing on the subject site, or use of the subject site, and not
to the applicant personally. Economic hardship or profit potential is
not a consideration for practical difficulty.
(2) Unique situation. The demonstrated practical difficulty results from
exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying
to the subject site at the time the ordinance was adopted, or
amended, which are different than typical properties in the same
zoning district or the vicinity.
(3) Not self-created. The conditions resulting in a variance request can
not be self-created and would have existed regardless of ownership
of the property.
(4) Substantial justice. The variance would provide substantial justice
by granting property rights similar to those enjoyed by the majority
of other properties in the same zoning district or the vicinity. The
decision shall not bestow upon the property special development
rights not enjoyed by other properties in the same zoning district or
which might result in substantial adverse impacts on properties in
the vicinity. Adverse impacts may include, but are not limited to,
the supply of light and air, significant increases in traffic, increased
odors, noise, use, an increase in the danger of fire, or other
activities which may endanger the public health, safety or welfare.
(5) Minimum variance necessary. The variance shall be the minimum
necessary to grant relief created by the practical difficulty.
(6) Compliance with other laws. The variance shall be the minimum
necessary to comply with state or federal laws, such as farming
activities protected by the Right to Farm Act or accessibility to
meet the needs of individuals with disabilities protected under the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
§ 170-41.3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-41.4
1:788
B. Variance from Article 28, Private Roads. The ZBA may grant a variance
from the standards of Article 28, Private Roads, when the applicant
demonstrates all of the following conditions exist:
(1) A practical difficulty exists on the subject site, such as exceptional
narrowness, shape, area or topographic features, presence of
quality trees, limited sight distance, wetlands, floodplain or other
physical conditions related to the property, that makes compliance
with the requirements of this chapter unnecessarily burdensome or
would result in unnecessary loss of important natural features.
(2) Granting the variance will not compromise traffic operations,
public safety or accessibility by emergency vehicles.
C. Variance from Article 29, Wireless Communications. The ZBA may grant
a variance from the standards of Article 29, Wireless Communications,
when the applicant demonstrates that one or more of the following
conditions exist:
(1) The location requirements of this chapter do not reasonably
address the applicant's coverage or capacity needs.
(2) Co-location is not feasible because existing structures cannot
support the facility, co-location would result in unreasonable
interference, or reasonable financial terms are not available.
(3) The tower is self-collapsing and the setback area provided will
accommodate the structure and provide a reasonable buffer should
it fall or break.
(4) An increased tower height is required as a result of signal
interference due to topography, tall buildings, trees or other
obstructions or would reduce the number of towers to the benefit of
the Township.
(5) Negative impacts are mitigated through provision for future colocation.
(6) The wireless communications and accessory facilities are designed
to be compatible with the existing character of the proposed site,
neighborhood and general area, such as a steeple, bell tower or
similar form.
D. Use variance. A use variance may be requested when a proposed use is
not listed as a permitted or a special land use in the district in which the
property is located. Approval of a use variance requires 2/3 of the entire
ZBA membership (five votes). Use variances shall only be granted when
the applicant demonstrates that all of the following conditions exist:
(1) The proposed use is compatible with existing or planned uses on
surrounding properties.
§ 170-41.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-41.4
1:789
(2) The site cannot reasonably be used for any of the uses allowed
under current zoning.
(3) Public utilities and streets are sufficient to accommodate the
proposed use.
(4) An unnecessary hardship exists on the subject property due to very
unique circumstances, such as:
(a) Exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of the property;
(b) Exceptional topographic conditions or other extraordinary
situation pertaining to the land, building or structure;
(c) The use or development of the property immediately adjoining
the subject property; or
(d) Any other physical situation pertaining to the land, building or
structure as determined by the ZBA.
(5) The requested use variance is the minimum necessary to permit a
reasonable use of the land.
(6) The conditions causing the use variance request were not created
by any affirmative action of the applicant and would have existed
regardless of ownership of the property.
E. Fence variance. The ZBA may grant a variance from the standards of
Article 31, Fences, when the applicant demonstrates all of the following
conditions exist:
(1) A practical difficulty is present on the property and results in
conditions which do not generally exist throughout the Township.
(2) The practical difficulty which will result from a failure to grant the
variance includes substantially more than mere inconvenience or
an inability to attain a higher financial return.
(3) Granting the variance will result in substantial justice, considering
the hardships that will be suffered by a failure of the ZBA to grant a
variance, the rights of others whose property would be affected by
the variance and the public and the general purpose of the fence
standards.
F. Text interpretations. The ZBA shall be responsible for interpreting the
provisions or meaning of standards contained in this chapter in such a
way as to carry out the stated intent of the zoning districts, chapter and
the goals of the Master Plan. In making an interpretation, the ZBA shall
adhere to the following:
(1) The ZBA shall avoid broad interpretations.
§ 170-41.4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-41.4
1:790
§ 170-41.5. Conditions.
Any approval granted by the ZBA may be made subject to conditions,
provided the conditions ensure the applicable review standards are
satisfied. For site plan or design-related conditions, the ZBA may require
the plans be reviewed and approved by staff or the Planning Commission.
Any conditions must be made part of the record of the approval. The ZBA
may require that a bond or performance guarantee be furnished to insure
compliance with certain conditions.
§ 170-41.6. Limits on authority.
The ZBA shall not have the power to alter or change the zoning district
classification of any property, approve a variance within special
development options, except as permitted by Article 20, overturn a Planning
Commission decision to deny a special land use, or make ordinance text
amendments.
§ 170-41.7. Expiration of approvals.
Variances shall be valid for one year, except for the following conditions:
(2) Text interpretations shall be confined to the question raised, shall
be based on a thorough reading and understanding of the entire
chapter and shall not have the effect of amending the chapter.
(3) If the chapter is silent on a particular use, and the use is not
deemed similar to others already listed in the chapter, the ZBA does
not have the authority to make such an interpretation; instead, the
applicant must seek a use variance from the ZBA or an amendment
from the Board of Trustees following an evaluation, public hearing
and recommendation by the Planning Commission.
G. Map interpretations. The ZBA shall be responsible for interpreting the
boundaries of the Zoning Map where the actual alignment of streets or
natural features used to separate zoning districts varies from the
alignment shown on the Zoning Map or where the zoning district
boundary does not follow property lines but was intended to do so.
(1) Map interpretations should be made based on relevant historical
information, including prior editions of the Zoning Map, and
current and prior editions of the Master Plan Map.
H. Text amendments. The ZBA may suggest text amendments to the
Planning Commission and Board of Trustees based upon the frequent
application for, or granting of, specific variances or problems with
interpretation. Suggestions shall be submitted in writing to the
Planning Commission.
A. If the Planning Commission grants an extension of an approved site
plan, the variance approval shall expire when, or if, the site plan
approval expires.
§ 170-41.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-41.7
1:791
B. If a building permit is obtained and meaningful construction is
continually proceeding toward completion in accordance with the terms
of the building permit.
§ 170-41.7 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-41.7
1:792
ARTICLE 42
Building Permits
[Amended 4-16-2009; 11-17-2011; 11-19-2015]
§ 170-42.1. Building permits and compliance permits.
A. A building permit or compliance permit shall only be issued for the
erection, alteration, repair, modification or use of any structure or part
thereof which complies with the provisions of this chapter and other
applicable Township requirements.
B. A compliance permit must be obtained for certain structures or uses
which are not subject to a building permit. The compliance permit
signifies that the intended use or structure complies with the provisions
of this chapter and other applicable Township requirements.
C. The terms "altered" or "repaired" shall include any structural changes,
stairways, type of construction, type, class or kind of occupancy, light or
ventilation, means of egress or ingress or any other changes affecting
or regulated by the Building Code, Housing Law of Michigan (MCLA
§ 125.401 et seq.) or this chapter.
D. The Building Official shall make the final determination regarding
applicability of a building permit or compliance permit, based on the
information submitted by the applicant and subject to applicable
legislation and Township standards.
E. A compliance permit must be obtained for certain structures as
generally identified below. Issuance of a compliance permit shall not
waive any provision of this chapter, other Township requirements or
requirements of other permit agencies. A compliance permit is not
required for a repair or replacement of items that have been previously
approved for a compliance permit. Compliance permits include, but are
not limited to, the following:
(1) One-story detached accessory structures in nonresidential zoning
districts having a floor area of less than 120 square feet.
(2) One-story detached accessory structures in residential zoning
districts having a floor area of less than 200 square feet.
(3) Fences greater than 36 inches and six feet or less in height.
(4) Retaining walls less than four feet in height, measured from the
bottom of the footing to the top of the wall.
(5) Concrete, brick pavers or other similar hardscape surfaces, less
than 30 inches above grade.
(6) Tents greater than 200 square feet, when utilized for nonresidential
uses.
(7) Construction and sales trailers.
§ 170-42.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-42.2
1:793
§ 170-42.2. Change in use.
A building or compliance permit is required for any change in the use of
land, type of use or occupancy of any structure or for a change to the
amount of parking required by this chapter. For changes in use, additional
improvements may be required to bring the site into compliance with
current standards.
§ 170-42.3. Building requirements.
§ 170-42.4. Application requirements.
The following information is required:
§ 170-42.5. Final inspection.
The holder of a building or compliance permit shall request an inspection
upon completion of the work. Any damages occurring during construction
shall be restored to their original condition. Upon successful completion, a
certificate of occupancy or other applicable approval will be granted.
§ 170-42.6. Certificates of occupancy.
Structures, or parts thereof, shall not be occupied or used until a certificate
of occupancy is issued.
A. Any structure shall be subject to the Township requirements for
submission of architectural plans, code compliance, inspection and
inspection fees.
B. A building permit for a structure located within a proposed
condominium project shall not be issued until a master deed has been
reviewed and approved by the Township and the Township has received
a recorded copy from the applicant. Prior to recording the master deed,
the Township may issue permits for site grading. No permit issued, or
work undertaken, prior to recording of the master deed shall grant any
rights or any expectancy interest in the approval of the master deed.
A. Plans shall indicate the location, nature and extent of the proposed
work.
B. Plans shall provide sufficient detail to demonstrate compliance with the
building code and other relevant ordinances and regulations.
A. Accessory structures and uses may be included in the certificate of
occupancy for the principal use, provided they are included with the
permit, shown on the construction documents and completed at the
same time as the principal use.
B. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued in advance of a final
certificate of occupancy in situations where certain building or site
improvements are not complete, provided the portion of the building or
§ 170-42.2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-42.6
1:794
§ 170-42.7. Stop-work orders.
site complies with the provisions of this chapter and the building code
and does not pose a threat to public health, safety or welfare. The
Building Official may establish a time limit for the temporary certificate
of occupancy. Failure to obtain a final certificate of occupancy within
the specified time shall constitute a violation.
C. A final certificate of occupancy shall be issued upon compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and other applicable regulations. If a final
certificate of occupancy is denied, written notification will be provided
to the applicant within five days.
D. A certificate of occupancy shall remain in effect until the use of the
structure or land changes.
A. Upon notice from the Building Official that any use is being conducted
or that any work is being pursued contrary to the provisions of this
chapter, such work or use shall be stopped immediately. The stop-work
order shall be issued in writing and given to the owner of the subject
property, to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work or
posted on the subject property. The stop-work order shall state the
conditions, if any, under which work or the use will be permitted to
resume.
B. Any person who continues to work in or about the structure, land or use
after a stop-work order is issued shall be in violation of this chapter,
except for such work as is necessary to remove a violation or correct an
unsafe condition.
§ 170-42.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-42.7
1:795

ARTICLE 43
Amendments
[Amended 4-16-2009; 11-19-2015]
§ 170-43.1. Intent.
The intent of this article is to outline the process for amending the text of
this chapter or the boundaries of any zoning district.
§ 170-43.2. Initiation of amendments.
The Board of Trustees, on recommendation from the Planning Commission
or on petition, may amend, supplement or change the district boundaries
or the regulations established herein pursuant to the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006) and Article 43, Amendments. Text
amendments may be initiated by any governmental body or any interested
person or organization. An amendment to the Zoning Map may be initiated
by any governmental body or freehold interest in the subject property, a
possessor interest entitled to exclusive possession, a contractual interest
which may become a freehold interest, an exclusive possessory interest
entitled to exclusive possession or which is specifically enforceable.
§ 170-43.3. Applications.
Except for requests initiated by the Township Board or Planning
Commission, an application is required for an amendment to the text of this
chapter or an amendment to change the zoning classification of a particular
property.
§ 170-43.4. Procedure.
A. An application to amend the Zoning Map shall include the following
information:
(1) A written description of how the requested rezoning satisfies the
requirements identified in this article.
(2) An impact statement, pursuant to Article 32, Impact Assessment,
for rezoning requests that represent a departure from the
Township's Master Plan.
(3) A location map.
B. A request for a text amendment shall include a general description of
the proposed amendment.
A. A public hearing, pursuant to § 170-40.7, is required for text
amendments and amendments to the Zoning Map.
B. For amendments to the Zoning Map, the applicant shall erect a sign on
the property pursuant to Board Resolution 91-135, as amended.
§ 170-43.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-43.4
1:797
§ 170-43.5. Criteria for amendment of Zoning Map.
In considering any application for an amendment to the Zoning Map, the
Planning Commission and Township Board shall consider the following
criteria in making their findings, recommendations and decision:
C. Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall identify
and evaluate factors relevant to the request and the criteria contained
in this article. The Planning Commission shall make its
recommendation, by findings of fact, to the Board of Trustees. The
Planning Commission shall make one of the three findings below:
(1) The proposed text amendment or change to zoning district
boundaries shall be approved as submitted.
(2) The proposed text amendment shall be approved as modified by the
Planning Commission, or the proposed zoning district shall be
changed to a more-restrictive zoning classification.
(3) The proposed text amendment or change to zoning district
boundaries shall be denied.
D. The Planning Department shall forward a copy of the application
materials, Planning Commission recommendation, findings of fact, and
summary of public comment, as applicable, to the Board of Trustees for
placement on the next regularly scheduled Board of Trustees meeting
agenda.
E. The Township Board shall approve or deny the amendment, based on
the criteria contained in this article. The Township Board may elect to
conduct another public hearing, or an interested property owner may
request a hearing on a proposed ordinance amendment. The request
shall be made to the Township Clerk, and the hearing notice shall be
provided to the interested property owner.
F. A notice of ordinance adoption shall be published in the newspaper, and
the amendment becomes effective seven days after publication.
G. For an amendment to the Zoning Map, the Planning Department shall
update the Zoning Map.
A. Consistency with the goals, policies and future land use map of the
Charter Township of Northville Master Plan, including any subarea or
corridor plans. If conditions have changed since the Master Plan was
adopted, the rezoning may be found to be consistent with recent
development trends in the area.
B. Compatibility of the site's physical, geological, hydrological and other
environmental features, with all uses permitted in the proposed zoning
district compared to uses permitted under current zoning.
C. Evidence that if the current zoning is enforced, the consequent
restriction will preclude the use of the property for any purpose to
§ 170-43.4 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-43.5
1:798
which it is reasonably adapted and that the application of the current
classification amounts to a confiscation of the plaintiff's property.
D. Compatibility of all uses permitted in the proposed zoning district with
surrounding uses and zoning in terms of land suitability, impacts on the
environment, density, nature of use, traffic impacts, aesthetics,
infrastructure and potential influence on property values compared to
uses permitted under current zoning.
E. Capacity of Township utilities and services are sufficient to
accommodate all the uses permitted in the requested district without
compromising the health, safety and welfare of the Township.
F. Capacity of the street system to safely and efficiently accommodate the
expected traffic generated by uses permitted in the requested zoning
district. A rezoning traffic assessment shall be required for all proposed
rezonings that would result in potential uses that may generate more
peak-hour or daily trips than currently zoned uses would generate. An
assessment is intended to identify a comparison between the peak-hour
and daily trip generation characteristics of the existing and proposed
zoning. A traffic impact study in accordance with the requirements of
§ 170-32.4 shall be provided if the proposed zoning district permits uses
that could generate 100 or more directional trips during the peak hour
than the majority of the uses that could be developed under the current
zoning.
G. Apparent demand for the types of uses permitted in the requested
zoning district, in the Township and surrounding area, in relation to the
amount of land in the Township, and surrounding area, currently zoned
and available to accommodate the demand.
H. Whether the boundaries of the requested zoning district are sufficient
to meet the dimensional regulations for the zoning district listed in the
Article 18, Schedule of Regulations.
I. If a rezoning is appropriate, the requested zoning district shall be more
appropriate from the Township's perspective than another zoning
district.
J. If the applicant's request is for a specific use, rezoning shall be found to
be more appropriate than amendment to the list of permitted or special
land uses in the current zoning district.
K. The requested rezoning will not create an isolated and unplanned spot
zone.
L. The request has not previously been submitted within the past one year,
unless conditions have changed or new information has been provided.
M. Other criteria as determined by the Planning Commission or Township
Board which would protect the health and safety of the public, protect
§ 170-43.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-43.5
1:799
§ 170-43.6. Criteria for text amendments.
In considering an application for a text amendment, the Planning
Commission and Township Board shall consider the following criteria in
making their findings, recommendations and decision:
§ 170-43.7. Amendments required to conform to court decree.
Any amendment for the purpose of conforming to a decree of a court
of competent jurisdiction shall be adopted by the Township Board and
published, without necessity of a public hearing or referral to any other
board or agency.
§ 170-43.8. Conditional zoning agreement.
public and private investment in the Township and enhance the overall
quality of life in the Charter Township of Northville.
A. The proposed amendment would correct an error in the chapter.
B. The proposed amendment would clarify the intent of the chapter.
C. Documentation has been provided from Township staff that indicates
problems and conflicts in implementation or interpretation of specific
sections of the chapter.
D. The proposed amendment would address changes to the state
legislation.
E. The proposed amendment would address potential legal issues or
administrative problems with the chapter based on recent case law or
opinions rendered by the Attorney General of the State of Michigan.
F. The proposed amendment would promote compliance with changes in
other Township ordinances and county, state or federal regulations.
G. The proposed amendment is supported by the findings of reports,
studies or other documentation on functional requirements,
contemporary building practices, environmental requirements and
similar technical items.
H. Other criteria as determined by the Planning Commission or Township
Board which would protect the health and safety of the public, protect
public and private investment in the Township, promote
implementation of the goals and policies of the Master Plan or other
subarea or corridor plans and enhance the overall quality of life in the
Charter Township of Northville.
A. An applicant may voluntarily offer a conditional zoning agreement
along with an application for rezoning. The conditions set forth in the
conditional zoning agreement must be more restrictive than the
regulations contained in the proposed zoning district.
§ 170-43.5 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-43.8
1:800
B. The offer for a conditional zoning agreement shall be submitted in
writing prior to the public hearing, pursuant to the Michigan Zoning
Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006, as amended. The Township may
voluntarily accept the offer for a zoning agreement but shall not be
obligated to accept such offer.
C. When necessary, the conditional zoning agreement shall also include a
conceptual site plan. This plan shall not replace the requirement for a
site plan review and approval per Article 33, Site Plan Review.
D. The conditional zoning agreement may include limitations on the uses
permitted within the zoning district, specification of lower-density or
less-intense development/use or may impose more-restrictive measures
on the location, size, height or other regulations for structures,
improvements, setbacks, landscaping, design, architecture and other
site features. The conditional zoning agreement may not authorize uses
which are not permitted in the proposed zoning district or
developments of greater intensity/density or permit variations from
height, area, setback or similar dimensional requirements that are less
restrictive than the proposed zoning district. The conditional zoning
agreement shall include conditions that bear a reasonable and rational
relationship and/or benefit to the property in question. The conditional
zoning agreement may include conditions related to the use and
development of the property that are necessary to accomplish the
following:
(1) Serve the intended use of the property, such as extension,
installation or construction of or improvements to roadways,
utilities or other infrastructure serving the site.
(2) Minimize the impact of the development on surrounding
properties.
(3) Preserve natural features and open space.
E. In addition, the conditional zoning agreement shall also include the
following:
(1) Acknowledgement that the conditional zoning agreement was
voluntarily proposed by the applicant.
(2) Agreement and understanding that the property shall not be
developed or used in any manner that is not consistent with the
conditional zoning agreement.
(3) Agreement and understanding that the rezoning and the
conditional zoning agreement shall be binding upon the property
owner, Township and their respective heirs, successors, assigns,
receivers or transferees.
(4) Agreement and understanding that, if a rezoning with a conditional
zoning agreement becomes void, no further development shall take
§ 170-43.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-43.8
1:801
place and no permits, consents or other approvals shall be issued
unless and until a new zoning classification has been established
for the property.
(5) Agreement and understanding that no part of the conditional
zoning agreement shall permit any activity, use or condition that
would otherwise violate any requirements or standard that is
otherwise applicable in the new zoning district.
(6) Any other provisions as are agreed upon by the parties.
F. Any uses proposed as part of a conditional zoning agreement that would
otherwise require approval of a special land use or site plan approval
shall be subject to the applicable review and approval requirements of
Article 30, Special Land Uses, and Article 33, Site Plan Review.
G. Failure to comply with the conditional zoning agreement will constitute
a breach of the agreement and a violation of this chapter. Further use of
the property may be subject to legal remedies available to the
Township.
H. Review procedures.
(1) The conditional zoning agreement shall be reviewed by the
Township Attorney to determine that the agreement conforms to
the requirements of this section, the Township Zoning Act, as
amended, and the conditional zoning agreement is in a form
acceptable for recording with the Wayne County Registrar of
Deeds.
(2) Following the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall make
a recommendation to the Township Board based upon the criteria
listed in § 170-43.5. The Planning Commission shall consider
whether the proposed conditional zoning agreement achieves the
following:
(a) Is consistent with the intent of this article.
(b) Bears a reasonable and rational connection and/or benefit to
the property being proposed for rezoning.
(c) Is necessary to ensure that the property develops in such a way
that protects the surrounding neighborhood and minimizes
potential impacts to adjacent properties.
(d) Is necessary to allow the rezoning to be approved, in that the
property could not or would not be rezoned without the
proposed conditional zoning agreement.
(e) Leads to a development that is more compatible with abutting
or surrounding uses than would have been likely if the property
had been rezoned without a conditional zoning agreement or if
§ 170-43.8 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-43.8
1:802
the property were left to develop under the existing zoning
classification.
I. Approval.
(1) If the rezoning and conditional zoning agreement is approved, the
zoning classification of the property shall consist of the district to
which the property has been rezoned, with a reference to the
conditional zoning agreement.
(2) The approved agreement shall be executed by the owner and a
recorded copy delivered to the Township. Building permits shall not
be accepted for review until a recorded copy of the conditional
rezoning agreement is received by the Township.
J. Expiration.
(1) If substantial construction has not commenced within two years,
the conditional zoning agreement shall be void.
(2) Should the conditional zoning agreement become void, all
development on the subject property shall cease, and further
development shall not be permitted. Until action satisfactory to the
Township is taken to bring the property into compliance with the
conditional zoning agreement, the Township may withhold or,
following notice to the applicant and being given an opportunity to
be heard, revoke permits and certificates, in addition to or in lieu of
any other lawful action to achieve compliance.
(3) The Township Board, upon recommendation from the Planning
Commission, may grant a one-year extension, provided the
property owner submits satisfactory evidence for the extension, at
least 30 days prior to the expiration date. A further extension of one
year may be granted, provided there is forward progress by the
applicant.
(4) If the rezoning and conditional zoning agreement become void,
then the land shall automatically revert back to its original zoning
classification, as set forth in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act 110
of 2006, as amended. The Planning Department will advise the
landowner and developer, by registered letter, of the reversion of
zoning.
K. Nothing in the conditional zoning agreement, or other provisions, shall
prohibit the Township from later rezoning all or any portion of the
property to another zoning classification. Any land use initiated
pursuant to the conditional zoning agreement will be allowed to
continue, after any later rezoning under this subsection, in accordance
with the following:
(1) Provided all development and/or use of the property is in
compliance with the conditional zoning agreement. A use or
§ 170-43.8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-43.8
1:803
development may continue indefinitely, provided all terms of the
conditional zoning agreement are followed.
(2) Failure to comply with the conditional zoning agreement will
constitute a breach of the agreement and also a violation of this
chapter. Further use of the property may be subject to legal
remedies available to the Township under this chapter and the
Township Zoning Act.
L. Amendment.
(1) During the initial two-year period, or during any extension granted
by the Township, the Township shall not add to or alter the
conditional zoning agreement, even with the landowner's consent.
(2) The conditional zoning agreement may be amended after the
expiration of the initial two-year period, and any extensions, in the
same manner as was prescribed for the original rezoning and
conditional zoning agreement.
M. If the developer constructs any public improvements in connection with
the development, a financial guarantee, in an amount equal to the
expected cost of the public improvements, shall be provided to the
Township. The developer shall also warrant the public improvements
for a period of one year from the date of acceptance by the Township
and shall, at its sole expense, repair or replace, at the Township's sole
discretion, any public improvements which fail during the one-year
warranty. The value of the financial guarantee may be reduced as the
Township accepts the public improvements, by the value of the work
accepted, provided a minimum of 25% is retained for the one-year
warranty period.
§ 170-43.8 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-43.8
1:804
ARTICLE 44
Definitions
§ 170-44.1. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABUTTING OR ADJACENT LOT OR PARCEL — A lot or parcel which shares
a common border, excluding the road right-of-way, with the subject lot or
parcel.
ACCESS MANAGEMENT — A technique to improve traffic operations and
safety along major roadways through the control of driveway locations and
design; the promotion of alternatives to direct access; and consideration
to the relationship of traffic activity for properties adjacent to, and across
from, one another.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A subordinate building or
structure, the use of which is clearly incidental to that of the principal
building, structure or use of the subject parcel, and is a structure or use
that is customarily associated with the principal use of the lot. Where
an accessory structure is attached to a principal building, such accessory
building shall be deemed a part of the principal building. Where two or
more activities take place within a principal building, the accessory use
shall be the use occupying the least square footage or generating the least
amount of traffic or other external impacts.
ADULT-CARE FACILITY — A facility licensed by the State of Michigan
pursuant to Public Act 287 of 1972, Public Act 116 of 1973 (MCLA § 722.111
et seq.) or Public Act 218 of 1979 (MCLA § 400.701 et seq.) and constructed
for residential purposes.
ADULT DAY-CARE FACILITY — A facility that provides care to over 12 adults
for a period of time less than 24 hours.
ADULT FOSTER-CARE FACILITY — A facility that provides care to adults,
in accordance with Public Act 218 of 1979 (MCLA § 400.701 et seq.), as
amended, and the Adult Foster Care Administrative Rules as administered
by the Michigan Department of Consumer and Industry Services. Adult
foster-care facilities include facilities for individuals 18 years or older who
are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled or physically handicapped
and require supervision but not continuous nursing care on an ongoing
basis. The following adult foster-care homes are provided for by these rules:
ADULT FOSTER-CARE FAMILY HOME — A private residence with
the approved capacity to receive six or less adults that are provided
with foster care for five days or more a week and for two or more
consecutive weeks. The licensee must be a member of the household
and an occupant of the home. Local zoning approval is not required
prior to issuance of a license.
A.
§ 170-44.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-44.1
1:805
ADULT REGULATED USES — The following definitions shall be classified as
adult regulated uses:
ADULT FOSTER-CARE SMALL GROUP HOME — A facility with the
approved capacity to receive 12 or less adults. The licensee is not
required to live in the home. Local zoning approval is required prior
to issuance of a license only if seven or more residents will live in the
house.
B.
ADULT FOSTER-CARE LARGE GROUP HOME — A facility with the
approved capacity to receive 13 to 20 adults. The licensee is not
required to live in the home. Local zoning approval is required prior to
issuance of a license.
C.
ADULT FOSTER-CARE CONGREGATE FACILITY — A facility with the
approved capacity to receive more than 20 adults.
D.
ADULT FOSTER-CARE CAMP / ADULT CAMP — A facility with the
approved capacity to receive more than four adults to be provided
foster care when located in a natural or rural environment.
E.
ADULT PHYSICAL CULTURE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment,
club or business by, whatever name designated, which offers, advertises
or is equipped or arranged to provide massages, body rubs, alcohol
rubs, physical stimulation, baths or other similar treatment. An adult
physical cultural establishment may include, but is not limited to,
establishments commonly known as "massage parlors," "health spas,"
"sauna baths," "Turkish bathhouses" and "steam baths." The following
uses shall not be included in the definition of an adult physical culture
establishment:
Establishments which routinely provide such services by a licensed
physician, a licensed chiropractor, a licensed osteopath, a licensed
physical therapist, a licensed nurse practitioner or any other
similarly licensed medical professional.
(1)
(2) Fitness center.
Electrolysis treatment by a licensed operator of electrolysis
equipment.
(3)
Continuing instruction in martial or performing arts or in organized
athletic activities.
(4)
(5) Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics or medical offices.
Barbershops, beauty parlors or salons which offer massages to the
scalp, the face, the neck or shoulders; and
(6)
Adult photography studios whose principal business does not
include the taking of photographs of specified anatomical areas as
defined herein.
(7)
A.
§ 170-44.1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-44.1
1:806
ADULT BOOK OR SUPPLY STORE — An establishment having 10% or
more of its usable floor area devoted to the distribution, display or
storage of books, magazines, other periodicals, photographs, drawings,
films, videotapes and/or novelty items which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (as defined herein).
B.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER or ADULT LIVE STAGE
PERFORMING THEATER — An enclosed building having a capacity
of 50 or more persons wherein still or motion pictures, videotapes
or similar material is presented or viewed which is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas (as
defined herein). Such an establishment is customarily not open to the
general public but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding
minors.
C.
ADULT MODEL STUDIO — Any place where models who display
specified anatomical areas (as defined herein) are present to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or
similarly depicted by persons who pay some form of compensation or
gratuity. This definition shall not apply to any accredited art school or
similar educational institution.
D.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE ARCADE or MINI MOTION-PICTURE
THEATER — Any place where motion picture machines, projectors or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five
or fewer persons per machine and where the images displayed depict,
describe or relate to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
E.
ADULT NUDE/PARTIALLY NUDE DANCING — A business where a
principal activity is the live presentation or display of nude, or partially
nude, male or female impersonators, dancers, entertainers, models,
waiters or waitresses or employees. Such activity may or may not
feature food or beverage service. Nude or partially nude shall mean
having any or all of the specified anatomical areas exposed.
F.
ADULT OUTDOOR MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A drive-in theater
used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.
Such establishment is customarily not open to the general public but
only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason
of age. The definition shall not apply to coin-operated amusement
devices owned or leased to establishments that are properly licensed
for sale of beer or intoxicating liquor for consumption on the premises.
G.
GROUP A CABARET — An establishment where material or live
entertainment is provided, presented, permitted or performed in which
performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on or
H.
§ 170-44.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-44.1
1:807
ALLEY — A way dedicated to the public and which affords a secondary
means of access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic
circulation.
relationship to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
(as defined herein) for observation by or participation of patrons, or an
establishment which features any of the following: topless dancers and/
or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers, male and/or female
impersonators or similar entertainers, topless and/or bottomless
waiters, waitresses and/or employees.
SPECIALLY DESIGNATED DEALER'S ESTABLISHMENT — A retail
establishment consisting of less than 8,000 usable square feet of retail
space or any retail establishment licensed by the State Liquor Control
Commission to distribute liquor, other than wine under 20% alcohol
by volume and beer in the original package, for consumption off the
premises where more than 10% of the usable retail space is utilized for
the distribution of alcohol.
I.
SPECIALLY DESIGNATED MERCHANT'S ESTABLISHMENT — A retail
establishment consisting of less than 8,000 usable square feet of retail
space or any retail establishment licensed by the State Liquor Control
Commission to sell alcohol for consumption off the premises, where
more than 10% of the usable retail space is utilized for the distribution
of alcohol.
J.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Portions of the human body
defined as having:
Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or female breast below the point immediately
above the top of the areola; and
(1)
Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(2)
K.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — The explicit display of one or more
of the following:
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breast.
(3)
L.
TATTOO PARLOR — A business having as its principal activity the
application or placing, by any method, of designs, letters, scrolls,
figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the human skin and
includes any other substance resulting in the coloration of the skin by
aid of needles or any other instrument designed to touch or puncture
the skin.
M.
§ 170-44.1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-44.1
1:808
AMPHITHEATER — An oval or circular structure with rising rows of seats
ranged about an open space, commonly used for public gatherings, contests
and spectacles.
ANIMAL SHELTER — A facility operated by a licensed individual, humane
society, a society for the prevention of cruelty to animals or any other
similar institutions that keep animals for an extended period of time and are
available for adoption/placement.
APARTMENT — A suite of rooms or a room arranged and intended for
a place of residence for a single family commonly located in a multiple
dwelling or accessory to another use as defined herein.
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES — An element extending out from the
exterior wall of a building or structure, including cornices, eaves, gutters,
belt courses, sills, lintels, bay windows, chimneys, and decorative
ornaments.
AS-BUILT PLANS — Revised construction plans prepared in accordance
with all approved field changes.
AUTOMOBILE — Any motorized vehicle intended to be driven on roads or
trails, such as cars, trucks, vans and motorcycles.
AUTOMOBILE MAINTENANCE/SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS (ROUTINE
MAINTENANCE AND MINOR REPAIR) — A building or premises used
primarily to provide general maintenance on automobiles such as an oil
change and lubrication; the servicing and repair of spark plugs, batteries,
pumps, belts, hoses, air filters, windshield wipers and distributors; mufflers
and exhaust replacement, brakes and shock absorbers; radiator cleaning
and flushing; sale and installation of automobile accessories such as tires,
radios and air conditioners; wheel alignment, balancing and undercoating,
excluding tire recapping or grooving or any major mechanical repairs,
collision work or painting. An automobile maintenance/service
EFFICIENCY APARTMENT — A dwelling unit containing 350 square
feet or less of net floor area and consisting of not more than one room
in addition to kitchen and necessary sanitary facilities.
A.
ONE-BEDROOM UNIT — A dwelling unit containing a minimum net
floor area of at least 500 square feet per unit and consisting of two
rooms or less in addition to kitchen, dining and necessary sanitary
facilities.
B.
TWO-BEDROOM UNIT — A dwelling unit containing a minimum net
floor area of at least 700 square feet per unit and consisting of three
rooms or less in addition to kitchen, dining and necessary sanitary
facilities.
C.
THREE-OR-MORE-BEDROOM UNIT — A dwelling unit wherein for
each room in addition to the three rooms permitted in a two-bedroom
unit there shall be provided an additional area of 200 square feet to the
minimum net floor area of 700 square feet.
D.
§ 170-44.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-44.1
1:809
establishment may also sell gasoline but is distinct from an automobile
service station.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR ESTABLISHMENT (MAJOR) — An automotive repair
establishment which in addition to minor repairs, as defined above, may
conduct one or more of the following: engine rebuilding, the rebuilding
or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service; overall painting and
undercoating of automobiles; the major overhauling of an engine requiring
removal of cylinder head or crankcase pan; the recapping or retreading of
tires; steam cleaning and other similar activities.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE/FILLING STATION — Buildings and premises used
for the purpose of retail, such as gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires,
mufflers, automotive accessories, and other similar products, routine
automotive maintenance and minor automobile repair as defined above.
An automotive service station may also include accessory retail sales of
convenience items.
AUTOMOBILE/VEHICLE DEALERSHIP — A building or premises used
primarily for the sale of new and used automobiles and other motor vehicles
such as motorcycles, boats, recreational vehicles or other similar methods
of transportation. Such a dealership may include outdoor display and
accessory indoor maintenance and/or repair.
AUTOMOBILE WASHES — A building or structure, or portion thereof,
containing facilities for washing motor vehicles using production line
methods with a conveyer, blower, steam-cleaning device or other
mechanical washing devices. Automobile washes include coin- and
attendant-operated drive-through, automatic self-serve, track-mounted
units and similar high-volume washing establishments, but exclude handwashing
operations.
BASEMENT — The portion of a building which is partly or wholly located
below grade, provided the vertical distance from the average grade to the
floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the
ceiling.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN — Any dwelling in which transient guests are
provided overnight accommodations, breakfast and access to bathing/
lavatory facilities in return for compensation. A bed-and-breakfast shall
have only one set of kitchen facilities, employ only those living in the house
plus up to one additional employee and have a facade treatment that is
consistent with surrounding homes.
BOARD OF APPEALS — The Zoning Board of Appeals for the Charter
Township of Northville, established by the Township Board to exercise the
authority granted by the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of
2006).85
BOARD OF TRUSTEES — The Charter Township of Northville Board of
Trustees.
85.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3101.
§ 170-44.1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-44.1
1:810
BUFFER ZONE — An area of land containing landscaping, berms or walls
to minimize visual and noise impacts.
BUILDING — Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof
supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.
BUILDING ALTERATIONS — Any change to the supporting members of
a building, such as bearing walls, columns or girders, any alteration or
relocation of a building and any change in use.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — The ground area of a lot which is defined by the
minimum setback and spacing requirements of a principal building.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the ground/
grade to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs; to the deckline of
mansard roofs and to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable,
hop and gambrel roofs. Where a building is located on sloping terrain, the
height is measured from the average grade surrounding the base of the
building wall by taking measurements at five-foot intervals.
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the face of the principal building, the
area between the structure and the street right-of-way or property line.
BUILDING OFFICIAL — The designated building official for the Charter
Township of Northville.
CARETAKER LIVING QUARTERS — An independent residential dwelling
unit or living area within a principal building that is designed for and
occupied by no more than two persons and where at least one of the
residents is employed to provide services or to look after goods, buildings
or property on the parcel in which the living quarters are located.
CARPORT — A shelter for vehicles consisting of a roof extended from a
wall of a building or a partially open structure consisting of a roof and
possibly walls. Carports shall comply with all yard requirements applicable
to private garages.
CEMETERY — See "mortuarial uses."
CHANGE IN USE — The use of a building, structure or parcel of land, or
portion of a building, structure or parcel of land, which is different from the
previous use in the way it is classified in this chapter.
CHEMICALS AND ALLIED PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING — The
processing of chemicals and allied products, including industrial chemicals,
plastics materials and synthetics, drugs, soaps, cleaners and toilet goods,
paints and allied products, agricultural chemicals and fertilizers, adhesives
and sealants, explosives and ink.
CHILD-CARE ORGANIZATION, STATE-LICENSED — A facility for the care
of children under 18 years of age, as licensed and regulated by the state
under Act 116 of the Public Acts of 1973 (MCLA § 722.111 et seq.), Act 218
of the Public Acts of 1979 (MCLA § 400.701 et seq.) and the associated rules
promulgated by the State Department of Social Services.
§ 170-44.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-44.1
1:811
CHILD-CARE CENTER or DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility other than
a private residence, receiving more than six preschool or school-age
children in group day care for periods of less than 24 hours a day,
provided the parents or guardians are not immediately available to
the child. It includes a facility which provides care for not less than
two consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care
per day. The facility is generally described as a "child-care center,"
"day-care center," "day nursery," "nursery school," "parent cooperative
preschool," "play group" or "drop-in center." "Child-care center" or
"day-care center" does not include a Sunday school conducted by a
religious institution or a facility operated by a religious organization
where children are cared for during short periods of time while persons
responsible for such children are attending religious services.
A.
CHILD-CARING INSTITUTION — A facility which is organized for the
purpose of receiving minor children for care, maintenance and
supervision, usually on a twenty-four-hour basis, in a building that
operates throughout the year and is maintained for that propose. It
includes a maternity home for the care of minor, unmarried mothers,
an agency group home and institutions for mentally retarded or
emotionally disturbed minor children. It does not include hospitals,
nursing homes, boarding schools or an adult foster-care facility in
which a child has been placed.
B.
FOSTER-FAMILY HOME — A private home in which at least one, but
not more than four, minor children who are not related by blood,
marriage or adoption to an adult member of the household are given
care and supervision for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week,
for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal
guardian.
C.
FOSTER-FAMILY GROUP HOME — A private home in which more
than four, but less than seven, children who are not related by blood,
marriage or adoption to an adult member of the household are provided
care for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more
consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
D.
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — A private home in which one, but less
than seven, minor children are received for care and supervision for
periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal
guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by
blood, marriage or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an
unrelated child for more than four weeks during a calendar year.
E.
GROUP DAY-CARE HOME — A private home in which more than six, but
not more than 12, children are given care and supervision for periods
of less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian,
except children related to an adult member of the family by blood,
marriage or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated
child for more than four weeks during a calendar year.86
F.
§ 170-44.1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-44.1
1:812
CLEAR VISION AREA — An area of each lot near any street intersection
or commercial driveway which shall remain clear of obstructions between a
height of two feet and six feet to ensure safe sight distance for motorists.
CLUBS and MEMBERSHIP ORGANIZATIONS — Business associations,
professional organizations, labor organizations, civic and social
associations, political organizations and other membership organizations.
This includes an organization of persons for special purposes or for the
promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics or the like but
not operated for profit or to espouse beliefs or further activity that is not
in conformance with the Constitution of the United States or any laws
or ordinances. The facilities owned or used by such organization may be
referred to as a "club" in this chapter.
COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE ARCADES — The use of a building,
or a portion of a building, for the location, operation and placement of five
or more mechanical amusement devices. "Mechanical amusement devices"
shall mean any device, apparatus, mechanical equipment or machine
operated as amusement for required compensation but shall not include
vending machines used to dispense foodstuffs, toys or other products for
use and consumption.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any vehicle bearing, or required to bear,
commercial license plates such as a truck tractor, a semitrailer, flatbeds,
stake beds, rolloff containers, tanker bodies, dump bodies and full or partial
box-type enclosures; vehicles of a type that are commonly used for the
delivery, hauling or construction-oriented contractors; tow trucks; vehicle
repair service trucks; snowplowing trucks; and any other vehicle with a
commercial license plate having a gross vehicle weight in excess of 10,000
pounds or a total length in excess of 22 feet.
COMMERCIAL WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — Licensed
telecommunications services, including cellular, personal communications
services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized
mobilized radio (ESMR), paging and similar services that are marketed to
the general public.
COMPOSTING — The sorting, grinding, composting, digestion (including
mechanical digestion systems) and wind rowing or storage of refuse at
an outdoor, open-air facility for the purpose of producing material for
fertilization and the conditioning of soil.
COMPUTER AND DATA PROCESSING SERVICES — Computer
programming, computer system design, data processing, information
retrieval, computer facilities management, computer sales, rental and
leasing and computer repair.
CONFERENCE CENTER — A multipurpose facility in which the primary
purpose is to accommodate meetings, seminars, social and civic events.
Such a facility offers a total meeting environment that typically consists
86.Editor's Note: The former definitions of "churches, temples, and other places of religious
worship (general)" and "churches, temples, and other places of religious worship (largescale),"
which immediately followed this definition, were repealed 8-19-2010.
§ 170-44.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-44.1
1:813
of meeting rooms, conference rooms, and catering uses and may include
lodging facilities. A hotel/motel with at least 10,000 square feet of
conference room facilities shall also be considered a conference center.
Accessory conference center uses may include dining areas, recreation
facilities and specialty shops.
CONTIGUOUS — An area connected together to form an uninterrupted
expanse in space. The term "contiguous" shall apply to any of the following:
CONTRACTOR YARD — A site where a building or construction contractor
stores equipment, tools, vehicles, building materials and other
appurtenances used in association with building or construction.
CONVALESCENT OR NURSING HOME — A nursing care facility, including
a county medical care facility, but excluding a hospital or a facility created
by Act 152 of the Public Acts of 1985, as amended, being §§ 36.1 to 36.12 of
the Michigan Compiled Laws Annotated, which provides organized nursing
care and medical treatment to seven or more unrelated individuals suffering
or recovering from illness, injury or infirmity. See also "senior housing."
CURB CUT — The entrance to or exit from a property or public or private
thoroughfare for the purpose of vehicular ingress/egress.
DAY — A calendar day.
DAY-CARE CENTER — See "child-care organization, state-licensed."
DECK — An unroofed platform, commonly constructed of wood, which is
typically attached to a house.
DENSITY — The number of dwelling units situated on, or to be developed,
per net or gross acre of land. For purposes of calculating maximum density,
only 25% of the acreage comprised of open water, land within the onehundred-
year floodplain elevation and/or wetlands protected by the
Goemaere-Anderson Wetland Protection Act, Public Act 203 of 1979 (MCLA
§ 281.701 et seq.)87 shall be calculated toward the total site acreage.
DEVELOPMENT — The proposed construction of a new building on a zoning
lot, the relocation of an existing building on another zoning lot or the use of
open land for a new use.
A permanent surface water connection or other direct physical contact
with any lake, pond, river or stream, including surface water or
groundwater connections;
A.
A seasonal or intermittent direct surface water connection with any
lake, pond, river or stream;
B.
Located within 500 feet of the ordinary high-water mark of any lake,
pond, river or stream; or
C.
Separated only by man-made barriers, such as dikes, roads, berms or
other similar features.
D.
87.Editor's Note: MCLA § 281.701 et seq. was repealed by P.A. 345 of 1966, § 30, eff.
10-26-1066. See now MCLA § 324.30901 et seq.
§ 170-44.1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-44.1
1:814
DISTRICT, ZONING — A portion of the Township within which certain
regulations, requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the
provisions of this chapter.
DRIVE-IN BUSINESS/RESTAURANT — A business or restaurant
establishment so developed to serve patrons while within the motor vehicle
rather than within a building or structure. This includes eating
establishments, customer communications facilities for banks or other
similar uses. A drive-in restaurant is distinct from a drive-through
restaurant in that the majority of drive-in patrons consume food and
beverages while in the vehicle and parked on the premises.
DRIVE-THROUGH BUSINESS/RESTAURANT — A business or restaurant
establishment so developed to serve patrons from a drive-through window.
A drive-through restaurant may or may not also have indoor seating.
DWELLING UNIT — A building, or portion thereof, designed exclusively for
occupancy providing complete independent living facilities for one family,
including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and
sanitation.
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use
of private land for private, public or quasi-public purpose such as for
franchised utilities, a conservation easement or an access easement for a
private road or service drive.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration,
maintenance and use by public utilities, municipal departments or quasi-
EARTH-SHELTERED DWELLING — A dwelling designed in such a way
as to take advantage of the insulating effect of soil and constructed
so that 50% or more of the exterior surface of the building, excluding
unattached garages and other accessory buildings, is covered with soil.
The purpose of such dwelling shall not be to serve only as a foundation
or substructure for above-grade construction. Partially completed
buildings shall not be considered earth-sheltered dwellings.
A.
DETACHED ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building designed
exclusively for, and occupied exclusively by, one family as a dwelling
unit.
B.
ATTACHED ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — Three or more one-family
dwelling units, each having individual entrances on the first floor and
only sharing common side walls, but not having a common floor/ceiling.
Such dwellings may also be termed "townhomes."
C.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building, or portion thereof, designed
exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each
other as two dwelling units.
D.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building, or portion thereof,
designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living
independently of each other as three or more dwellings. See
"apartment."
E.
§ 170-44.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-44.1
1:815
public utilities authorized by franchise agreement with the Township of
underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel or water
transmission or distribution systems; collection, communications, supply
or disposal systems. These may include, but not necessarily limited to,
poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and
police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar accessories
in connection herewith that are reasonably necessary for the furnishing
of adequate service by such public utilities, municipal departments or
commissions or for the public health or general welfare. Essential services
shall not include buildings or towers subject to the wireless communications
regulations of this chapter.88
EXCAVATION — The removal or recovery by any means of soil, rock, sand,
gravel, peat, muck, barrow, shale, limestone, clay or other mineral or
organic substance other than vegetation from water or land. Common
household gardening and grounds care are not considered excavation.
FAMILY — Either of the following:
FARM — A platted or unplatted parcel of contiguous land being at least five
acres in area and under single ownership or single operation on which bona
fide farming is carried out by the owner, a manager or tenant farmer by
means of his own labor, with the assistance from members of the household
or by hired employees. The crops may be used for their own consumption
or for sale to others off the premises, including a bona fide greenhouse,
orchard or nursery where plants or flora are grown for the purpose of
selling the agricultural products thereof off the premises. The farm shall not
include the keeping, raising or breeding of any livestock, animals or fauna
or the operating of hatcheries or stables, unless a permit for such use is
granted from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
A domestic family which is one or more persons related by blood,
marriage or adoption occupying a dwelling unit and living within a
dwelling as a single housekeeping unit; or
A.
The functional equivalent of the domestic family which is persons living
together in a dwelling unit whose relationship is of a permanent and
distinct domestic character, and is the functional equivalent of a
domestic family with a demonstrable and recognizable bond which
constitutes the functional equivalent of the bonds which render the
domestic family a cohesive unit. All persons of the functional equivalent
of the domestic family must be cooking and otherwise operating as a
single housekeeping unit. This definition shall not include any society,
club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, combine, federation, or
group, coterie, or organization which is not a recognized religious
order, nor include a group of individuals whose association is temporary
and resort/seasonal in character. There shall be a rebuttable
presumption enforceable by the Zoning Administrator in the first
instance that the number of persons who may reside as a functional
equivalent family shall be limited to six.
B.
88.Editor's Note: See Art. 29, Wireless Communications.
§ 170-44.1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-44.1
1:816
FENCE — A structure of definite height and location constructed of wood,
masonry, stone, wire, metal, other similar material or combination of
approved materials to serve as a physical barrier, marker or enclosure,
provided the fence does not consist of a solid masonry wall, low-rise
decorative fences or railings.
FENCE, DECORATIVE — A fence not necessarily used for enclosure which
is part of an overall landscape plan and constructed of natural materials
such as wood, brick, stone or decorative metal.
FILLING — The depositing or dumping of any matter onto, or into, the
ground; excluding waste, common household gardening and grounds care.
FITNESS CENTER or HEALTH CLUB — A facility which provides indoor
exercise facilities, such as exercise machines and weight-lifting equipment,
usually in a structured physical activity program supervised by professional
physical fitness instructors or specialists in sports medicine. As defined
herein, "personal fitness center" shall not include spectator seating for
sports events. A personal fitness center may or may not be enclosed within
a gym.
FLOODPLAIN — The land at a specified elevation subject to periodic
flooding that has been defined by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA), i.e., lands within the one-hundred-year flood boundary.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas which must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of all horizontal areas of each floor of the building
or dwelling unit measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from
the center line of walls separating dwelling units. Basements, unfinished
attics, attached garages, breezeways, enclosed and unenclosed porches,
patios and cellars shall not be considered as part of the floor area, except
when utilized for commercial or institutional purposes.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS (GFA) — The area within the perimeter of the outside
walls of the building, without deducting for hallways, stairs, closets/storage
areas, wall thickness, columns or other features.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — Floor area in square feet, including basements,
of all principal and accessory buildings divided by the area of the lot,
excluding the existing public street right-of-way. Floor area shall exclude
parking that is wholly underground but shall include any parking structure
located above the ground.
FLOOR AREA, USABLE (UFA) — The area used or intended to be used
for the sale of merchandise or services or to serve patrons, clients or
customers. Floor area used or intended to be used for hallways, stairs,
closets/storage areas, sanitary facilities or the storage/processing of
merchandise shall be excluded from the computation of usable floor area.
The measurement of usable floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal
areas of each floor of a structure measured from the internal faces of the
wall.
§ 170-44.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-44.1
1:817
GARAGE — Part of a principal or accessory building or structure used
primarily for the parking or storage of vehicles in connection with a
permitted use.
GOLF COURSE — A public or private area consisting of fairways, greens
and rough that may include a clubhouse and related accessory uses,
provided that all structures and activities shall be an integral part of the golf
course. Further, all clubhouses, restaurants, pro-shop facilities, etc., shall
be secondary in nature to the golf course and may not be continued if the
principal golf course activity shall cease or become the minor activity of the
facility.
GRADE — The average of the lowest and highest elevations in an area
within five feet of a building or structure's foundation.
GRADE, FINISHED — The resultant elevation of the land after completion
of alterations and development.
GRADE, NATURAL — The grade as determined by the natural topography
that existed before alteration.
GREENBELT — A landscaped area along a street between the curb or road
shoulder and the front building, parking setback line or rear lot line to serve
as an obscuring mechanism.
HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC WASTE — Waste or a combination of waste and
other discarded material (including but not limited to solid, liquid, semisolid
or contained gaseous material) which because of its quantity, concentration
or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly
contribute to the following if improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of or otherwise managed: an increase in mortality; an increase in
serious irreversible illness; serious incapacitating but reversible illness; or
substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment.
HAZARDOUS USES AND MATERIALS — Any use which involves the
storage, sale, manufacture or processing of materials which are dangerous,
combustible and/or produce either poisonous fumes or explosions in the
event of fire.
HELIPAD, HELIPORT and HELISTOP — Areas on a roof or on the ground
used by helicopters or steep-gradient aircraft for the purpose of boarding
and discharging passengers, patients or cargo. Accessory uses may include
maintenance, overhaul or tie-down.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation customarily conducted in a dwelling
unit that is clearly an incidental and secondary use of the dwelling.
HOSPITAL — A facility offering twenty-four-hour emergency, inpatient and
outpatient care and services for observation, diagnosis and active treatment
of patients under the care and supervision of physicians and professional
medical staff. The term "hospital" shall also include medical clinics or
hospitals offering care in special fields such as eye, cardiac care, ear, nose,
throat, pediatric, orthopedic, skin, cancer, burn centers, neonatal care,
children's hospitals and ophthalmology centers.
§ 170-44.1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-44.1
1:818
HOTEL and MOTEL — A building, or part of a building, with a common
entrance or entrances, where the dwelling units or rooming units are used
primarily for transient occupancy and/or where one or more of the following
services are offered: maid service, the furnishing of linen, telephone,
secretarial or desk service and bellboy service. A hotel may include a
restaurant or cocktail lounge, public banquet halls or meeting rooms.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that does not absorb or percolate
water, including buildings, structures or pavement.
IMPROVEMENTS — Any additions to the natural state of land that increase
its value, utility or habitability. Improvements include but are not limited
to street pavements, with or without curbs and gutters, sidewalks, water
mains, storm and sanitary sewers, landscape and other appropriate and
similar items.
INDOOR RECREATION CENTER — An establishment which provides indoor
exercise facilities, indoor court and/or field sports facilities and which may
include spectator seating in conjunction with the sports facilities such as
skating rinks, swimming pools, indoor golf facilities and bowling alleys.
Auditoriums and stadiums are not included.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL — Any lot or premises on which three or more
pets (but not including wild, vicious or exotic animals) of at least six months
in age are kept either permanently or temporarily for the purposes of
breeding, boarding, training, sale, protection, hobby, pets or transfer.
LANDFILL or SANITARY LANDFILL — Disposal by which the waste is
buried between layers of earth to build up low-lying land.
LANDSCAPING — The treatment of the ground surface with live plant
materials normally grown in Wayne County. In addition, a landscape design
may include other decorative natural or processed materials, such as wood
chips, crushed stone, boulders or mulch. Structural features such as
fountains, pools, statues and benches shall also be considered a part of
landscaping if provided in combination with live plant material.
LEVEL OF SERVICE — A qualitative measure describing operational
conditions within a traffic stream; generally described in terms of such
factors as speed and travel time, freedom to maneuver, traffic interruptions,
comfort and convenience and safety.
LOADING SPACE — An off-street space on the same lot with a building, or a
group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while
loading and unloading merchandise or materials.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area within the lot lines, exclusive of
any abutting public street right-of-way or private road easements or the
submerged area of any river, pond or lake (below the shoreline or ordinary
high-water mark)
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting two streets forming an interior angle of less
than 135°.
§ 170-44.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-44.1
1:819
LOT DEPTH — The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines,
measured along the median between the side lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE, and THROUGH LOT — A lot other than a corner
lot that fronts upon two more-or-less parallel streets or upon two streets
that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. In the case of a row
of double frontage lots, all sides of said lots adjacent to streets shall be
considered frontage, and front yards shall be provided as required.
LOT FRONTAGE — The length of the front lot line measured along the rightof-
way or easement line.
LOT, INTERIOR — Any lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES — The fixed boundaries of a lot described by a survey or
recorded plat.
LOT OF RECORD — A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown
on a document or maps on file with the Wayne County Register of Deeds
or in use by the Township or Township officials and which actually exists as
so shown, or any part of such parcel held in a recorded ownership separate
from that of the remainder thereof, whether platted or described by metes
and bounds.
LOT WIDTH — The straight-line horizontal distance between side lot lines,
measured at the minimum front yard setback.
LOT, ZONING — Any single tract of land located within a single block
which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designed by its owner
or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit under
single ownership or control. A zoning lot shall satisfy this chapter with
respect to area, size, setbacks, dimensions and frontage as required in the
district in which the zoning lot is located. A zoning lot, therefore, may not
coincide with a lot of record as filed with the County Register of Deeds but
may include one or more lots of record.
LOT / ZONING LOT / PARCEL — A piece of land, or contiguous parcels of
land, under one ownership described within fixed boundaries, of sufficient
size and configuration to meet the minimum site development requirements
FRONT LOT LINE — The lot line separating said lot from the publicright-
of way or easement. In the case of a double frontage lot, it is the
line separating the lot from that street which is designated as the front
yard. A corner lot shall have two front lot lines.
A.
REAR LOT LINE — The lot line opposite, parallel and most distant from
the front lot line and intersecting the side lot lines. Irregularly shaped
lots may have more than one rear lot line. In the case of a triangular
shape, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front
lot line, not less than 10 feet in length and located entirely within the
subject parcel.
B.
SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot
line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior
side lot line.
C.
§ 170-44.1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-44.1
1:820
of this chapter, excluding only public right-of-way or private road easement.
A lot shall have frontage on a dedicated public or private road. Where a
lot is divided by a public street or a private road, each part of such lot
shall meet minimum area and bulk requirements for the zone in which it
is located and shall be considered separate lots. A lot may also mean a
portion of a condominium project, as regulated by Public Act 59 of 1978
[MCLA § 559.101 et seq., MSA 26.50(101) et seq.], designed and intended
for separate or limited ownership and/or use.
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE — An arterial roadway to serve longer-distance
travel to and through the Township with traffic volumes generally over
10,000 vehicles per day. Major thoroughfares are generally spaced at mile
points and may also be referred to as "county primary roads" or "major
arterials."
MANUFACTURED HOME — A manufactured dwelling unit transportable in
one or more sections which is built on a chassis and designed to be used
as a dwelling, with or without permanent foundation, when connected to
the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning
and electrical systems contained in the structure. A mobile home does not
include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITY — A parcel or tract of land under
the control of a person, group or firm upon which three or more mobile
homes or manufactured homes are located on a continual, nonrecreational
basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose, regardless of
whether a charge is made, together with any building, structure, enclosure,
street, equipment or facility, used or intended for use, incident to the
occupancy of a mobile home and which is not intended for use as a
temporary trailer park.
MASTER PLAN — The comprehensive land use plan, including graphic and
written proposals, indicating the general location of planned land uses,
streets, pathways, greenways, parks, schools, public buildings and design
standards for all physical development of the Township, including any
geographic unit, subarea, chapter, part or amendment to such plan which
shall be adopted by the Township Planning Commission or Board.
MEAT AND DAIRY PRODUCTS PROCESSING — The processing and
packaging of meat products, dairy products, fats and oils, excluding live
animals and slaughtering houses.
MEDICAL CLINIC — A public or proprietary establishment providing
diagnostic, therapeutic or preventive medical, osteopathic, chiropractic,
dental, homeopathic, holistic, acupuncture and psychological treatment of
ambulatory human patients on an outpatient basis by a group of
practitioners licensed to perform such services and acting conjointly and
in the same building for the purpose aforesaid. A medical clinic may
incorporate customary laboratories and pharmacies incidental to or
necessary for its operation or to the service of its patients, but may not
include facilities for overnight patient care or major surgery.
§ 170-44.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-44.1
1:821
MEZZANINE — An intermediate floor in any story occupying not more than
50% of the floor area of the story below.
MINI/SELF-STORAGE WAREHOUSE OR FACILITY — A building or group of
buildings in a controlled-access and fenced compound that contain varying
sizes of individual, compartmentalized and controlled-access stalls or
lockers for the storage of customers' goods or wares.
MODULAR HOME — A dwelling which consists of prefabricated units
transported to the site on a removable undercarriage or flatbed and
assembled for permanent location on the lot.
MORTUARIAL USES — Mortuarial uses include the following land uses:
cemetery, pet cemetery, memorial parks and gardens, columbarium,
mausoleum, funeral home and crematorium as defined herein.
NONCONFORMING — A list of related definitions is provided in § 22.3.
NUISANCE FACTORS — An offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious
thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or
repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across
CEMETERY — A parcel of land intended for the burial of deceased
humans (or pets within pet cemeteries). A marker or memorial is
erected at each gravesite for permanent remembrance of the deceased.
A.
MAUSOLEUM — A building or structure designed with vaults to hold
many caskets or crematory urns. A mausoleum could be an elaborate
grave marker for a single burial or be erected to house entire families
as an alternative to family grave plots.
B.
FUNERAL HOME / MORTUARY / UNDERTAKING
ESTABLISHMENT / FUNERAL PARLOR — A facility for funerals often
including a chapel for funeral services; viewing rooms; visitation rooms,
preparation rooms (embalming, cosmetic treatment and clothing of the
deceased); display rooms and storage for caskets; garages for hearses;
and other equipment and administrative offices. A funeral home may
include family living quarters for the funeral director/owner as an
accessory use.
C.
CREMATORIUM — A location where bodies are consumed by
incineration and the ashes of the deceased are collected for permanent
burial or storage in urns.
D.
MEMORIAL PARKS — A location for burying the deceased where all
gravestones must be of standard dimensions and flush with ground
level.
E.
PET CEMETERIES — Cemeteries as defined herein for the expressed
purpose of providing a gravesite and/or permanent marker/
remembrance of deceased animals, typically household pets.
F.
COLUMBARIUM — A building or structure designed with niches for the
location of urns to hold the ashes of cremated persons.
G.
§ 170-44.1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-44.1
1:822
a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the
generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things,
such as, but not limited to, noise, dust, smoke, odor, glare, fumes, flashes,
vibration, shock waves, heat, electronic or atomic radiation, objectionable
effluent, noise of congregation of people, particularly at night, passenger
traffic or invasion of nonabutting street frontage by traffic.
NURSERY — A space, building, structure, or combination thereof for the
storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail sale on the premises,
including products used for gardening or landscaping. The definition of
"nursery" within the meaning of this chapter does not include any space,
building or structure used exclusively for the sale of fruit, vegetables or
Christmas trees.
OFFSET — The distance between the center line of driveways or streets
across the street from one another.
OFF-STREET PARKING LOT — A facility providing vehicular parking
spaces, drives and aisles for maneuvering for more than two vehicles.
OPEN-AIR BUSINESS — Business and commercial uses conducted solely
outside of any building unless otherwise specified herein. Examples of openair
businesses include:
OPEN FRONT STORE — A business establishment so developed that service
to the patron may be extended beyond the walls of the structure, not
requiring the patron to enter the structure, such as ice cream and yogurt
restaurants serving patrons through a walkup window. The term "open front
store" shall not include an automobile repair establishment or automobile
service stations. See also "restaurant."
OPEN SPACE — Required open space shall be on the same lot with the
principal use and shall be unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward except for living plant material, recreation facilities, permitted
signs, sidewalks, bike paths and necessary drives and utility lines, unless as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The line between upland and
bottomland which persists through successive changes in water levels,
below which the presence and action of the water is so common or
Retail sales of garden supplies and equipment, including but not limited
to trees, shrubbery, plants, flowers, seed, topsoil, trellises and lawn
furniture.
A.
Roadside stands for the sale of agricultural products, including fruits,
vegetables and Christmas trees.
B.
Various outdoor recreation uses, including but not limited to tennis
courts, archery courts, shuffleboard, horseshoe courts, miniature golf,
golf driving ranges and amusement parks.
C.
Outdoor display and sale of automobiles, recreation vehicles, garages,
swimming pools, playground equipment and similar goods.
D.
§ 170-44.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-44.1
1:823
recurrent that the character of the land is marked distinctly from the upland
and is apparent in the soil, the configuration of the soil surface and the
vegetation.
OUTDOOR STORAGE — The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods,
junk, material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than 24
hours.
PAPER AND ALLIED PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING — The manufacturing
of paper and allied products, including pulp mills, paper mills, paperboard
containers and boxes, bags, sanitary paper products, stationary and other
miscellaneous paper products.
PARCEL or TRACT — A continuous area or acreage of land which can be
described as provided for in the Land Division Act (MCLA § 560.101 et seq.).
PEAK HOUR — A one-hour period representing the highest hourly volume
of traffic flow on the adjacent street system during the morning (a.m. peak
hour) or during the afternoon or evening (p.m. peak hour) or representing
the hour of highest volume of traffic entering or exiting a site (peak hour of
generator).
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — A financial guarantee to ensure that all
improvements, facilities or work required by this chapter will be completed
in compliance with the ordinance, regulations and the approved plans and
specifications of a development.
PETROLEUM AND COAL PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING — Uses involving
petroleum refining, or asphalt and roofing materials, petroleum and coal
products manufacturing.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An integrated and coordinated
development of various residential land uses, and in some cases
nonresidential uses, comprehensively planned and approved as an entity via
a unitary site plan which permits additional flexibility in building sitting,
usable open spaces and preservation of natural features.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Charter
Township of Northville, Wayne County, Michigan.
PORCH — A structure, attached to the ground, which serves as a covered
entrance to a building, commonly enclosed in part and not heated or air
conditioned.
PRIMARY METAL INDUSTRIES INCLUDING FOUNDRIES — Blast
furnaces, basic steel production, iron and steel foundries and nonferrous
metals foundries, rolling and drawing, including metal heat-treating.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE — The primary or
predominant building, structure or use to which the premises is devoted
and the primary reason the premises exists. No lot may contain more than
one principal building, structure or use, excepting groups of multiple-family
dwellings, farm worker housing, retail business buildings or similar other
groups of buildings.
§ 170-44.1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-44.1
1:824
PRIVATE ROAD — A road owned and maintained by the owners of the
property it serves.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department,
board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under
federal, state or municipal regulations to the public gas, steam, electricity,
sewage disposal, communications, transportation or water.
RECEPTION ANTENNA FACILITY — An exterior apparatus that is capable
of receiving communications for radio or television purposes, including
satellite reception antennas but excluding facilities considered to be
essential public service facilities or those preempted from Township
regulation by applicable state, FCC or other federal laws or regulations.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Includes a tent or vehicular-type structure
designed primarily as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping
or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted on
or drawn by another vehicle which is self-powered. Recreational units of
this type shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: travel
trailers, camping trailers, tent trailers, motor homes and truck campers.
Recreational units shall also include, but shall not be limited to, the
following: boats, boat trailers, snowmobiles, snowmobile trailers, all-terrain
vehicles, dune buggies, horse trailers and similar equipment.
RECREATION AREAS, OUTDOOR — Such uses shall include, but need not
be limited to, the following: recreation fields, rinks or courts, including
football, softball, soccer, tennis, basketball, ice skating, hockey, in-line
skating and similar activities; swimming pools open to the general public
or operated by a private nonprofit organization; and uses accessory to
the above uses, such as refreshment stands, maintenance buildings, office
for management functions, spectator seating and service areas, including
locker rooms and rest rooms.
RECYCLING CENTER — A facility in which used material, such as paper,
glass, plastic or motor oil, is separated and processed prior to shipment
to other locations for processing or manufacturing into new products. A
recycling center is distinct from a junkyard or salvage yard.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS — An establishment, organization or
association instituted to advance or promote religious purposes or beliefs at
a physical place such as churches, mosques, temples and synagogues and
religious societies founded by members of a faith. Such institutions shall
be limited to nonprofit religious services and related religious activities.
Permitted related activities may include living quarters for clergy and other
members of religious orders who carry out their primary duties on site,
religious education classes, church-sponsored day care, youth centers,
religious activities, office space and other similar activities customarily
associated with religious institutions. Soup kitchens, rescue missions and
residential facilities for men, women or families are not considered
accessory uses. Temporary religious assemblies, such as tent revivals or
other similar activities, are not included within this definition. [Added
8-19-2010]
§ 170-44.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-44.1
1:825
RESTAURANT — An establishment serving foods and/or beverages for
consumption upon the premises within the structure serving such foods or
beverages for remuneration.
RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT — A restaurant for the selling of food or
beverage which is served in disposable containers or wrappers for
consumption primarily off the premises.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — A restaurant at which patrons are served from
a drive-in window, by employees serving patrons while in a motor vehicle or
at which consumption of food takes place within the motor vehicle on the
premises.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH — A restaurant at which patrons pay for
an order and pick up the order at a drive-through window while in a motor
vehicle.
RETAIL BUSINESSES, MISCELLANEOUS — Sporting goods and bicycle
shops, bookstores, stationery stores, jewelry stores, hobby toy and game
shops, photographic supply stores, gift novelty and souvenir shops, luggage
and leather goods shops, florists, tobacco stores, newsstands, optical goods
stores and other uses similar in character and intensity.
RETAIL FOOD STORES — Grocery stores, meat and fish markets, fruit
and vegetable markets, candy, nut and confectionery stores, dairy product
stores and retail bakeries.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A public or private strip of land acquired or utilized by
reservation, dedication, easement, prescription, purchase or condemnation
and permanently established for the passage of persons, vehicles, railroads,
water, utility lines and other similar uses.
SALVAGE BUSINESS — An area where waste, used or secondhand
materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed,
disassembled or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other
metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A salvage yard includes
junkyards and similar facilities, including automobile wrecking yards and
any open area greater than 200 square feet that is used for storage, keeping
or abandonment of junk.
SCREENING — The method by which a view of one site or use is shielded,
concealed or hidden. Screening techniques include fences, walls, hedges,
berms, or other physical features.
SENIOR HOUSING — Housing constructed for the exclusive use of an
individual 55 years of age or older or for a couple where at least one of the
individuals is over the age of 55. Senior housing may include the types of
facilities listed below:
SENIOR APARTMENTS — Multiple-family dwelling units where
occupancy is restricted to persons 55 years of age or older.
A.
CONGREGATE OR INTERIM-CARE HOUSING — A semi-independent
housing facility containing congregate kitchen, dining, and living areas,
but with separate sleeping rooms. Such facilities typically provide
B.
§ 170-44.1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-44.1
1:826
SERVICE DRIVE — An access drive which parallels the public right-ofway
in front of or behind a building or buildings, or may be aligned
perpendicular to the street between buildings, which provides shared
access between two or more lots or uses.
SETBACK — The distance required to obtain the minimum required
distance between the front, side or rear lot lines and the building line or
parking lot. Setbacks from a public street or private road shall be measured
from the right-of-way line or easement. Setbacks shall remain as open space
as defined herein, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter.
SHOPPING CENTER — A grouping of two or more business establishments
developed in accordance to an overall plan and designed and built as
an interrelated project. Buildings constructed on out-lots shall not be
considered part of the shopping center unless access and parking
easements are provided.
SHORELINE — The edge of a body of water measured at the ordinary highwater
mark.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of roadway visible to the driver. Generally
related to the distance or time (perception/reaction time) sufficient for the
driver to execute a maneuver (turn from driveway or side street, stop or
pass) without striking another vehicle or object in the roadway.
SLAUGHTERHOUSES — The processing and packaging of meat products,
dairy products, fats and oils, excluding live animals and slaughtering
houses.
SPECIAL LAND USE — A use of land for an activity which, under usual
circumstances, could be detrimental to other land uses permitted within the
same district but which may be permitted because of circumstances unique
to the location of the particular use and which use can be conditionally
permitted without jeopardy to uses permitted within such district. Such
uses are defined as "special land uses" in the Township Zoning Act (MCLA
§ 125.271 et seq.).89
STABLE, COMMERCIAL — A facility for the rearing and housing of horses,
mules and ponies or for riding and training academies.
STABLE, PRIVATE — A facility for the rearing and training of horses, ponies
and mules which are owned by the occupant of the dwelling unit.
special support services, such as transportation and limited medical
care.
DEPENDENT HOUSING FACILITIES — Facilities such as convalescent
homes and nursing homes which are designed for older persons who
need a wide range of health and support services, including personal
nursing care.
C.
89.Editor's Note: MCLA § 125.271 et seq. was repealed by P.A. 110 of 2006, § 702, eff.
7-1-2006. See now MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.
§ 170-44.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-44.1
1:827
STORY — That part of a building, except a mezzanine defined herein,
included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor;
in instances where there is no floor above, then ceiling next above. A story
thus defined shall not be counted as a story when more than 50% is below
the height level of the adjoining ground.
STORY, HALF — An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof; the usable
floor area of which the height at four feet above the floor does not exceed 1/
2 of the floor area in the story directly below and the height above at least
200 square feet of floor space is seven feet six inches.
STREET — Any public or private thoroughfare or right-of-way, other than
a public or private alley, dedicated to or designed for travel and access to
any land, lot or parcel, whether designated as a road, avenue, highway,
boulevard, drive, lane, place, court or any similar designation.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ground. Structures include, but are not limited to, principal and accessory
buildings; radio, television and cellular phone towers; decks; fences; privacy
screens; walls; antennas; swimming pools; signs; gas or liquid storage
facility; mobile homes; sidewalks; and landscape improvements. Approved
regulatory signs, sidewalks, pedestrian paths, necessary public utilities,
driveways, frontage roads and landscaping shall not be considered a
structure.
SWIMMING POOL — Any permanent, nonportable structure or container
located either above or below grade designed to allow the holding of water
to a depth of greater than 24 inches, intended for swimming, bathing
or relaxation. The definition of "swimming pool" includes spas, hot tubs
and similar devices. A swimming pool shall be considered an accessory
structure for purposes of computing lot coverage.
TEXTILE MILLS AND APPAREL PRODUCTION — The production of textile
products into apparel, home furnishings, automotive trimmings and other
textile products.
THEATER — An enclosed building used for presenting performances or
motion pictures which are observed by paying patrons from seats situated
within the building. ("Theater" is distinct from "adult theater" defined
separately under "adult regulated uses.")
TOWNSHIP — The Charter Township of Northville, Wayne County,
Michigan.
TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY — The analysis of the potential traffic impacts
generated by a proposed project. This type of study and level of analysis will
vary dependent upon the type and size of the project.
REZONING TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY — A traffic impact study which
contrasts typical uses permitted under the current and requested
zoning or land use classification. This study usually includes a trip
generation analysis and a summary of potential impacts on the street
system.
A.
§ 170-44.1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-44.1
1:828
TRIP (i.e., DIRECTIONAL TRIP) — A single or one-direction vehicle
movement with either the origin or the destination (exiting or entering)
inside a study site.
URGENT CARE — An establishment where outpatients are examined and
treated by a group of physicians, dentists or similar professionals. A medical
clinic may incorporate customary laboratories and pharmacies incidental to
or necessary for its operation or to the service of its patients, but may not
include facilities for overnight patient care or major surgery.
VEHICLES AND TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT MANUFACTURING —
The manufacturing of motor vehicles, aircraft, boats, motorcycles, railroad
equipment and other miscellaneous transportation equipment.
VETERINARY CLINIC — A facility providing diagnosis, treatment, surgery
and similar veterinary care for small domestic animals with no overnight
boarding and indoor boarding of a maximum three animals at any one time.
VETERINARY HOSPITAL — A facility which provides diagnosis, treatment,
surgery and other veterinary care for domestic animals, horses and
livestock. A veterinary hospital may include outdoor boarding incidental to
treatment.
WALL — A structure of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring
screen in carrying out the requirements of this chapter.
WASTE RECEPTACLE — A container, such as a dumpster, used for the
temporary storage of rubbish or recycling materials, pending collection and
having a capacity of at least one cubic yard.
WATERCOURSE — A natural or artificially created trench which
periodically or continuously contains moving water and has definite banks,
a bed and visual evidence of a continued flow or occurrence of water,
including but not limited to a lake, pond, river, canal, channel, swamp,
creek, marsh or outcropping of water.
WETLAND — Land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances
TRAFFIC IMPACT ASSESSMENT — A traffic impact study for smaller
projects which are not expected to have a significant impact on the
overall transportation system but will have traffic impacts near the site.
This type of study focuses on the expected impacts of a development at
site access points and adjacent driveways.
B.
TRAFFIC IMPACT STATEMENT — A traffic impact study which
evaluates the expected impacts at site access points and intersections
in the vicinity.
C.
REGIONAL TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY — A comprehensive traffic
impact study for large projects expected to have a significant long-term
impact on the street system. Such a study evaluates the impacts over
a long period and may involve analyses of alternate routes. This type
of study is typically prepared using a computer model which simulates
traffic patterns.
D.
§ 170-44.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 170-44.1
1:829
does support, wetland vegetation or aquatic life. Wetland may also be
referred to as a "bog," "swamp" or "marsh."
YARDS — The open spaces on the same lot with a main building unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in
this chapter and as defined herein.
ZONING VARIANCE — A modification of a Zoning Ordinance standard
granted when strict application of the ordinance would cause a practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship upon the individual property in which the
variance is requested.
FRONT YARD — An open space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front
lot line and the nearest point of the main building.
A.
REAR YARD — An open space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot
line and the nearest point of the main building. In the case of a corner
lot, the rear yard may be opposite either street frontage.
B.
SIDE YARD — An open space between a main building and the side lot
line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which
is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to
the nearest point of the main building.
C.
§ 170-44.1 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § 170-44.1
1:830
Appendix
Chapter A175
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Wiring in subdivisions for cable
television — See Ch. 152.
Effect of telecommunications permits on
CATV systems — See Ch. 162, § 162-9I.
Gas franchise — See Ch. A176.
§ A175-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms phrases, words
and their derivatives shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, work used in the present tense shall include
the future and words in the plural number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory not merely directory.
BOARD — The Township Board of the Township of Northville.
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM or CATV SYSTEM — A system or antennas,
cable, wires, lines, towers, wave guides or any other conductors,
converters, equipment or facilities by which the signals of one or more
television or radio stations are received directly or indirectly over the air
and are amplified or otherwise modified and distributed primarily by wire
or cable to subscribing numbers of the public who pay for such services.
COMPANY — OMNICOM of Michigan, the grantee of rights under this
ordinance.
FCC — the Federal Communications Commission, Washington, DC 20554.
GRANTEE — Refers to OMNICOM of Michigan or anyone who succeeds said
company in accordance with the provisions of this franchise.
GROSS SUBSCRIBER REVENUES — Those revenues derived by the
company from regular subscriber services, namely carriage of broadcast
signals and required nonbroadcast services.
TOWNSHIP — The Charter Township of Northville, Wayne County,
Michigan.
§ A175-2. Qualifications of grantee and grant of authority.
Having conducted on open public proceeding concerning the company's
application for the franchise herein granted covering the legal character,
financial, technical and other qualifications of the company and the
adequacy and feasibility of its arrangements for the construction of a cable
television system in the Township, the Board hereby finds that construction
arrangements are adequate and feasible. Pursuant to such findings, the
§ 170-44.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A175-2
1:831
Board hereby grants the company a nonexclusive franchise, right and
privilege to construct, erect, operate, modify and maintain in, upon along,
across, above over and under highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public
ways and places now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and
additions thereto in the Township all poles, wires, cables, underground
conduits, manholes and other television conductors and fixtures necessary
for the maintenance and operation of a cable television system for the
purpose of distributing to the public television and radio signals, other
electronic impulses in order to furnish television and radio programs and
various communications and other electronic services.
§ A175-3. Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
The grantee shall at all times during the life of this franchise be subject
to the lawful exercise of the police power of the Township and to such
regulations as the Board shall hereinafter provide and shall comply with
all applicable state and federal regulations including, without limitation,
the provisions of Section 14 of Public Act 368 or 1925, as amended (MCL
247.184) concerning obtaining and necessary consents from the Board of
County Road Commissioners and/or the State Highway Commissioners.
Said regulations shall expressly include a rule prohibiting the use of
Township streets or alleys for the installation of additional utility poles, or
where the utilities are presently underground, prohibit the use of additional
conduit to be used solely by the CATV company. Also, in the event that the
utilities go underground in the future, the CATV system shall be reinstalled
underground. In the event the CATV system has not been installed, it shall
be installed underground.
§ A175-4. Term.
Subject to the provisions herein, the rights and privileges of the grantee
shall continue for a period of 15 years from the date of adoption of this
ordinance, which shall be deemed to constitute a contract between the
Township and said grantee. Further, said grantee shall have the right of first
refusal in negations.
§ A175-5. Renewal.
No renewal hereof shall be granted unless authorized by the Township
following appropriate public proceedings involving public notice and an
opportunity for the interested parties to participate, during which
proceedings the company's past performance, the adequacy of the
franchise's provisions and the consistency of those provisions with
applicable FCC rules shall be considered.
§ A175-6. Territory involved.
The franchise extends throughout the present territorial limits of the
Township and to any other area henceforth annexed to or otherwise added
to said Township during the terms of this franchise and service rendered by
§ A175-2 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § A175-6
1:832
the grantee shall be made available to all inhabitants of the Township that
may desire service where a density of not less than 70 homes per mile exists
continuous of existing plant.
§ A175-7. Transmission line placement.
The poles used by the grantee's transmission and distribution system, wires
and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained on existing
utility facilities where possible and the grantee shall go underground when
all utilities do but not necessarily in the utility facilities.
§ A175-8. Liability and indemnification.
§ A175-9. Prohibition of discriminatory or preferential practice.
The company shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules,
regulations or in any other respect, make or grant preference or advantages
to any person or subject any person to any prejudices or disadvantage;
provided, however, that nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to
prohibit the establishment of service without charge to public or private
educational institutions and such public buildings or facilities as shall from
time to time be designated by the Township. This provision shall not be
deemed to prohibit promotional campaigns to stimulate individuals to
connect to the CATV service.
§ A175-10. Notice of interruption for repairs.
Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service for the purpose
of making repairs, adjustments or installations, the company shall do so at
such time as will cause the least amount of inconvenience to its customers.
Unless such interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary, it shall
give reasonable notice thereof to all customers affected thereby.
A. The grantee, by its acceptance of this franchise, shall exonerate,
indemnify, defend and hold the Township harmless from and against
any and all liability or expense, including, but not limited to, interest,
court costs and actual consul fees resulting during the term of this
franchise and specifically agrees that it will pay all damages and
penalties which the Township may legally be required to pay as a result
of granting this franchise. Such damages and penalties shall include,
but not be limited to, damages arising out of the installation, operation
or maintenance of the CATV system authorized herein, whether or not
any acts or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited
by this franchise.
B. The grantee shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general
liability insurance policy with a single occurrence limit amount of
$1,000,000 covering liability arising out of its construction and
operation of the cable television system. The Township shall be named
as an additional insured under said policy. All of said insurance
coverage shall provide a thirty-day notice of cancellation.
§ A175-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A175-11
1:833
§ A175-11. Local office of agent.
The company shall share or maintain a local business office or agent for
receiving via a nontoll telephone call inquiries or complaints regarding
the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, billing disputes and similar
matters. All complaints and inquiries will be investigated, responded to or
acted upon as promptly as is practical and, unless circumstances otherwise
require, within three business days of their receipt.
§ A175-12. Franchise fee.
The grantee shall pay to the Township an annual franchise fee in the amount
of 3% percent of the local gross subscriber revenues. Should similar fee
payments be required by a state agency now or subsequently charged with
the regulations of cable television, the fees provided for herein and the fees
payable to said state agency, when added together, shall not exceed the
maximum amount permitted by applicable federal law, rules or regulations.
Gross subscriber revenues shall not include installation, advertising
revenues or pay television revenues.
§ A175-13. Inspection of company records.
The company shall keep books and records in accordance with good
accounting practices and shall deliver to the Board financial and income
statements in such form and at such times as may reasonably be required.
§ A175-14. Rates.
The rate structure for basic residential service for television and radio
signals distributed hereunder shall be proposed by the grantee and subject
to the review of the Township. The subscriber rate schedule shall be
implemented if found to be fair and reasonable and no higher than
necessary to meet all costs of service (assuming efficient and economical
management), including a fair return on the cost plus depreciation of the
properties devoted to such services (with regard to any subsequent sale or
transfer price or cost of such properties).
§ A175-15. Necessity of franchise.
No person shall own or operate a community antenna television system in
the Township except by franchise issued by the Township granting such
poser to any such grantee. In the event litigation is required to enforce the
provisions of said chapter, the grantee shall pay legal expenses incurred by
the Township.
§ A175-16. Revocation of franchise.
Any violation by the grantee of the provisions of this ordinance or the failure
to properly perform any of the conditions or terms hereof and not remedy
such breach within 60 days after having received written notice from the
Township to do so shall be cause for the revocation of this franchise and
§ A175-11 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § A175-16
1:834
all rights thereunder. The Township Clerk shall report such known
noncompliance in writing to the Township and, upon due notice to the
grantee and opportunity to be heard on the charge of noncompliance, the
Township may revoke such franchise.
§ A175-17. Limitation of services.
Services performed pursuant to this franchise issued hereunder shall not
include the performance of repairing, servicing or selling television sets
or television antennas nor shall the grantee recommend service by any
other person except for such items as may be directly related to the cable
installation and/or connection.
§ A175-18. Compliance with FCC standards.
The grantee shall comply fully with the rules and standards for the cable
television operations as adopted by the FCC.
§ A175-19. Emergency use of facilities.
In the case of any emergency or disaster, the company shall, upon request
of the Township, make available its facilities for emergency use for the
duration of such emergency or disaster.
§ A175-20. Safety requirements.
The grantee shall as all times employ ordinary care and shall install and
maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices preventing
failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or
nuisances to the public.
§ A175-21. Channel capacity.
The cable television system to be installed shall have a thirty-five-channel
capability and the technical capacity for return or two-way communications.
The company will install and maintain a cable television system in keeping
with latest state-of-the-art technology, including the capability for satellite
reception. The CATV system will be equipped with a backup for electrical
failure with standby power supplies.
§ A175-22. Modification of FCC rules.
Consistent with the requirements of FCC Rule 76.31, any modification
or amendment thereof by the FCC shall, to the extent applicable, be
considered to be part of this franchise as of the effective date of such
amendment and shall be incorporated herein by specific amendment hereto
within one year from the effective date of the FCC's amendment or at the
time of renewal of this franchise, whichever occurs first.
§ A175-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A175-23
1:835
§ A175-23. New developments.
It shall be the policy of the Township to liberally amend this franchise upon
the application of the grantee whenever necessary to enable the grantee to
take advantage of any developments in the field of transmission of television
or radio signals which will afford it an opportunity to more effectively,
efficiently or economically service its customers.
§ A175-24. Performance bond.
During the life of the franchise, the grantee shall give a bond to the
Township satisfactory in form and substance to the Board in the amount
of $10,000 to insure the faithful performance of all undertakings of the
grantee as represented under this ordinance; provided, however, that the
Board of Trustees may waive the bond requirement after the system has
been constructed, subject to the following conditions:
§ A175-25. Construction timetable.
The grantee shall promptly and as soon as possible after the granting of the
franchise described in this ordinance apply to the FCC for all permission
and authority necessary for the lawful operation of a CATV system. The
grantee shall exercise all reasonable efforts to complete in a workmanlike
manner and in conformity with all applicable state, federal, and Township
rules and regulations all construction of a CATV system within the Township
within 36 months from the date upon which it receives a certificate of
compliance from the FCC. The grantee shall not be responsible for any
delays in the progress of work due to labor disputes, fire, acts of God,
A. Any such waiver would be subject to and without prejudice of the right
of the Township to reinstate the bond requirement upon 30 days prior
written notice to the grantee;
B. While such waiver is in effect, the grantee shall pay the franchise fee
set forth in § A175-12 of this ordinance on a monthly basis. Such
payments shall be made within 30 days from the end of the period to
which the franchise fee payment relates;
C. In the event that any question is raised by the Township regarding
whether the grantee is in full compliance with the terms of this
ordinance, the grantee and the Township will discuss those matters and
attempts to resolve them in mutual good faith. In the event that,
following such discussions, there remains a disagreement regarding
whether the grantee is in compliance with this ordinance, the Township
may, by written notice to the grantee, require the grantee to deposit in
escrow the amount up to the amount of the bond set forth in the chapter
which is claimed by the Township as damages or which is required to
remedy the alleged noncompliance or, at the grantee's option, to obtain
a letter of credit in favor of the Township to cover such amount, pending
resolution of such dispute. The grantee shall bear the expense of the
escrow agent, if any.
§ A175-23 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § A175-25
1:836
unusual delay in transportation, unavoidable casualties, failure of other
persons to transport, unavoidable casualties, failure of other person to meet
properly their respective commitments, including, by way of example and
not limitation, suppliers of essential services or goods, or any and all other
causes beyond the grantee's control.
§ A175-26. Local organization services.
The grantee, upon reaching a market saturation of 35% of the homes passed
(the number of homes which cable compared with number of homes where
cable is available), will maintain and operate a fully equipped studio which
will be capable of operation at remote location.
§ A175-27. Other services.
The grantee will provide service to the Township Hall, Fire Department,
Police Department and public schools. This service is without charge to
a single point of entry. Any additional and /or extensive wiring required,
such as in a school building, should be on a cost basis only. In addition,
the grantee will provide a community bulletin board, weather information,
cable guide listing various services and an alphanumeric display for the
benefit of impaired hearing residents.
Chapter A176
GAS FRANCHISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Oil and gas operations — See Ch. 122. Cable television franchise — See Ch. A175.
§ A176-1. Grant of franchise.
The Township hereby grants to the Consumers Power Company, a Michigan
Corporation, its successors and assigns, hereinafter call the "grantee," the
right, power and authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and
services on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges
and other public places and to do a local gas business in the Township for a
period of 30 years.
§ A176-2. Term of franchise.
In consideration of the rights, power and authority hereby granted, all of
which shall vest in the grantee for a period of 30 years as aforesaid, said
grantee shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof.
§ A175-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A176-3
1:837
§ A176-3. Obstructions.
No highway, street, alley, bridge, or other public place used by said grantee
shall be obstructed longer than necessary during the work of construction
or repair and shall be restored to the same order and condition as when
said work was commenced. All of the grantee's pipes and mains shall be
so placed in the highways and other public places as not to unnecessarily
interfere with the use thereof for highway purposes.
§ A176-4. Hold harmless.
Said grantee shall at all times keep and save the Township free and
harmless from all loss, costs and expense to which it may be subject by
reason of the negligent construction and maintenance of the structures and
equipment hereby authorized. In case any action is commenced against
the Township on account of the permission herein given, said grantee
shall, upon notice, defend the Township and save it free and harmless
from all loss, cost damage arising out of such negligent construction and
maintenance.
§ A176-5. Nonexclusivity.
The rights, power and authority herein granted are not exclusive and either
manufactured or natural gas may be furnished hereunder.
§ A176-6. Service to Township.
Said grantee shall from time to time extend its gas distribution system to
and within said Township shall furnish gas to applicants residing therein
whenever the amount of gas to be furnished thereby shall provide an
adequate and reasonable return upon the cost of making such extensions
and providing such service.
§ A176-7. Charges.
Said grantee shall be entitled to charge the inhabitants of said Township for
gas furnished therein the rates, including minimum charges, as approved
by the Michigan Public Services Commission, to which Commission or its
successors authority and jurisdiction to fix and regulate gas rates and rules
regulating such service in said Township are hereby granted for the term of
this franchise. Such rates and rules shall be subject to review and change at
any time upon petition therefor being made by either said Township, action
or by its Township Board or by said grantee.
§ A176-3 NORTHVILLE TOWNSHIP CODE § A176-7
1:838