CODE OF ORDINANCES OXFORD CHARTER TOWNSHIP, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published in 2006 by Order of the Township Board 
____________ 
Adopted: January 10, 2007 
____________ 
 
> 
OFFICIALS 
of 
CHARTER TOWNSHIP 
OF 
OXFORD, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
William Dunn 
(Supervisor) 
____________ 
Clara J. Sanderson 
(Clerk) 
____________ 
Joseph G. Ferrari 
(Treasurer) 
____________ 
Sue Bellairs 
(Trustee) 
Pat Fitchena 
(Trustee) 
Doleen Behnke 
(Trustee) 
Charles Kniffen 
(Trustee) 
Township Board 
____________ 
Gary R. Rentrop 
Township Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the Charter Township of Oxford, Michigan. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were ordinances adopted by the township board. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Connie Timmons, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Gary R. Rentrop, Township Attorney, for his cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that his efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the township readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the township's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the Charter Township of Oxford, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the Charter Township of Oxford, Michigan. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the Charter Township of Oxford, Michigan. 2006. 
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF OXFORD 
COUNTY OF OAKLAND 
STATE OF MICHIGAN 
ORDINANCE NO. 119 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF OXFORD, MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ARTICLE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF OXFORD ORDAINS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled 'Code of Ordinances, Oxford Charter Township, Michigan," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 66, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. Repealer. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before April 9, 2003, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. Repealed ordinances not revised. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this article. 
Section 4. Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, as to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense and as to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the township may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Amendments to Code. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the township to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Later Ordinances. Ordinances adopted after April 9, 2003, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. Effective Date. This article shall become effective 30 days following the date of publication hereof. 
This article is adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Charter Township of Oxford at a regular meeting of the Board held on the 10 th day of January 2007. 
MOVED BY: Trustee Kniffen 	SECONDED BY: Trustee Fitchena 
AYES: Kniffen, Ferrari, Dunn, Behnke, Fitchena, Bellairs 
NAYS: None 	
ABSENT: Sanderson 	
___________ 	___________ 
William Dunn, Supervisor 
Charter Township of Oxford 	Clara J. Sanderson, CMC, Clerk 
Charter Township of Oxford 
 
STATE OF MICHIGAN  ) 
)SS 
COUNTY OF OAKLAND  ) 
I, Clara J. Sanderson, CMC, duly elected Clerk of the Charter Township of Oxford, do hereby certify that the foregoing is a complete and true copy of Ordinance No. 119 adopted by the Charter Township of Oxford at a meeting of the Board of Trustees held on the 10 th day of January 2007. 
	/s/ Clara J. Sanderson 
      Clerk 
 	 
PUBLISHED: January 31, 2007 
EFFECTIVE: March 2, 2007  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, Oxford Charter Township, Michigan," and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Oxford Charter Township Code."  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances and resolutions unless the context requires otherwise or except as otherwise defined in a particular provision of this Code or an ordinance or resolution. 
Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the township board may be effectuated. The provisions of this Code are minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the natural resources and the public health, safety and welfare of the township. When provisions within this Code or other township ordinances conflict with this Code, the more restrictive requirements or the requirements imposing the higher standard shall control. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, Oxford Charter Township, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period or a fixed or final day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period or day is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. 
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either…or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Oakland County, Michigan. 
Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a township officer or township employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
Includes, including. The terms "includes" and "including" are terms of enlargement and not of limitation or exclusive enumeration, and the use of the terms does not create a presumption that components not expressed are excluded. 
Joint authority. A grant of authority to three or more persons as a public body confers the authority on a majority of the number of members as fixed by statute or ordinance. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Number. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
Oath, affirmation, sworn, affirmed. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. In similar cases, the term "sworn" includes the term "affirmed." 
Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, boards, commissions or employees are to township officers, township departments, township boards, township commissions and township employees. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. With respect to special assessments, however, the owner shall be considered to be the person whose name appears on the assessment roll for the purpose of giving notice and billing. 
Person. The term "person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust, or governmental unit, and any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
Planning commission. The term "planning commission" means the planning commission of the Charter Township of Oxford, Michigan. 
Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes land and structures. 
Property. The term "property" means real and personal property. 
Public acts. References to public acts are references to the Public Acts of Michigan. (For example, a reference to Public Act No. 246 of 1945 is a reference to Act No. 246 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1945.) Any reference to a public act, whether by act number or by short title, is a reference to such act as amended. 
Real property, real estate, land, lands. The term "real property" includes land, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature, subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Michigan. 
Street, highway, alley. The term "street" or "highway" means the entire width subject to an easement for a public right-of-way or owned in fee by the township, county or state, or every way or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of public travel. The term "alley" means any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and egress to and from property. 
Swear. The term "swear" includes affirm. 
Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses. The future tense includes the present tense. 
Township. The term "township" means the Charter Township of Oxford, Michigan, or Oxford Charter Township, Michigan. 
Township board. The term "township board" means the township board of Oxford Charter Township, Michigan. 
Water and sewer committee. The term "water and sewer committee" means the Oxford Township Water and Sewer Committee. 
Week. The term "week" means seven consecutive days. 
Written. The term "written" includes any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures. 
Year. The term "year" means 12 consecutive months. 
Zoning ordinance. The term "zoning ordinance" means the zoning ordinance of the Charter Township of Oxford.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. Editor's notes, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code.  
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive any repealed ordinance. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal.  
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. Portions of this Code repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section _______ (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Oxford Charter Township Code is hereby amended to read as follows: …." 
(c)  If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section _______ (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Oxford Charter Township Code is hereby created to read as follows: …." 
(d)  All provisions desired to be repealed should be repealed specifically by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance.  
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the township. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in this Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into this Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, this Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of this Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from this Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in this Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in this Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to this Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of this Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in this Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in this Code.  
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, a civil infraction, a municipal civil infraction or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation, a civil infraction, a municipal civil infraction or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a township officer or township employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Unless declared to be a civil infraction or a municipal civil infraction, a violation of this Code is a misdemeanor. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided, a person convicted of a violation of this Code that is a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00, and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided, however, that a violation of this Code is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, if the violation substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days. 
(e)  The following provisions apply to violations of this Code that are municipal civil infractions: 
(1)  A person found responsible or responsible with explanation for a municipal civil infraction shall be subject to a civil fine to be determined by the district court having jurisdiction in the township. 
(2)  Such person shall be subject to costs, including all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the township has been put to enforce such civil infraction, in the amount of not less than $9.00 and not more than $500.00. 
(3)  If such person refuses to pay such civil fine and costs in a timely manner as set forth under court order, the township may obtain a lien against the land, building or structure involved in the violation. Such lien may be obtained, enforced and discharged subject to the procedures and limitations in section 8731(3) of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961 (MCL 600.8731(3)). 
(4)  The penalties set forth in this section are otherwise controlled by the requirements of Michigan law. The township may further pursue injunctive or other remedies permitted at law to enforce provisions of this Code. 
(f)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  As to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  As to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(g)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(h)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief or civil or quasijudicial enforcement.  
Sec. 1-8. - Severability. 
If any provision of this Code or its application to any person or circumstances is held invalid or unconstitutional, the invalidity or unconstitutionality does not affect other provisions or applications of this Code that can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Code are severable.  
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the township relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments.  
Sec. 1-10. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any township ordinance on the effective date of this Code.  
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any of ordinance or portion of an ordinance listed in this section. Such ordinances or portions of ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. 
(1)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance annexing property into the township or describing the corporate limits. 
(2)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance deannexing property or excluding property from the township. 
(3)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(4)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(5)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(6)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(7)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance granting any right or franchise. 
(8)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(9)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(10)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(11)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(12)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(13)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes not published in this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance granting a tax exemption for specific property not published in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance pertaining to zoning, including, but not limited to, the basic zoning ordinance, ordinances rezoning property or amending the zoning map and ordinances promulgating zoning text amendments. 
(16)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance that is temporary, although general in effect. 
(17)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance that is special, although permanent in effect. 
(18)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance the purpose of which has been accomplished.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement saved from repeal, § 1-11(4); administration and enforcement of public water supply protection, § 22-221 et seq.; administration of weapons regulations, § 30-271 et seq.; taxation, ch. 50; utilities, ch. 62. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Public notice of meetings; publication of proceedings, ordinances and notices. 
(a)  Public notice of meetings. Public notice of meetings of the township board shall be posted at the principal office of the township and at any other location determined appropriate by the township board. The public notice shall contain the name of the township, its telephone number and its address. 
(b)  Publication of proceedings, ordinances, and notices other than meeting notices. Publication of proceedings of the township board or a synopsis of such proceedings, the publication of notices other than notice of meetings and the publication of a summary or a true copy of an ordinance after final passage, as part of the published proceedings of the township, shall be made by publication in a newspaper which is published and circulated in the township, if there be one so published and circulated, or if there is no such newspaper, then in one published in the county in which the township is located. If a summary of an ordinance is published, the township shall include in the publication the designation of a location in the township where a true copy of the ordinance can be inspected or obtained. 
(Ord. No. 66.001, 11-26-2002)  
Secs. 2-2—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TOWNSHIP BOARD (RESERVED 
 
Secs. 2-31—2-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-11(6); enforcement officer for weapons, § 30-272. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-61. - Ordinance enforcement officer. 
(a)  Office established. There is hereby established the office of ordinance enforcement officer within the township. 
(b)  Appointment and removal; term. The township board is hereby authorized by resolution, at any regular meeting of the board, to appoint any person or persons to the office of ordinance enforcement officer for such term or terms as may be designated in such resolution. The board may further, by resolution, remove any person from such office, at the discretion of the board. 
(c)  Authority to enforce ordinances. The ordinance enforcement officer is hereby authorized to enforce all ordinances of the township, whether heretofore or hereafter enacted, and whether such ordinances specifically designate a different official to enforce the ordinance or do not designate any particular enforcing officer. Where a particular officer is so designated in any such ordinance, the authority of the ordinance enforcement officer to enforce the ordinance shall be in addition and supplementary to the authority granted to such other specific officer. The authority of the ordinance enforcement officer shall also be in addition and supplementary to the authority vested in the township supervisor by state statute. The ordinance enforcing authority of the township supervisor and the other officers specifically designated in any township ordinance shall continue in full force and effect and shall in no way be diminished or impaired by the terms of this section. 
(d)  Specific enforcement duties. The ordinance enforcement duties authorized in this section shall include, among others, the following: investigation of ordinance violations, serving notice of violations, serving appearance tickets as authorized by Public Act No. 175 of 1927 (MCL 760.1 et seq.), appearance in court or other judicial proceedings to assist in the prosecution of ordinance violators, and such other ordinance-enforcing duties as may be delegated by the township supervisor or assigned by the township attorney. 
(Ord. No. 63, §§ 1—4, 3-12-1986)  
Secs. 2-62—2-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BENEFITS 
 
Sec. 2-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appointed officials include the deputy/assistant clerk, deputy/assistant treasurer, assessor, and building official/zoning administrator. An appointed official may also be considered a full-time employee pursuant to this division provided the appointed official is scheduled to regularly work 40 hours per week in a calendar year. 
Elected official means a person who has been elected to serve in a public office of the township by the qualified electors of the township. The term "elected officials" shall also include an official who has been appointed to serve part or all of the remainder of an elected official's term of office. Elected officials include the supervisor, the clerk, the treasurer, and the four trustees of the township board for purposes of this division. 
Full-time employee means an employee who is scheduled to regularly work 40 hours per week in a calendar year. 
Personnel policy means the personnel policy, as amended, adopted and in effect for the township. 
Temporary employees means employees who occupy positions that are temporary in nature, for specific purposes, and with expected end dates. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 2, 12-13-1995) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-82. - Scope and effect of division. 
(a)  This division shall not affect any additional benefits provided for in the personnel policy of a nature not described in this division. Such benefits provided in the personnel policy shall remain in full force and effect. 
(b)  This division shall not affect any benefits which the township is required to provide pursuant to the laws of the state. Such benefits shall remain in full force and effect. 
(c)  The authority given under this division is in addition to and not in derogation of any power existing in the township under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 5, 12-13-1995)  
Sec. 2-83. - Ratification of existing plans. 
The township hereby ratifies and confirms the validity of any annuity or pension plan, insurance or prepayment plan arrangement in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 6, 12-13-1995)  
Sec. 2-84. - Retirement system. 
(a)  Pursuant to Public Act No. 77 of 1989 (MCL 41.110b) the township board is hereby authorized, but not required, to create and establish or maintain an existing annuity or pension program for the pensioning of its elected and appointed officials and full-time employees, in addition to the salary or wage of each appointed official and full-time employee as determined by the township board. 
(b)  For purposes of creating and establishing or maintaining an existing annuity or pension program, the township supervisor and the township clerk, with approval of the township board, are hereby authorized to sign the contract in the name of the township, subject to approval by the township board, with any company authorized to transact such business within the state for annuities or pensions. 
(c)  The annuity or pension plans created and established under this division, or the annuity or pension plans maintained hereafter, shall cover elected and appointed officials and each full-time employee as set forth in the personnel policy. 
(d)  The township may make contributions to the annuity or pension plan created or maintained under this division for each employee according to the terms of the plan created or maintained and amended from time to time, and by the personnel policy. The following contributions by the township shall be made to an existing annuity or pension plan approved by the township board: 
(1)  Fifteen percent of an eligible appointed official's or full-time employee's salary or wage. 
(2)  Ten percent of an elected official's, including township board trustees, salary or wage. 
This contribution shall be secured from the general fund of the township. 
(e)  The responsibility and method of each employee for the employee's individual contributions to the annuity or pension plan, and the method for making such contributions, shall be governed by the terms of the plan created or maintained and amended from time to time, and by the terms of the personnel policy. 
(f)  Each employee's eligibility to participate in the annuity or pension plan created or maintained pursuant to this division, and the vesting of the employee's right or interest in the plan, shall be governed by the criteria established under the plan, as amended from time to time, and by the terms of the personnel policy. 
(g)  The responsibility and method of each elected official for the official's individual contributions to the annuity or pension plan, and the method for making such contributions, shall be governed by the terms of the plan created or maintained and amended from time to time by resolution of the township board. 
(h)  Each elected official's eligibility to participate in the annuity or pension plan created or maintained pursuant to this division, and the vesting of the official's right or interest in the plan, shall be governed by the criteria established under the plan, as amended from time to time by resolution of the township board. 
(i)  Any appointed official or full-time employee, though eligible to participate in an annuity or pension plan pursuant to this section, may decline to participate by giving written notice to the township clerk prior to the commencement of any coverage period. If the appointed official or full-time employee decides to terminate such coverage during a coverage period, the coverage will cease according to the terms of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 3, 12-13-1995)  
Sec. 2-85. - Other benefits. 
(a)  Pursuant to Public Act No. 77 of 1989 (MCL 41.110b) the township board is hereby authorized but not required to make arrangements with a prepayment plan or a co-payment plan authorized to transact business within the state, to insure and cover township elected or appointed officials (excluding, however, the four trustees for purposes of this section) and full-time employees under policies of group insurance or prepayment plan contracts, or both, covering life, accident, health, hospitalization, dental, optical, medical and surgical service insurance, including hospitalization and medical and surgical service and expense for their spouse and/or dependents prior to their 19th birthday of the appointed officials and full-time employees. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the following classes of persons in the township are eligible for the benefits as set forth in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Full-time employees. 
(2)  Elected officials. 
(3)  Appointed officials who are also full-time employees. 
Township board trustees, although elected, and temporary employees are not eligible for benefits for purposes of this section. 
(c)  Employee eligibility for insurance or coverage for full-time appointed officials and full-time employees shall be governed by the terms of the personnel policy and the terms of the contract or arrangement as both may be amended from time to time. 
(d)  If the appointed official or full-time employee decides to terminate such coverage as set forth in subsection (a) of this section during a coverage period, the coverage will cease according to the terms of the plan. 
(e)  Full-time appointed officials and full-time employees who are eligible to participate in the township's medical insurance plan and also have medical insurance coverage available on another policy can instead opt to accept compensation in lieu of medical insurance. Full-time elected officials (the supervisor, clerk, and treasurer) are not eligible to receive compensation in lieu of participation in the township's medical insurance plan. 
(f)  Any appointed official or full-time employee, though eligible to participate in a group insurance or other plan pursuant to this section, may decline to participate by giving written notice to the township clerk prior to the first day of the last month of the end of the township's fiscal year in order for the appointed official or full-time employee to receive compensation in lieu of participation in the township's medical insurance plan for the immediately succeeding fiscal year. 
(g)  If an appointed official or full-time employee waives the medical insurance coverage offered, the appointed official or full-time employee has the option to be compensated by an increase in the appointed official's or full-time employee's salary or wage. 
(h)  The compensation received by eligible appointed officials and full-time employees shall apply to their salary and is not transferable or applicable to a future employee's starting wage or salary for a similar position. 
(i)  The eligibility of appointed officials and full-time employees for compensation in lieu of medical insurance or coverage shall be governed by terms as set forth in a resolution adopted by the township board. 
(j)  If an appointed official or full-time employee who is currently receiving compensation in lieu of medical insurance or coverage elects to be included in the township's group insurance or other plan pursuant to this section, he shall be monetarily compensated, until he receives insurance or coverage, proportionately for the months in which he elected to accept compensation in lieu of insurance or coverage. This compensation shall be paid in a lump sum total to the appointed official or full-time employee on the final scheduled working day of the township's fiscal year. 
(k)  An appointed official or full-time employee may elect to be included in the township's medical insurance plan at any time. Reinstatement shall occur only one time for any appointed official or full-time employee in any particular fiscal year of the township. The township board may permit more than one reinstatement in any fiscal year if warranted by extenuating circumstances. 
(l)  If an appointed official or full-time employee is currently accepting compensation in lieu of participation in the township's medical insurance coverage plan and elects to be included in the township's medical insurance coverage plan, the effective date of coverage shall be governed by the terms of the existing medical insurance coverage plan in effect for the township. 
(Ord. No. 91, § 4, 12-13-1995) 
APPENDIX A
 
APPENDIX B
 
APPENDIX C
  
Secs. 2-86—2-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-11(3); taxation, ch. 50. 
 
Sec. 2-111. - Recovery of expenses of emergency responses to incidents involving motor vehicles and alcohol or drugs. 
(a)  Purpose. The township finds that a significant number of traffic arrests and traffic accidents in the township involve drivers who are operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of, or impaired by, an intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or a combination thereof, or having an unlawful blood alcohol level. In addition, the township finds that, when a traffic accident involves drivers who were operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of, or impaired by, an intoxicating liquor or controlled substance or a combination thereof, or having an unlawful blood alcohol level, there is a greater likelihood of personal injury and property damage. As a result, a greater operational and financial burden is placed upon the township's police, firefighting and rescue services by persons who are operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of, or impaired by, an intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance or a combination thereof, or having an unlawful blood alcohol level. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency response means: 
(1)  The providing, sending, or dispatch of police, firefighting, emergency medical or rescue services by personnel employed by and/or acting on behalf of the township at an accident involving a motor vehicle or vehicles where one or more of the drivers of such vehicle or vehicles was operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of, or impaired by, intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or a combination thereof, or having an unlawful blood alcohol level. 
(2)  The making of a traffic stop and arrest by a law enforcement officer where a driver was operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of, or impaired by, intoxicating liquor, or a controlled substance, or a combination thereof, or having an unlawful blood alcohol level. 
Expense of an emergency response means the direct and reasonable costs incurred by the township, a public entity under contract with the township, an intergovernmental entity of which the township is a part, or a private person, authority, or corporation operating at the request or direction of the township, when making an emergency response, including the costs of providing police, firefighting and rescue services at the scene of the emergency response. These costs further include all of the salaries and wages of the personnel responding, all salaries and wages of the personnel engaged in investigation, supervision and report preparation, all costs connected with the administration and provision of all chemical tests of his or her blood, breath, or urine and all costs related to any prosecution of the person causing the incident. 
(c)  Liability for expense of emergency response. 
(1)  Responsible person. Any person is liable for the expense of an emergency response, if while under the influence of, or impaired by, an intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or the combined influence of an intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, or having an unlawful blood alcohol level, such person's operating of a motor vehicle proximately causes an emergency response, and that person is determined to be guilty of any of such drunk driving offenses in a district court proceeding associated with the emergency response. 
(2)  Charge against person. The expense of an emergency response shall be a charge against the person liable for the expenses under this section. The charge constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the township for incurring those costs in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, express or implied. Additionally, the district court is authorized to collect such debt for the township and may charge a service fee for such collection in an amount mutually agreed upon by the court and the township. 
(3)  Cost recovery schedule. The township shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule of the costs to be charged and included within the expense of an emergency response. This schedule shall be available to the public from either the township clerk or the county sheriff's department. 
(4)  Billing. The township clerk or his or her designee may, within 30 days of receiving the itemized costs, or any part thereof, incurred by the township for emergency response, submit a bill for these costs by first class mail or personal service to the person liable for the expenses as enumerated under this section. The bill(s) shall require full payment in 30 days from the date of service. The 30-day period shall begin two days after the bill is postmarked. 
(5)  Failure to pay bill; procedure to recover costs. Any person described in this section as liable for the expense of an emergency response failing to pay the bill within 30 days of service shall be considered to be in default. The 30-day period shall begin two days after service is postmarked. The failure to pay may further be considered a violation of probation if the payment was ordered by the court at the time of sentencing. The township may commence civil suit to recover the expenses, attorneys' fees, and all costs allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 94A, arts. 1—3, 12-13-2000) 
APPENDIX A
  
Secs. 2-112—2-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS 
 
Sec. 2-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
FOIA means the Freedom of Information Act (MCL 15.231 et seq.). 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 2-142. - General policy. 
It is the policy of the township that all persons are entitled to full and complete information regarding the affairs of the township and the official acts of those who represent them as public officials and public employees, consistent with the Freedom of Information Act (MCL 15.231 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 89-A, § 1, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 2-143. - Submission of request for record. 
A person desiring to inspect or receive a copy of a public record pursuant to the FOIA (MCL 15.231 et seq.) may make a written request for the public record. A written request means a writing that asks for information and includes a writing transmitted by facsimile, electronic mail, or other electronic means. Such requests shall be directed to the township clerk, who, as the designated FOIA coordinator, is responsible for accepting and processing requests for the township's public records. A written request sent by facsimile, electronic mail, or other electronic transmission is not considered to be received by the township clerk until one business day after the electronic transmission is made. If the township clerk is unavailable, the request shall be submitted to the township deputy clerk or other person designated to receive such requests by the township clerk. 
(Ord. No. 89-A, § 2, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 2-144. - Processing of request for record. 
Upon receipt of a request to inspect or receive a copy of a public record pursuant to the FOIA (MCL 15.231 et seq.), a township official or employee shall promptly deliver the request to the township clerk, deputy clerk or other person designated to receive such request by the township clerk together with a written memorandum setting forth a brief summary of the request and the date of the request. 
(Ord. No. 89-A, § 3, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 2-145. - Response to request for record. 
Within five business days of the day upon which a request is received under section 2-144, unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the person making the request, the township shall respond to the request by one of the following: 
(1)  Grant the request. 
(2)  Issue a written notice to the requesting person denying the request. 
(3)  Grant the request in part and issue a written notice denying the request in part. 
(4)  Under unusual circumstances, issue a notice extending for not more than ten business days the period during which the township shall respond to the request. Such a notice shall set forth the reasons for the extension and the date by which the township shall respond in one of the ways specified in subsections (1) through (3) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 89-A, § 4, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 2-146. - Notice of denial of request for record. 
A written notice denying a request under this division in whole or in part shall contain: 
(1)  An explanation of the basis under the FOIA (MCL 15.231 et seq.) or other statute for the determination that the public record, or the portion thereof, is exempt from disclosure, if that is the reason for denying the request or a portion thereof. 
(2)  A certificate that the public record does not exist under the name given by the requestor or by another name reasonably known to the township, if that is the reason for denying the request or a portion thereof. 
(3)  A description of a public record or information on a public record which is separated or deleted because of its exempt status under the FOIA (MCL 15.231 et seq.). 
(4)  An explanation of a requesting person's right to do either of the following: 
a.  Submit to the township supervisor a written appeal of the denial that identifies the reason why the denial should be reversed. 
b.  Commence an action in the county circuit court to compel the township's disclosure of the public records within 180 days after the township's final determination to deny a request. 
(5)  Notice of the requesting person's right to receive attorneys' fees and damages if, after judicial review, the circuit court determines that the township has not complied with the FOIA and orders disclosure of all or a portion of a public record. 
(Ord. No. 89-A, § 5, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 2-147. - Rights of requesting person on denial of request for record. 
If the township makes a determination to deny all or a portion of a request under this division, the requesting person may do one of the following at his or her option: 
(1)  Submit to the township supervisor a written appeal that specifically states the word "appeal" and identifies the reason or reasons for reversal of the denial. 
(2)  Commence an action in the county circuit court to compel the township's disclosure of the public records within 180 days after the township's final determination to deny a request. 
(Ord. No. 89-A, § 6, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 2-148. - Response to appeal of denial of request for record. 
Within ten days after receiving a written appeal pursuant to section 2-147, the township supervisor shall do one of the following: 
(1)  Reverse the disclosure denial. 
(2)  Issue a written notice to the requesting person upholding the disclosure denial. 
(3)  Reverse the disclosure denial in part and issue a written notice to the requesting person upholding the disclosure denial in part. 
(4)  Under unusual circumstances, issue a notice extending for not more than ten business days the period during which the township supervisor shall respond to the written appeal. The township supervisor shall not issue more than one notice of extension for a particular written appeal. 
(Ord. No. 89-A, § 7, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 2-149. - Duties of township clerk; protection of records. 
The township clerk, as the FOIA coordinator, is responsible for approving or denying requests made pursuant to the FOIA (MCL 15.231 et seq.), and shall sign all written notices of denial. The township clerk shall keep a copy of all written requests for public records on file for no less than one year. The township shall protect public records from loss, unauthorized alteration, mutilation or destruction. 
(Ord. No. 89-A, § 8, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 2-150. - Fee. 
(a)  The township may charge a fee for the production of documents pursuant to a FOIA (MCL 15.231 et seq.) request, including the costs of searching for a public record, copying the record and providing the record, or the township may search for and/or furnish such documents without charge or at a reduced charge if the township determines that a waiver or reduction is in the public interest. The township shall search for and/or furnish public records without charge for the first $20.00 of the fee for each request, to an individual who submits an affidavit stating that the individual is then receiving public assistance, or, if not receiving public assistance, stating facts showing inability to pay the cost because of indigence, provided the individual is entitled to information under the FOIA. Fees shall otherwise not be dependent upon the identity of an individual making a request. 
(b)  The fee, if any, shall be calculated to include the following charges, in accordance with the following method and policy: 
(1)  Actual mailing costs. 
(2)  Actual duplication costs, using the most economical means available. 
(3)  Actual labor costs, which shall be calculated based on the hourly wage of the lowest paid employee of the township capable of retrieving the information necessary to comply with the FOIA (MCL 15.231 et seq.) request, and these labor costs shall include time spent for search, examination, review, deletion and separation of exempt from nonexempt information, duplication and mailing. Upon receipt of a FOIA request, the township clerk or designee, as acting FOIA coordinator, shall make a determination as to which township employee is capable of conducting the search, examination, review and deletion and separation of exempt from nonexempt information (referred to in this section as "FOIA processing"). The FOIA coordinator shall select the lowest paid capable employee to conduct FOIA processing. When selecting a capable employee with the lowest hourly wage, a determination of the lowest hourly wage shall include the employee's salary plus the township's cost of fringe benefits provided to that employee. The FOIA applicant shall then be charged for the time necessary for the employee to conduct the FOIA processing based on the employee's hourly wage, plus the actual cost of duplicating and mailing the requested documents. 
(4)  If FOIA processing takes no longer than one-half hour, there shall be no charge for processing costs, although duplication, copying and mailing costs shall be determined and be assessed to the FOIA applicant. For the purpose of this subsections the Township Board of Trustees has determined that a response to a FOIA request requiring time in excess of one-half hour represents an unreasonably high cost to the township unless the township is able to be reimbursed for its processing costs. 
(5)  These costs shall be calculated for each separate request so that each individual pays the actual costs of providing to the individual the requested information. 
(c)  If the FOIA coordinator, upon receipt of the FOIA (MCL 15.231 et seq.) request, estimates that the total cost of responding to the FOIA request will exceed $50.00, the FOIA coordinator may request a deposit from the applicant equal to one-half the estimated cost of responding to the FOIA request. If a deposit is requested pursuant to this section, the township need not commence a response to the FOIA request until the deposit has been paid. 
(d)  The township shall provide each FOIA (MCL 15.231 et seq.) applicant a statement of the bill which categorizes the costs to the township as to mailing, duplication and labor costs. 
(e)  Once a FOIA request has been fully processed and documents prepared, and the total costs of the FOIA response have been determined, the township shall not release the requested documents to the FOIA applicant until the total costs of the FOIA response have been paid. The FOIA coordinator shall treat each FOIA request as a separate request, and the FOIA coordinator shall not decline to respond to an applicant's new FOIA request based upon the applicant's failure to pay the costs associated with a prior distinct FOIA request by the same applicant. 
(Ord. No. 89-A, §§ 9—12, 11-10-1999; Ord. No. 89A.001, arts. I—III, 8-9-2000)  
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14; alcoholic liquor in parks, § 34-36. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Alcoholic liquor defined. 
In this chapter the term "alcoholic liquor" has the meaning assigned to it in section 105 of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 (MCL 436.1105).  
Sec. 6-2. - Purchase, consumption, possession or transportation by underage persons. 
No person under the age of 21 years shall purchase, consume or knowingly possess or transport any alcoholic liquor, or knowingly possess, transport, or have under his control any alcoholic liquor in any motor vehicle, unless the person is employed by a licensee of the state liquor control commission and is possessing, transporting, or having such alcoholic liquor under his control in a motor vehicle during regular working hours and in the course of his employment. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.2(21), 6-26-1980; Ord. No. 43-A.001, § 1, 1-14-1998)  
Sec. 6-3. - Furnishing alcoholic liquor to underage persons. 
No person shall willfully give or furnish any alcoholic liquor to a person under the age of 21 years except upon authority of and pursuant to a prescription of a duly licensed physician and except as otherwise permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.2(21), 6-26-1980; Ord. No. 43A.001, § 1, 1-14-1998)  
Sec. 6-4. - Adoption of Section 703 of Public Act 58 of 1998, MCL 436.1703. 
(a)  Purpose and intent . This is a section to adopt Section 703 of Public Act 58 of 1998, MCL 436.1703, as amended at this time or as may be amended in the future, by reference, for the purpose of regulating purchase, consumption, or possession of alcoholic liquor by minor; attempt; violation; fines; sanctions; furnishing fraudulent identification to minor; use of fraudulent identification by minor; prior violation; screening and assessment; chemical breath analysis; notice to parent, custodian, or guardian; exceptions; definitions. 
(b)  Adoption by reference. Section 703 of Public Act 58 of 1998, MCL 436.1703, as amended at this time or as may be amended in the future, is hereby adopted by reference. 
(c)  Definition of minor. As defined in Section 109 of Public Act 58 of 1998, MCL 436.1109, as amended, "minor" means an individual less than 21 years of age. 
(d)  Limitations. Violations of Section 703 of Public Act 58 of 1998, MCL 436.1703, as amended at this time or as may be amended in the future, for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days shall not be enforced by the Township of Oxford as an ordinance violation. 
(e)  Penalties. The penalties provided in Section 703 of Public Act 58 of 1998, MCL 436.1703, as amended at this time or as may be amended in the future, are adopted by reference, subject to the limitations stated in subsection (d) of section 6-4. 
(f)  Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed only to the extent necessary to give this section full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 43A.004, § 1, 3-14-2018)  
Secs. 6-5—6-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LIQUOR CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 58A, adopted Oct. 22, 2003, repealed art. II and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former art. II, §§ 6-31 and 6-32, pertained to license issuance, renewal and revocation recommendations and derived from Ord. No. 58, §§ I and II, adopted Feb. 9, 1983; an ordinance adopted June 8, 1994; and Ord. No. 58.002, art. 1, adopted May 9, 2001. 
 
Sec. 6-31. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Charter Township of Oxford Liquor Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 58A, art. 1, 10-22-2003)  
Sec. 6-32. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Alcoholic liquor shall mean any spirituous, vinous, malt, or fermented liquor, liquids and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume which are fit for use for beverage purposes, and including, but not limited to, beer, wine, spirits or any combination thereof. 
Board shall mean the Charter Township of Oxford Board of Trustees. 
Commission shall mean the Michigan Liquor Control Commission. 
License shall mean a liquor license, as issued by the commission, or issued by the commission's equivalent in another jurisdiction of the United States. 
Licensed establishment shall mean a business, enterprise, or operation for which a license has been issued. 
Licensed premises shall mean the property upon which a licensed establishment is located. 
Licensee shall mean the person who holds a license. 
Manager shall mean any person engaged in the operation of an establishment who is, for any substantial period of time, the highest-ranking agent or employee of the owner of the establishment present at the premises, and who is engaged in the operation of the establishment in a supervisory capacity. The fact that a person has the title "manager" shall be indicative of his or her status as a manager under this article, but shall not be necessary for such a determination. 
Operating plan shall mean a detailed description of the intended operation of a proposed licensed establishment. At a minimum, it shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The proposed manner in which the proposed licensed establishment will be used and operated. 
(2)  The proposed days and hours of operation. 
(3)  Proposed crowd control, security, alcohol management, parking, interior use and layout, entertainment, staffing level, and food service plans. 
(4)  Any other information necessary to fully inform the board of the nature of the use and planned activity to take place at the proposed licensed establishment. 
Person shall mean any individual, firm, company, limited liability company, partnership, corporation or any other legal entity of any kind or nature whatsoever, or any combination thereof, whether for profit or not for profit. 
Township shall mean the Charter Township of Oxford. 
(Ord. No. 58A, art. 2, 10-22-2003)  
Sec. 6-33. - License required. 
(a)  Requirement for sale. No person shall sell any alcoholic liquor unless such person has first obtained a license from the commission as required by state law. 
(b)  No right for a license. No person shall be entitled to the issuance of such license, or to the consideration by the board of the application for a license. 
(c)  Non-consideration of license application. The board may determine, at any time, that the issuance of a new license would be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the township, and that applications for licenses shall not be considered. 
(Ord. No. 58A, art. 3, 10-22-2003)  
Sec. 6-34. - New licenses. 
(a)  Applications. Applications for a license shall be submitted to the board in writing, on a form provided by the township. If an applicant is an individual, the application shall be signed by the individual applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, corporation, or limited liability company, the application shall be signed by a duly authorized agent. In all cases, the signature shall be verified by oath or affidavit, and the application shall contain the following statements and information: 
(1)  The name, date of birth, and address of the applicant, and any person who will serve as a manager of the proposed licensed establishment. In the case of a partnership, the application shall also contain the name, date of birth and address of each partner and/or other person entitled to share in the profits of the partnership. In the case of a corporation or limited liability company, the application shall also contain the names, dates of birth, and addresses of the officers, directors, managers and of all shareholders or members who hold directly or indirectly five percent or more of the voting stock, shares of the corporation, or ownership interest, as the case may be. 
(2)  The type of license desired. 
(3)  The citizenship of the applicant, the date and place of the applicant's birth, and, if the applicant is a naturalized United States citizen, the date and place of his or her naturalization. 
(4)  A description of the nature of the business for which the license is applied for, and, in the case of a corporation or limited liability company, the object for which it was formed. 
(5)  The length of time the applicant has conducted a business of the nature as provided in the response required by subsection (4), or, in the case of a corporation or limited liability company, the date when its articles of incorporation or articles of organization were filed. 
(6)  The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license, including but not limited to the street address and legal description. 
(7)  A statement whether any person required to be identified under subsection (1), has ever had a similar or other license suspended or revoked, the reason therefore, and the date and location where such suspension or revocation occurred. 
(8)  A statement whether any person required to be identified under subsection (1) has made an application, or applications, for another license for the proposed licensed premises other than that described in the application, and the disposition of such other application(s). 
(9)  A statement whether any person required to be identified under subsection (1) has ever been convicted of a felony, and a statement that no such person is disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this article, the laws of the state, or any regulations promulgated by the commission. 
(10)  A statement that no person required to be identified under subsection (1) will violate any laws of the state or of the United States, or any ordinances of the township, or any regulations promulgated by the state or the United States, including regulations promulgated by the commission, in the conduct or operation of the proposed licensed establishment. 
(11)  A statement that all personal property taxes and real property taxes, and all other obligations due and payable to the township, have been paid with regard to the proposed licensed premises and, in the case of an application for the transfer of a license, the licensed premises from which the applicant seeks to transfer the license. 
(12)  A statement as to the applicant's character, experience, and financial ability to meet the obligations and business undertakings for which the license is sought. 
(13)  The application shall be accompanied by building and plat plans showing the entire structure where the proposed licensed establishment is to be located, and the proposed licensed premises, and in particular the specific areas where the license is to be utilized. The plans shall demonstrate adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities and, where appropriate, adequate plans for screening and police control. 
(14)  The application shall be accompanied by a general area plan encompassing a one-quarter square mile area, surrounding the proposed licensed premises, showing the proximity of churches and schools (giving distances in lineal feet) to the proposed licensed establishment. 
(15)  The application shall be accompanied by an operating plan. 
(16)  The applicant shall pay any fees required by this article at the time of submitting the application. 
(17)  At the time of submitting the application to the township, the applicant shall provide authorization for the township to have access to any and all files in the possession of the commission regarding the commission's investigation of the applicant for the proposed license, or any past license. Such authorization shall be communicated in writing to the commission, and the applicant shall instruct the commission to promptly provide all such files to the township. 
(18)  At all times during the application process, the applicant shall provide notice to the township, by providing written notice to the township clerk, of all proceedings, formal and informal, related to the application, conducted by or held before any governmental agency, body, or court, including the commission, other than the township itself. 
(b)  Investigation. If the board wishes to consider the issuance of a license to the applicant, the board shall make an investigation into the proposed licensed premises, the proposed licensed establishment, the applicant and/or its shareholders, members and partners, and managers, as the board deems necessary or desirable for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)  Reviews required. Upon receipt of the application, the board shall forward copies to the county sheriff's department (and/or such other police agency as the board shall direct), the fire chief, planning commission, building department, township attorney and/or such other persons, township agencies or employees as the board deems necessary or desirable for review and comment. The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of all outside consultant reviews, including the township attorney's review. 
(d)  Public hearing. If the board wishes to consider the issuance of a license to the applicant, the township board shall hold a public hearing upon the license application. Following such hearing the board shall submit to the applicant a written statement of its findings and determination. The board's determination shall be based upon subsection (e). No person whose application is denied for any reason may reapply for one year from the date of denial, regardless of the location, unless the board determines otherwise for good cause shown. 
(e)  Board approval of license applications. 
(1)  Restrictions. The board shall decline to allow a license to be issued in any of the following circumstances: 
a.  To any person who has failed to comply with subsection (a), or any person who has provided false or misleading information to the township regarding his, her, or its application. 
b.  To a person who has had a license revoked for cause. 
c.  To a partnership of any kind, unless all of the members of such partnership are qualified under this article to obtain a license. 
d.  To a corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or a stock owner or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license under this article for any reason. 
e.  To a limited liability company, if any manager or member would not be eligible to receive a license under this article for any reason. 
f.  To a person whose proposed licensed establishment is or will be operated at any time by a manager, unless such manager would be eligible to receive a license under this article. 
g.  To a person who has been convicted of a violation of any United States, state, or local law, regulation, or rule concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance. 
h.  To a person who has been convicted of a crime punishable by death or imprisonment in excess of one year under the law of the place where convicted; or a crime involving theft, dishonesty or false statement (including tax evasion), regardless of punishment. This subsection shall not apply if the conviction was entered by a court that was not governed by the Constitution of the United States, unless the convicting court provided due process to the applicant. 
i.  To a person who does not own the proposed licensed premises, or who does not have a lease therefore for the full period for which the license is proposed to be issued, or to a person that does not have sufficient financial assets to carry on or maintain the business of the proposed licensed establishment. 
j.  To any law enforcing public official, or any member of the board. 
k.  For proposed licensed premises where there exists a violation of applicable building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, or fire codes, applicable zoning laws or regulations, or applicable public health regulations, or any township ordinance. 
l.  To a person who is in default of any personal or real property taxes, or any other obligation due and payable to the township. 
m.  For any proposed licensed establishment unless the sale of alcoholic liquor is shown to be incidental and subordinate to other permitted business uses upon the premises, including but not limited to food sales, motel operations, or recreational activities. 
n.  For a proposed licensed premises where it is determined by a majority of the board that the proposed licensed premises do not, or will not reasonably soon after commencement of the operation of the proposed licensed establishment, have adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, screening, landscaping, noise or nuisance control, or where a nuisance does or is reasonably likely to exist. 
o.  To any person who is unable, or whom the board reasonably believes to be unable, to adequately meet the obligations involved in operating the proposed licensed establishment. 
(2)  The board may decline to approve an application for a license based upon any of the following grounds: 
a.  Where the board determines that the proposed location is inappropriate for the area where it is proposed to be located, based upon any of the following factors: 
1.  The desirability of establishing a licensed establishment in developed, commercial areas, in preference to isolated, undeveloped areas. 
2.  Input from surrounding residents and property owners. 
3.  Traffic safety. 
4.  Accessibility to the proposed site from abutting roads, and/or the capability of abutting roads to accommodate the commercial activity. 
5.  Distance from public or private schools for minors. 
6.  Proximity to an inconsistent zoning classification. 
7.  Accessibility from primary roads or state highways. 
8.  Any other factors which, based upon the complete record before the board, reasonably indicate that the approval of the proposed licensed establishment would be inappropriate for the area where it is proposed to be located. 
b.  When the board determines that, at the time of the application process, issuance of a new license is not in the interest of the health, safety, or welfare of the residents of the township. 
c.  When the board determines, based upon the materials submitted by the applicant, the board's investigation, the reviews conducted pursuant to subsection (c), and/or the public hearing held pursuant to subsection (d), that the issuance of a license to the applicant would not be in the best interest of the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the township, based upon any of the following factors: 
1.  The applicant's experience in the alcohol/liquor business, and/or any other business that the proposed licensed establishment will be involved in. 
2.  The applicant's business reputation. 
3.  The applicant's moral character. 
4.  The impact of the proposed licensed establishment on the economic development of the area where it is to be situated, and the township as a whole. 
5.  The ability of law enforcement personnel to police the proposed licensed establishment. 
6.  The potential impact of the proposed licensed establishment on law enforcement within the township generally. 
7.  The potential impact of the proposed licensed establishment on the safety within the township. 
8.  If the application is for a license for an existing establishment, the history and reputation of that establishment. 
9.  The compatibility of the proposed licensed establishment within the surrounding land use and architecture. 
10.  Sewer capacity available for the proposed licensed premises. 
11.  Any other factors which, based upon the complete record before the board, reasonably indicate that the approval of the license would be a detriment to the health, safety, and welfare of the township. 
(f)  Conditions and agreements. 
(1)  Conditional approval. 
a.  All license approvals granted by the board shall be conditioned upon the completeness of the record before the board. If, after board approval but before the license is issued by the commission, any information is brought to the board's attention regarding the application, the board may rescind its approval of the license. 
b.  During the period between board approval of the license and issuance of the license by the commission, the applicant shall inform the township if there is any change to any of the information provided under subsection (a). 
(2)  The board may place additional conditions upon the granting of a license, and/or may require the applicant to enter into additional agreements as the board deems, in the board's sole discretion, to be necessary or desirable for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(g)  Term of license. Approval of a license shall be for a period of one year, subject to renewal, nonrenewal, and/or revocation, at the discretion of the township board, based upon compliance with the requirements of this article as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 58A, art. 4, 10-22-2003)  
Sec. 6-35. - Communications with commission. 
No officer, agent, trustee, or official of the township shall make a recommendation to the commission, positive or negative, regarding a pending application for a license within the township without the authorization of the board. 
(Ord. No. 58A, art. 5, 10-22-2003)  
Sec. 6-36. - Operation of licensed establishment. 
(a)  Inspections. All licensees shall make the licensed premises available for inspection and search by all commission investigators and local law enforcement officers designated by the state, county, or township, or any other township agent, during regular business hours or when the licensed premises are occupied by a licensee or a clerk, servant, agent or employee of the licensee. Evidence of a violation discovered pursuant to this article may be seized and used in an administrative or court proceeding, or in any hearing before the board. Furthermore, all prospective licensees and applicants shall make the premises available for inspection by the township's representatives so as to establish compliance with all applicable building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, fire, zoning, sanitation, and public health regulations and/or any other applicable township ordinance or regulation, including this article. 
(b)  Nudity. 
(1)  No person, while appearing in a state of nudity shall frequent, loiter, work for or perform in any licensed establishment or upon any licensed premises. No licensee or manager of any such establishment shall allow the presence in such establishment of any person who violates the provisions of this section. 
(2)  "Nudity," for purposes of this subsection, shall be defined to be the exposure by view of persons, of any of the following body parts, either directly or indirectly, including but not limited to exposure, see-through clothing articles or body stockings: 
a.  The whole or part of the pubic region; 
b.  The whole or part of the anus; 
c.  The whole or part of the buttocks; 
d.  The whole or part of the genitals; 
e.  The breast area including nipple, or more than one-half of the area of the breast. 
(Ord. No. 58A, art. 6, 10-22-2003)  
Sec. 6-37. - Commission materials and proceedings. 
(a)  Licensees shall instruct the commission, in writing, to promptly provide to the township all materials generated and received in connection with their respective licenses, and notice of all commission proceedings regarding the licensee and/or license. 
(b)  At all times, a licensee shall provide notice to the township, by providing written notice to the township clerk, of all proceedings, formal and informal, related to the license, conducted by or held before any governmental agency, body, or court, including the commission, other than the township itself. 
(Ord. No. 58A, art. 7, 10-22-2003)  
Sec. 6-38. - Insurance. 
Licensees shall provide and keep in force a comprehensive policy of liability insurance, covering both injuries to persons and property, in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. Licensees shall provide a current proof of insurance to the township clerk upon request, and said policy shall further require notification to the township 30 days prior to the termination or expiration of such policy. 
(Ord. No. 58A, art. 8, 10-22-2003)  
Sec. 6-39. - Change from representation. 
(a)  Deviation from representation. If, for any reason, a licensee acts, or intends to act, contrary to a representation made in connection with its license application, the licensee shall so inform the board. The board may approve such deviation, decline to approve such deviation, approve the deviation provisionally, or approve the deviation conditionally. 
(b)  Alteration of operating plan. After the issuance of a license, the licensee may amend its operating plan only with the permission of the board. 
(Ord. No. 58A, art. 9, 10-22-2003)  
Sec. 6-40. - Transfer or sale of license. 
Licenses shall be transferred or sold pursuant to the procedures and regulations of the commission and state law, unless the board determines that an objection to the transfer is appropriate for any reason that would justify the denial of a license application, or the nonrenewal or revocation of a license. Anyone wishing to transfer a license or to obtain a license by transfer or sale shall first comply with the requirements set forth herein pertaining to new licenses. No license may be transferred unless said transfer has been pre-approved by the board. 
(Ord. No. 58A, art. 10, 10-22-2003)  
Sec. 6-41. - License renewals. 
Licenses shall be renewed on an annual basis pursuant to the procedures of the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, unless the board determines an objection to the renewal is appropriate as set forth in section 6-42. The board may require, at its sole discretion, annual review of the operating plan and performance of any licensee, a public hearing, reviews of the history of the establishment and licensee, and/or comment from township agencies, officers, employees or others regarding the performance of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 58A, art. 11, 10-22-2003)  
Sec. 6-42. - Recommendation of revocation or nonrenewal of licenses. 
(a)  Grounds. The township board may object to the renewal, and/or request revocation, of a license if the board determines that the continued possession of the license by the licensee would not be in the best interest of the public, and would be contrary to the health, safety and welfare of township residents and the general public. Grounds for such a determination shall include one or more of the following: 
(1)  The licensee, during the period for which the license is issued, would not be eligible for such license upon a first application. 
(2)  Failure of the licensee to permit an inspection as required in section 6-36(a). 
(3)  Failure of the licensee to comply with section 6-37. 
(4)  Failure of the licensee to comply with section 6-41. 
(5)  Past or present violation of this article or any other ordinance of the township, or any state or federal law or regulation, including any commission regulation or order, or court order by the licensed establishment, or the licensee or any agent thereof, if the violation involves the operation of the licensed establishment or takes place upon the licensed premises. 
(6)  Failure of the licensed establishment to comply with the operating plan. 
(7)  Failure of the licensee to keep the licensed premises insured as required by this article. 
(8)  Maintenance of a nuisance upon the licensed premises by the licensee or its agents, or acquiescence by the licensee or its agents in the creation or maintenance of a nuisance upon the licensed premises by others, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Past or present violation of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, zoning, health, sanitation, fire, occupancy, use, or other applicable regulatory codes, rules, ordinances or laws. 
b.  Past or present failure to maintain the exterior of the licensed premises, including the building, parking lot, lighting, grounds or landscaping, and to keep same free from litter and debris. 
c.  Past or present pattern of patron behavior in or upon, or adjacent to, the licensed premises which is a violation of law, or a state or federal regulation, or a disturbance of the peace, order and tranquility of the surrounding neighborhood. 
d.  Any activity that is defined as a nuisance for purposes of MCL 600.3801, either by MCL 600.3801, or by any case interpreting MCL 600.3801. 
e.  Failure to comply with any permit, standard, plan or agreement entered into in consideration for the issuance, transfer, renewal or continuance of the license or any required permit related to the premises. 
f.  Violation of section 6-36(b). 
(9)  Any advertising, promotions, entertainment or activity, on the part of the licensed establishment or on the part of the licensee or its agent, and related to the licensed establishment, which causes, creates or contributes to disorder, disobedience to state or federal regulations (including regulations promulgated by the commission), ordinances, or laws, or contributes to the disruption of normal activities in the neighborhood where the licensed establishment is located. 
(10)  Any condition of default in the payment of any tax, fee, charge, water bill, special assessment, debt or unpaid judgment to the township, whether owed by the licensee, the licensed establishment, or the owner of the property upon which the licensed premises, or any part thereof, is located. 
(11)  Perjury, or any false or misleading statement or representation, made the by the licensee or any agent thereof, in the application, operating plan or other document, or in a public hearing or meeting related to the grant, renewal, or revocation of any license. 
(12)  Any material deviation from any representation made in connection with the approval of the license, except for such deviations as have been approved by the board. 
(13)  A delay of six months or more, after the grant of the license, in commencement of alterations to the licensed premises that are agreed to by the applicant during the application process. 
(14)  Failure on the part of the licensee to comply with any conditions imposed under section 6-34(f). 
(15)  If the continuation of the license would constitute a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of residents of the township, based on any of the grounds set forth in section 6-34(e)(2). 
(b)  Conditional renewal. If the board finds grounds to object to the renewal, and/or to request a revocation of a license, the board may, in lieu of such an objection and/or recommendation, permit the renewal and/or nonrevocation of the license with conditions. Violation of any such condition shall be a basis for revocation and/or nonrenewal. 
(c)  Procedure. 
(1)  Before objecting to the renewal, and/or requesting the revocation, of a license by the commission, the township board shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed request for revocation and/or nonrenewal. At such public hearing, the licensee may appear and address the board, may present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, may confront adverse witnesses, and may be represented by an attorney. 
(2)  Before conducting a hearing as provided for in subsection (1), the board shall serve notice of the hearing to the licensee, personally or by first class mail at the street address of the licensed establishment, or, if the licensed establishment has ceased to operate, at the last known address of the licensee. The notice shall be mailed or served not less than ten days prior to the date designated for the public hearing, and the notice shall state: 
a.  Notice of the action proposed to be taken by the board; 
b.  The reason therefore; 
c.  The date, time and place of the hearing; 
d.  A statement that the licensee may appear and address the board, and may present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, may confront adverse witnesses, and may be represented by an attorney. 
(d)  Written findings/resolutions. Within 60 days following completion of the public hearing, the board shall make written findings and may request revocation, and/or object to the renewal, of the license. The findings and decision of the board may be by resolution. in the event that the board decides that the license should be revoked, and/or that an objection to renewal should be made, it shall forward a copy of the resolution to the commission pursuant to state law, and shall serve a copy of same upon the licensee by first class mail at the street address of the licensed establishment, or, if the licensed establishment has ceased to conduct business, at the last known address of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 58A, art. 12, 10-22-2003)  
Sec. 6-43. - Fees. 
The township board may set fees for the review of license applications under this article. Such fees shall be set by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 58A, art. 13, 10-22-2003) 
APPENDIX A
 
  
Chapter 7 - ANIMALS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 7-1—7-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 7-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
State law means the Dog Law of 1919, MCL 287.261 et seq. and/or the Dangerous Animal Act, MCL 287.321 et seq. 
Owner means any person having a property interest in an animal or any person harboring, feeding, caring for, and/or sheltering an animal in the absence of a property interest, or any person who allows a usually domesticated animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by the person. 
(Ord. No. 114, art. 1, 4-24-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 7-32. - Township assistance in dangerous animal cases. 
(a)  Report of violation of state law. Any person may report to the township offices any of the following incidents or occurrences, so long as the person has contacted, or made a good faith effort to contact, the Oakland County Animal Control regarding the incident or occurrence prior to contacting the township, or within a reasonable time thereafter; and a person making such a report may make a sworn statement to the township supervisor, township elected official or ordinance enforcement officer that the reported incident has taken place: 
(1)  After January 10 and before June 15 in each year a dog over six months old is running at large unaccompanied by its owner or is engaged in lawful hunting and is not under the reasonable control of its owner without a license attached to the collar of the dog. 
(2)  A dog, licensed or unlicensed, has destroyed property or habitually causes damage by trespassing on the property of a person who is not the owner. 
(3)  A dog, licensed or unlicensed, has attacked or bitten a person. 
(4)  A dog has shown vicious habits or has molested a person when lawfully on the public highway. 
(5)  A dog duly licensed and wearing a license tag has run at large contrary to state law. 
(6)  A dangerous animal, as defined under state law in MCL 287.321, has caused serious injury or death to a person or dog. 
(b)  Filing of sworn complaint by the township. 
(1)  Authorization. Upon receipt of a sworn statement as described in subsection (a) above, the township supervisor, township elected official or ordinance enforcement officer may, on behalf of the township, file a sworn complaint with the appropriate court as provided for in MCL 287.286a and/or MCL 287.322, at the discretion of the township supervisor, township elected official or ordinance enforcement officer, in order to address the situation. 
(2)  Withdrawal and reinstatement of sworn statement. At any time and for any reason, the township supervisor, township elected official or ordinance enforcement officer may withdraw a sworn complaint filed under subsection (b)(1) above on behalf of the township, and, after such withdrawal, the township supervisor, township elected official or ordinance enforcement officer may refile such a complaint, as permitted by the appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 114, art. 2, 4-24-2002)  
Sec. 7-33. - Cost recovery. 
The owner of any animal which has necessitated any expense by the township under or related to this article shall be liable to the township for all expenses, including but not limited to legal fees, incurred by the township pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 114, art. 3, 4-24-2002)  
Sec. 7-34. - Private actions. 
Nothing in this article shall impair any person's ability to bring legal action, including an action under state law, without recourse to the procedures of this article, and the township's action or inaction pursuant to this article shall in no way impair a person's ability to bring such an action. 
(Ord. No. 114, art. 4, 4-24-2002)  
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 22; fire prevention and protection, ch. 26; obstructing public ways or buildings, § 30-96; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 62; waterways, ch. 66; zoning, app. B. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE 
 
Sec. 10-31. - Election to enforce; enforcing agency. 
(a)  The township shall administer and enforce the Michigan Building Code, Michigan Residential Code, Michigan Mechanical Code, Michigan Plumbing Code and Michigan Electrical Code pursuant to Public Act No. 230 of 1975 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.) within township limits pursuant to the township supervisor's notice of adoption provided to the state department of consumer and industry services to administer and enforce such codes. The township shall also enforce Public Act No. 230 of 1975 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.) within the township limits. 
(b)  Pursuant to section 8b of Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1508b), the township building official is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the township's responsibility to enforce and administer such codes and act within the township limits. 
(Ord. No. 112, art. I, 5-9-2001; Ord. No. 113, arts. 1, 2, 10-10-2001)  
Sec. 10-32. - Permit fees. 
Fees to be paid to the township for permits under the state construction code shall be as established by resolution.  
Sec. 10-33. - Penalties. 
Pursuant to section 23 of Public Act No. 230 of 1975 (MCL 125.1523), violation of the codes designated in section 10-31 and of Public Act No. 230 of 1975 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.) shall constitute a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 113, art. 3, 10-10-2001)  
Secs. 10-34—10-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - UNSAFE STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 22. 
 
Sec. 10-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dangerous building means any building or structure which has any of the following defects or is in any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit does not conform to the approved fire code of the township. 
(2)  Whenever any portion has been damaged by fire, wind, flood, or any other cause in such a manner that the structural strength or stability is appreciably less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of this article or any building code of the township for a new building or similar structure, purpose or location. 
(3)  Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance is likely to fall or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property. 
(4)  Whenever any portion has settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds than is required in the case of new construction by this article or the building code of the township. 
(5)  Whenever the building or structure or any part, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, or faulty construction, or because of the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building or portion thereof, or for other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning is likely to fall or give way. 
(6)  Whenever for any reason whatsoever the building or structure or any portion is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used. 
(7)  Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind or flood, or has become so dilapidated, as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play therein to their danger, or as to afford a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful or immoral acts. 
(8)  Whenever a building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage or faulty construction or arrangement or otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation or is in a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease when so determined by the health officer, or is likely to work injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living within. 
(9)  Whenever any building becomes vacant, dilapidated and open at door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers. 
(Ord. No. 39, § II, 7-9-1975) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-62. - Prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent thereof to keep or maintain any dwelling or part thereof which is a dangerous building as defined in section 10-61. 
(Ord. No. 39, § I, 7-9-1975)  
Sec. 10-63. - Notices. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, when the whole or any part of any building or structure is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the enforcing agency shall issue a notice of the dangerous and unsafe condition. 
(b)  Such notice shall be directed to the owner, agent or lessee registered with the enforcing agency in accordance with law. If no owner, agent or lessee has been registered, then the notice shall be directed to each owner of or party in interest in the building in whose name the property appears on the last township tax assessment records. 
(c)  The notice shall specify the time and place of a hearing on the condition of the building or structure at which time and place the person to whom the notice is directed shall have the opportunity to show cause why the building or structure should not be ordered to be demolished or otherwise made safe. 
(d)  The hearing officer shall be appointed by the township supervisor to serve at his pleasure. The enforcing agency shall file a copy of the notice of the dangerous and unsafe condition with the hearing officer. 
(e)  All notices shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person to whom they are directed personally, or in lieu of personal service may be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to such owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax records, at least ten days before the date of the hearing described in the notice. If any person to whom a notice is directed is not personally served, in addition to mailing the notice, a copy thereof shall be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 39, § III, 7-9-1975)  
Sec. 10-64. - Hearing; order by township board; lien. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall take testimony of the enforcing agency, the owner of the property and any interested party. The hearing officer shall render his decision either closing the proceedings or ordering the building to be demolished or otherwise made safe. 
(b)  If it is determined by the hearing officer that the building or structure should be demolished or otherwise made safe, he shall so order, fixing a time in the order for the owner, agent or lessee to comply therewith. 
(c)  If the owner, agent or lessee fails to appear or neglects or refuses to comply with the order, the hearing officer shall file a report of his findings and a copy of his order with the township board and request that the necessary action be taken to demolish or otherwise make safe the building or structure. A copy of the findings and order of the hearing officer shall be served on the owner, agent or lessee in the manner prescribed in section 10-63. 
(d)  The township board shall fix a date for the hearing reviewing the findings and order of the hearing officer, and shall give notice to the owner, agent or lessee in the manner prescribed in section 10-63 of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner, agent or lessee shall be given the opportunity to show cause why the building should not be demolished or otherwise made safe and the township board shall either approve, disapprove or modify the order for the demolition or making safe of the building or structure. 
(e)  The cost of the demolition or making the building safe shall be a lien against the real property and shall be reported to the assessing officer of the township, who shall assess the cost against the property on which the building or structure is located. 
(f)  The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified of the amount of such cost by first class mail at the address shown on the records. If he fails to pay the cost within 30 days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount thereof, the assessor shall add the cost to the next tax roll of the township and the cost shall be collected in the same manner in all respects as provided by law for the collection of taxes by the township. 
(Ord. No. 39, § IV, 7-9-1975)  
Sec. 10-65. - Appeals. 
An owner aggrieved by any final decision or order of the township board under section 10-64 may appeal the decision or order to the circuit court by filing a petition for an order of superintending control within 20 days from the date of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 39, § V, 7-9-1975)  
Secs. 10-66—10-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING NUMBERING 
 
Sec. 10-91. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the building department of the township to enforce this article. Existing structures affected by this article shall be required to be in compliance within three months of January 14, 1987, except that incorrectly numbered premises shall be corrected immediately. New structures shall be brought into compliance upon completion. Upon notification of noncompliance, the owner, occupant or agent in charge of the premises shall have seven days to install approved numbers. Failure to comply shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 64, § 6, 1-14-1987)  
Sec. 10-92. - Assignment of numbers. 
The principal building on each premises fronting on a township street or road shall bear a distinctive street number as assigned by the township. The appropriate street number for each new building constructed shall be issued by the township. 
(Ord. No. 64, § 1, 1-14-1987)  
Sec. 10-93. - Duty to place and maintain numbers. 
It shall be the duty of each owner, occupant or agent in charge of a building, premises or dwelling unit to place and maintain the correct identifying number on the front (or rear identification when required) of any building, residence or premises, and to properly identify by letter or number each unit of a multiple-dwelling residence. 
(Ord. No. 64, § 2, 1-14-1987)  
Sec. 10-94. - Location of numbers. 
(a)  Approved numbers shall be placed on all new and existing buildings in such a position near the principal entrance, no less than five feet above the ground, so as to be readily visible and legible from a vehicle on the street fronting the property. 
(b)  Approved numbers shall be placed on or near the principal entrance of each unit so as to readily and adequately identify each unit. 
(c)  Approved numbers shall be placed on all new and existing commercial or industrial buildings located on premises that have frontage on two parallel streets in such a position anywhere on the rear of such building, no less than five feet and not more than 12 feet above the ground, so as to be visible and legible from a vehicle on the street to the rear of such building. 
(d)  If premises are located at a distance making three-inch letters indiscernible from the closest public roadway, then a second numerical sign (not a mailbox post) must be located nearest the point of access to the premises discernible from nearest public roadway. 
(Ord. No. 64, § 3, 1-14-1987)  
Sec. 10-95. - Multiple-family dwellings. 
(a)  Multiple-family dwellings shall be identified by one placard containing the building number. The individual apartment numbers of each family dwelling must be posted on or near the principal entrance of each unit, so as to readily and adequately identify each unit. Placards shall be a color which contrasts with the immediate background on which they are mounted. 
(b)  Buildings with four or more family units shall contain at least two placards placed at opposite corners of the building, which shall be facing the street on which the building fronts. A map with all units properly drawn out and identified shall be filed with all local emergency services agencies and the township clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 64, § 4, 1-14-1987)  
Sec. 10-96. - Visibility of numbers. 
Approved numbers or letters shall: 
(1)  Be colored to readily and visibly contrast with the background. 
(2)  Be a minimum height of three inches. 
(3)  Be readily legible from the closest public roadway, and in numerical form (i.e., not spelled out in words). 
(4)  Not be mounted on a door covered by screen or storm doors, or under awnings projecting out. 
(Ord. No. 64, § 5, 1-14-1987)  
Chapter 14 - BUSINESSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic liquor, ch. 6; emergency services, ch. 18; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 38; taxation, ch. 50; telecommunications, ch. 54; utilities, ch. 62; franchises, app. A. 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Moral character. 
(a)  The provisions of this section do not apply to chapter 6 of this Code. 
(b)  In this Code, the phrase "good moral character" shall be construed to mean the propensity of the person to serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, honest and open manner. 
(c)  A judgment of guilt in a criminal prosecution or a judgment in a civil action shall not be used in and of itself as proof of a person's lack of good moral character. It may be used as evidence in the determination and when so used the person shall be notified and shall be permitted to rebut the evidence by showing that: 
(1)  At the current time the person has the ability to, and is likely to, serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner; and 
(2)  The person is rehabilitated, or that the substance of the former offense is not reasonably related to the occupation or profession for which he seeks a business license or business permit. 
(d)  The following criminal records shall not be used, examined, or requested by the township in a determination of good moral character when used as a requirement to obtain a business license or business permit: 
(1)  Records of an arrest not followed by a conviction. 
(2)  Records of a conviction which has been reversed or vacated, including the arrest records relevant to that conviction. 
(3)  Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor or a felony unrelated to the person's likelihood to serve the public in a fair, honest, and open manner. 
(4)  Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor for the conviction of which a person may not be incarcerated in a jail or prison.  
Chapter 16 - CEMETERIES 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Oxford Charter Township Cemetery Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 121, § 1, 1-11-2012)  
Sec. 16-2. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Burial rights certificate shall mean a certificate which grants the right of burial in a grave. 
Cemetery shall mean a burial ground for earth interments. 
Cemetery services shall mean all services offered to the public, including grave opening, closings and foundation installation. 
Cremains shall mean the container and incinerated body of the deceased person. 
Grave or grave site shall consist of a single burial space, consisting of a land area of approximately four feet wide and ten feet in length, sufficient to accommodate one vault; one vault and one cremain; or up to two cremains. 
Grave or lot owner shall mean the owner(s) of burial rights. Such rights are limited to a burial privilege as evidenced by a burial rights certificate. The ownership interest created by purchase or transfer of any grave or lot is a personal contract right and not an interest or estate in real property. Spouses, or no more than two persons may be joint owners with rights of survivorship to any burial space. 
Immediate family shall mean the spouse, parent, stepparent, grandparent, child, stepchild, grandchild and spouse of the aforementioned, of the owner(s), and shall include "great" to the above where applicable. 
Interment shall mean the disposition of the remains of a deceased human by earth interment. 
Lot shall mean a cemetery lot shall consist of numbered divisions as shown on the recorded plats, sufficient to accommodate up to eight grave sites. A typical lot consists of eight graves. 
Lot marker refers to any means used by the township to locate and mark corners of the lot. 
Management shall mean the person or persons duly designated by the township board for the purpose of managing the cemetery. 
Marker/headstone shall mean a marker or headstone is a stone or plaque either flush or above the ground usually used for a single grave site indicating the given and/or family name(s). 
Mausoleum shall mean above-ground entombment units for human remains/cremains. 
Memorial shall mean an object commemorating the remembrance of a person. 
Monument shall mean a sculpted and shaped stone extending above the ground inscribed with the family name, and usually used to mark multiple grave sites. 
Resident shall mean any person who has legal or official ownership, individually or jointly with another, of any real property which is subject to assessment by the township for ad valorem property taxes. 
Trustee shall mean the township board of trustees. 
Urn shall mean a concrete or stone container with an open top for planting flowers. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 2, 1-11-2012)  
Sec. 16-3. - Sale of lots or graves. 
(a)  Purchase of burial rights. Residents and nonresidents of the township may purchase burial rights at a cost to be determined from time-to-time by resolution (Appendix A) of the township board of trustees. All such sales shall be recorded on a burial rights certificate (Appendix B) approved by the township board of trustees, which grants a right of burial only and does not convey any other title to the lot or grave sold. Such form shall be executed by the township clerk. 
(b)  Transfer of burial rights. Burial rights may be transferred. A transfer of burial rights must be endorsed by and filed with the township clerk. Upon such transfer, the clerk shall issue a new burial rights certificate (Appendix B) to the assignee and shall cancel the original burial rights certificate (Appendix B) thus issued. 
(c)  Methods of payment. Grave site(s) may be paid in full at the time of purchase or paid on an installment basis. Payment shall be made by a method as determined from time-to-time by resolution of the township board of trustees. If grave(s) are purchased on an installment basis, ownership of said "burial rights" will not vest until the entire cost has been paid and no burial may take place on any grave that is not paid in full. 
(d)  Contract purchases. Graves purchased on an installment basis will be evidenced by a contract form furnished by the township with the following stipulations: 
(1)  One grave site will require 25 percent of the cost thereof to be paid at the time of the execution of the contract, and the balance shall be paid within one year from the date thereof. 
(2)  Two grave sites will require 50 percent of the cost thereof to be paid at the time of the execution of the contract, and the balance shall be paid within one year from the date thereof. 
(3)  Three grave sites will require 50 percent of the cost thereof to be paid at the time of the execution of the contract, and the balance shall be paid in full within two years from the date thereof. 
(4)  All other multiple grave site purchases will require a down payment of 25 percent of the cost thereof at the time of execution of the contract, and the balance must be paid in full within three years from the date thereof. 
Any grave site, which has not been paid in full within the time hereinbefore provided, shall automatically revert to the township and any sums so paid thereon shall be returned to the purchaser of said "burial rights" less any administrative charge as set by resolution (Appendix A) of the township board of trustees, payable to the township. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 3, 1-11-2012)  
Sec. 16-4. - Purchase price. 
(a)  Fees. The township board of trustees shall establish the fee for the purchase of a grave. These fees may be revised from time-to-time by resolution (Appendix A) of the township board of trustees, payable to the township. 
(b)  Deposit of cemetery revenue. The cemetery fees and charges shall be submitted to the township treasurer and shall be deposited in the cemetery fund(s) as determined by the township board of trustees. 
(c)  Authority to increase fees. The township board of trustees, by resolution, may periodically alter the foregoing fees to accommodate increased costs and needed reserved funds for cemetery maintenance and acquisition. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 4, 1-11-2012)  
Sec. 16-5. - Grave opening/closing charges. 
(a)  Authority to establish grave opening/closing fees. The opening and closing of any grave, prior to and following a burial therein, and including the interment of cremains shall be at a cost to be determined from time to time by resolution (Appendix A) of the township board of trustees, payable to the township. 
(b)  Authority to open/close graves. No graves shall be opened and closed except under the direction and control of such individual as designated by the township board of trustees. This provision shall not apply to proceedings for the removal and reinterment of bodies and remains, which matters are under the supervision of the county health department, or other properly constituted public authorities. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 5, 1-11-2012)  
Sec. 16-6. - Markers, memorials or monuments. 
(a)  Permitted materials and styles. All markers, memorials or monuments should be of quality granite, marble or standard bronze. The township board of trustees may cause a marker, memorial or monument to be removed, rebuilt or remodeled, where and when such is desirable for the proper maintenance and orderly development of the cemetery and to preserve the aesthetic value thereof. In the event that a marker, memorial or monument must be removed, rebuilt or remodeled, the township will not be responsible for any loss thereof either to the lot owner or dealer. 
(b)  Township's liability. The township assumes no responsibility for assuring that ordered markers, memorials or monuments are proper for the area and for name placement on the marker. 
(c)  Monument companies liable for damage. Monument companies are responsible for all damage to cemetery grounds and surrounding markers, memorials or monuments that occurs during the installation of a marker, memorial, or monument. 
(d)  Markers and memorials regulations. Only one marker or memorial shall be permitted per grave, with the exception of: 
(1)  The placement of a veteran's marker, which must be placed even with the existing ground elevation; 
(2)  Two markers will be allowed in the event there are two cremains burials in one grave site, provided at least one of the markers is a flat marker placed even with the existing ground elevation. 
(e)  Monument regulations. No monument will be allowed on any single grave site. All monuments must face the east or west direction. The township board of trustees must approve any variations in size, and/or location including the height and weight to prevent the monument from toppling over. 
(f)  Foundations. The foundation upon which any marker, memorial or monument must be placed, shall be constructed by such individual as designated by the township board of trustees, per specifications from the clerk's office, and shall be billed by the township to the grave owner or the deceased member's family at the rate set by resolution (Appendix A) by the township board of trustees. Orders for foundations shall be placed a minimum of 30 days in advance of delivery of the marker/memorial or monument. Foundations shall not be poured during the winter months, nor for a period of 60 days from the date of the burial to allow sufficient time for the ground to settle. 
(g)  Payment of foundation fees. No marker, memorial or monument may be placed upon any foundation for which there is a balance due nor may any marker, memorial or monument be placed upon a grave site for which payment has not been made. 
(h)  Variances from requirements. Any variance from the preceding requirements must be approved by the township board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 6, 1-11-2012; Ord. No. 121A, 9-11-2013)  
Sec. 16-7. - Interment regulations. 
(a)  Interments per grave site. Only one vault shall be allowed in a single grave site. Interments per grave site shall also allow one vault and one cremain; or up to two cremains with no vault. 
(b)  Advance notice required. Not less than 24-hour notice shall be given in advance of the time of a funeral to allow for the opening of the grave(s). 
(c)  Burial transit permit and fee required. A burial transit permit (Appendix C) and interment fee must be provided for all interments per Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of 1978 and Act No. 299 of the Public Acts of 1980. 
(d)  Method of ordering grave opening. The township shall not assume responsibility for errors in opening graves when orders are given by any means of communication other than in writing. Orders submitted by funeral directors for the opening of graves will be considered as if coming from the lot or grave owner. 
(e)  Removal of flowers and emblems. Following an interment, all flowers or emblems used at the interment that have become unsightly shall be removed and the township assumes no responsibility for their return to the owners. 
(f)  Interments on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. Interments taking place on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays will be subject to a higher fee as set by resolution (Appendix A) of the township board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 7, 1-11-2012)  
Sec. 16-8. - Ground maintenance. 
(a)  Unauthorized groundwork. No grading, leveling or excavating upon a grave shall be allowed without the permission of the township clerk or designee(s). 
(b)  Plantings. The township board of trustees reserves the right to direct the planting of trees and shrubs in the cemetery. All requests must be submitted to the township clerk in writing. 
(c)  Board authority regarding plantings. The township board of trustees reserves the right to direct the removal or trimming of any tree, plant or shrub, or other planting(s) located within the cemetery in the interest of maintaining proper appearance and the use of the cemetery. The township has the discretionary authority to trim and/or remove all trees, shrubs and plantings, which have become unsightly, or overgrown and encroaching on an adjacent grave. No unauthorized trimming, pruning or removing of a branch from any tree or shrub in the cemetery is permitted except under the supervision of the township or their designee(s). 
(d)  Mounds are prohibited. Mounds, which hinder the free use of a lawn mower or other gardening apparatus, are prohibited. 
(e)  Maintenance authority. The township, or its designee, shall have the right and authority to remove and dispose of any and all growth, emblems, displays or containers therefore that through decay, deterioration, damage or otherwise become unsightly, a source of litter or a maintenance problem. 
(f)  Required surface. Surfaces other than earth, grass seed, hydro seed, or sod are prohibited. 
(g)  Proper disposal of refuse. With the exception of dirt or soil, all refuse of any kind or nature including, among others, dried flowers, wreaths, papers and flower containers must be removed or deposited in containers located within the cemetery. 
(h)  Urn regulations. An urn must be set in line with the marker, memorial or monument. 
(i)  Location of flower beds. Flower beds must be located directly in front of and adjacent to the marker, memorial, or monument. 
(j)  Artificial flowers, wreaths and grave blankets. The township, or its designee, shall remove all artificial flowers, wreaths and grave blankets remaining on the grave after April 1 of each year. 
(k)  Items not permitted. The following items shall not be permitted: chairs, settees, benches, hanging baskets, glass containers, glass-covered boxes, photos and boxes for the preservation of flowers, statues, ornaments and flower pots. Other questionable items are subject to the discretion of the township board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 8, 1-11-2012)  
Sec. 16-9. - Forfeiture of vacant cemetery lots or graves. 
Burial rights for cemetery lot(s) or grave(s) sold after the effective date of the ordinance and remaining vacant 75 years from the date of their sale or last transfer shall automatically revert to the township upon occurrence of the following events: 
(1)  Notice shall be sent by the township clerk by first class mail to the last known address of the last owner of record informing him or her of the expiration of the 75-year period and that all rights with respect to said lot(s) or grave(s) will be forfeited if he or she does not affirmatively indicate in writing to the township clerk within 60 days from the date of mailing the notice his or her desire to retain said burial rights. 
(2)  No written response to said notice indicating a desire to retain the cemetery lot(s) or grave(s) in question is received by the township clerk from the last owner of record of said lot(s) or grave(s) or his or her heirs or legal representative within 60 days from the date of mailing of said notice. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 9, 1-11-2012)  
Sec. 16-10. - Repurchase of lot(s) or grave(s). 
The township will repurchase the burial rights to any cemetery lot or grave from the owner for the original price paid to the township, upon written request of said owner or his or her legal heirs or representative. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 10, 1-11-2012)  
Sec. 16-11. - Records. 
The township clerk shall maintain records concerning sales of all burial rights, all burials, issuance of burial permits and transfers of burial rights. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 11, 1-11-2012)  
Sec. 16-12. - Vaults. 
(a)  All burials shall be contained within a standard concrete or steel vault (or vaults made of other materials when standardized and accepted) placed in each grave before interment with the exception of cremains. 
(b)  Per MCL 339.1811(1), the purchase of a vault or similar receptacle designed or intended to enclose or receive a casket, coffin, or other similar container from a particular individual, partnership, association, or corporation shall not be required as a condition to burial in a cemetery in this state. There shall not be a discrimination by price, burial fee, or otherwise by reason of a failure to purchase the vault or similar receptacle from or under the direction of the cemetery or the owner of the cemetery. 
(c)  Per MCL 339.1811(2), this section shall not limit the right of the township to require the use of a vault in a burial in the township cemeteries. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 12, 1-11-2012)  
Sec. 16-13. - Cemetery hours. 
(a)  Public visitation hours. Township cemeteries shall be open during the time from sunrise to sunset Eastern Standard Time. 
(b)  Visitation during nonvisitation hours. No person shall be permitted in any township cemetery at any time other than during sunrise to sunset Eastern Standard Time, except upon permission of the township clerk. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 13, 1-11-2012)  
Sec. 16-14. - Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any of the provisions within this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of up to $500.00 and/or imprisonment for up to 90 days in jail as may be determined by a court of competent jurisdiction, plus the costs of prosecution. Each day that a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. Any criminal prosecutions hereunder shall not prevent civil proceedings for abatement and termination of the activity. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 14, 1-11-2012)  
Sec. 16-15. - Damage to cemetery properties. 
The township shall not be responsible for any kinds of damage by the elements, vandals, and thieves or by other causes beyond its control. The defacement of markers, memorials, monuments, graves or cemetery appurtenances, whether intentional or otherwise, and the removal of flowers, urns or any of the cemetery equipment without proper authority will be considered a misdemeanor and the individual(s) shall be liable for the damages. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 15, 1-11-2012)  
Sec. 16-16. - Vehicles and speed limit. 
The operator of any vehicle shall be liable for any damage caused by said vehicle, whether intentional or unintentional. The speed limit established on cemetery roads is ten miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 16, 1-11-2012)  
Sec. 16-17. - Disinterments and reinterments. 
(a)  Disinterment regulations. Disinterment of a body once properly interred shall not be made without approval of the township clerk and is subject to the orders and laws of the properly constituted public authorities. Graves shall not be opened for inspection except for official investigation. 
(1)  A permit for disinterment and reinterment is required before disinterment of a body. The county health department shall issue the permit. 
(2)  The county health department shall prepare and furnish to the township the forms for permits and applications therefore, which shall be used in the procedures prescribed by this section. The county health department and the township shall retain an application for a disinterment and reinterment permit for not less than five years. A duplicate copy of the permit shall be maintained in permanent records of the cemetery from which the body was disinterred. 
(3)  If a required consent cannot be obtained, a person may petition the county circuit court for disinterment order. 
(b)  Notice and fees required. At least one week's notice is required prior to any disinterment or removal, subject to the acquisition of a permit from the county health department. All fees for disinterment and reinterment shall be prepaid at the rate determined by resolution (Appendix A) of the township board of trustees. 
(c)  Markers, memorials, or monuments. Any markers, memorials, or monuments designating the location of an interment may be removed at the time a disinterment is made. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 17, 1-11-2012) 
APPENDIX A
 
 
APPENDIX B
 
APPENDIX C
  
Chapter 18 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14; fire prevention and protection, ch. 26. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm system means a detection device or an assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police, fire, or EMS personnel are expected to respond. An alarm system is designed for use for one or any combination of the following: 
(1)  The detection of an unlawful entry or attempted unlawful act within a building, structure or facility. 
(2)  The detection of fire, smoke, or heat within a building, structure, or facility. 
(3)  The detection of an injury or event to a person within a building, structure, or facility. 
Alarm system user means any owner or occupant who has physical control over the premises where an alarm system is installed within the township, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles. However, if an alarm system on a motor vehicle is connected to an alarm system at any premises, the person using such system is an alarm system user. Excluded from this definition and coverage of this section are persons who use self-contained alarm systems, i.e., a system which signals or alerts authorized persons who are on the premises of an authorized intrusion, attempted robbery or fire condition. However, if such a system employs an audible signal emitting sounds, a flashing light or a beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises, such systems shall be within the definition of an alarm system and shall be subject to this article. 
Authority means the Oxford Public, Fire and EMS Commission (OPFEC) under the provisions of Public Act No. 57 of 1988 (MCL 124.601 et seq.). 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the owner or user of an alarm system, or the negligence of the occupant of the residence and/or building in which the alarm system is located or of their employees or agents. The term "false alarm" also means any activation of an alarm system which indicates a crime or situation other than that which it was designed to indicate, or, in the case of a fire alarm, any alarm condition not resulting from a fire or potential fire condition. 
(Ord. No. 77A, § 2, 8-10-1994) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-32. - Licensing of alarm businesses. 
A person shall not engage in the business of providing for the installation, operating and/or maintenance of alarm systems unless properly licensed by the state pursuant to Public Act No. 330 of 1968 (MCL 338.1051 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 77A, § 3, 8-10-1994)  
Sec. 18-33. - Automatic dialing systems prohibited. 
A person shall not sell, install, operate, adjust, arrange for, or contract to provide a device which upon activation, either mechanically, electronically, or by any other means, initiates the automatic calling or dialing of, or makes a connection directly to, a telephone assigned to the police department, the fire department, a township department, the EMS agency or the authority for the purpose of delivering a prerecorded message. 
(Ord. No. 77A, § 4, 8-10-1994)  
Sec. 18-34. - Separate alarm required for each unit of occupancy in multiple-occupancy buildings. 
Separate alarm systems are required whenever a single building contains more than one unit of occupancy and each unit has a separate entrance. If such occupant elects to install an alarm system, the person shall be required to have a separate alarm system for each such unit located in the building. Whenever a multiple-housing residential structure shall have separate entrances for each occupancy unit, and such occupant elects to have an alarm system, each separate entrance to the occupancy unit shall contain a separate alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 77A, § 5, 8-10-1994)  
Sec. 18-35. - Duration of audible and visual alarms. 
(a)  No person shall operate, install or direct the installation of any alarm system that emits an audible and/or visual signal for a period longer than 15 minutes from the initial signaling of the device. 
(b)  An owner or lessee of an alarm system shall, within 180 days from the effective date Ordinance No. 77A, bring presently installed alarm systems and alarm systems offered for sale into conformance with this subsection. 
(c)  Whenever any alarm system continues to emit audible signals, whether continuously or on a regularly repeating basis, for over 30 minutes, and the person contacted by the authority does not respond within 30 minutes of being contacted, and the audible signals create a nuisance or other disturbance of the peace and tranquility of the neighborhood, the alarm user responsible for such alarm shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition, the authority shall be authorized to disconnect or otherwise disable the alarm system by cutting the wires, disconnecting the speakers, or disabling other components of the alarm system that are located on the exterior of the premises. 
(d)  The provisions of this section do not apply to fire/EMS alarms. 
(Ord. No. 77A, § 10, 8-10-1994)  
Sec. 18-36. - False alarms. 
(a)  Fee imposed; purpose. Notwithstanding any penalties provided for conviction for any violation of this article, and notwithstanding the fact that prosecution for a violation of this article has or has not commenced, there shall be imposed a false alarm fee on alarm system users responsible for false alarms. The fee shall be paid to the authority in order to defray a portion of the cost of response to false alarms. 
(b)  Fee schedule. False alarm fees for police and fire/EMS alarms shall be charged in an amount determined by resolution of the township board and may be modified from time to time as the board deems appropriate. 
(c)  Exceptions from fee. A false alarm shall not be charged for when an alarm system is activated by the following extenuating circumstances: 
(1)  Storms, earthquakes, tornados or other violent conditions beyond the control of the owner or lessee; 
(2)  Persons working on an alarm system with prior notification to the police department of the authority; and 
(3)  Disruption or disturbance of Michigan Bell Telephone Company facilities or motor vehicle utility pole accidents. 
(d)  Notice. The police department of the authority shall mail a false alarm notice to the alarm system user following false alarm occurrence indicating therein the appropriate warning and the fees as prescribed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 77A, §§ 11—13, 8-10-1994)  
Secs. 18-37—18-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 18-61. - Required. 
(a)  No alarm user shall install, possess, maintain or operate an alarm system for summoning police department aid without first obtaining a permit from the police department of the authority. 
(b)  No alarm user shall install, possess, maintain or operate an alarm system for summoning fire/EMS department aid without first obtaining a permit from the fire department of the authority. 
(c)  A permit shall be issued by the appropriate police or fire/EMS department of the authority upon completion and approval of an application therefor and payment of the required fee. 
(Ord. No. 77A, § 6, 8-10-1994)  
Sec. 18-62. - Application. 
(a)  The application for a permit under this division must be completed and signed by both the owner and the lessee, if any, of the premises on which the alarm system is maintained. 
(b)  The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The address and telephone number of the premises on which the alarm system is maintained. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the premises. 
(3)  The name, address, and telephone number of the lessee, if any, of the premises. 
(4)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person installing and/or servicing the alarm system. 
(5)  Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of at least two persons responsible for extinguishing or resetting the alarm or device, checking the premises or responding to notice from the police department or fire/EMS department of the authority of an activation of the alarm system, who can respond within 30 minutes. 
(6)  A description of the alarm system. 
(7)  Such additional information as may be required by the police department. 
(c)  The police department of the authority shall provide all applicants for a police-related alarm system permit with a copy of this article along with the application form. Receipt of the copy of this article by the applicant shall constitute notice to the applicant of his obligations and liabilities under this article. 
(d)  The fire/EMS department of the authority shall provide all applicants for a fire emergency or EMS alarm system permit with a copy of this article along with the application form. Receipt of the copy of this article by the applicant shall constitute notice to the applicant of his obligations and liabilities under this article. 
(e)  The application shall contain a statement signed by all alarm users who are applying for a permit under this section that the applicants have read the copy of this article provided and are signing the application with full knowledge and understanding of the provisions of this article and their duties and liabilities under this article and that, if applicable, they consent to the police or fire/EMS department of the authority disabling or disconnecting the alarm system under circumstances described in section 18-35. 
(f)  Upon issuance of a police or fire/EMS alarm permit, the holder thereof shall notify the respective department of the authority immediately of any changes to the information provided in the application for the permit. Failure to so notify the respective department may constitute grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 77A, § 7, 8-10-1994)  
Sec. 18-63. - Fee. 
(a)  A fee shall be charged for the permit required by this division in an amount determined by resolution of the township board and as may be modified from time to time as the board deems appropriate. 
(b)  There shall be no prorating of charges or refunds for voluntary cancellation or revocation for a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 77A, § 8, 8-10-1994)  
Sec. 18-64. - Illegal use. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use a permit issued under this division for any premises other than those identified on the application for the permit. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause an alarm system permit to be bought, sold, or leased, or caused to be sold or leased, for any value or consideration in any form whatever. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to buy or otherwise acquire for value or use any alarm system permit, except as provided for in this article. 
(d)  Upon conviction of any permit holder of a violation of subsection (b) or (c) of this section, the police or fire/EMS alarm system permit shall be void and must be surrendered to police department of the authority. 
(Ord. No. 77A, § 9, 8-10-1994)  
Sec. 18-65. - Revocation. 
(a)  Whenever there are five or more false police alarms, or two or more false fire/EMS alarms, within a calendar year, emanating from a specific occupancy unit, such alarm system shall be determined defective. Upon written notice from the appropriate department (police or fire/EMS) of the authority to the owner or lessee, the owner or lessee shall, within ten days from the date of such inspection, file a written report with the appropriate department of the authority with the results of his inspection of the system, together with the finding of probable cause of the false alarms and the measures implemented to eliminate the false alarms. 
(b)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or failure to eliminate the occurrence of any additional false alarms may result in the revocation of a permit. A written notice of revocation, stating the cause thereof, shall be delivered to the permittee personally or sent by registered mail. Unless a written request for a meeting is filed with the appropriate department head (police or fire/EMS department) of the authority or his designated representative within ten days from the receipt of the notice of revocation, a permit shall be revoked and the permittee shall immediately discontinue operation of the alarm system. If a meeting is requested under this section, it shall take place within ten days of the request. 
(c)  The permittee at the time shall have the opportunity to present written and oral evidence as to why the revocation of the permit would not be justified. If it is determined at that meeting that the permittee has failed to comply with the provisions of this article, the department head (police or fire/EMS department) of the authority shall file a written finding of his recommendation to that effect with the township clerk. 
(d)  A permittee shall immediately discontinue use of an alarm system upon being notified by the township clerk by registered mail of the revocation of the permit. A permittee whose permit has been revoked may reapply as provided in this article if any and all false alarm fees have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 77A, §§ 14, 15, 8-10-1994)  
Chapter 22 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; unsafe structures, § 10-61 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 46; utilities, ch. 62; waterways, ch. 66; franchises, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 58. 
 
Sec. 22-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Inoperable motor vehicle means those that by reason of disrepair, dismantling or other causes are incapable of being propelled under their own power, or if propelled under their own power would be unlawful on the highways of the township. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle defined as a motor vehicle by the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.) 
Parts of vehicles means those components that were originally designed for or used upon a motor vehicle during the vehicle lifetime. 
Unlicensed motor vehicle means any vehicle without proper registration and license from the Michigan Secretary of State's office. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 1, 3-12-1986) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-32. - Parking or storage in residential zones declared nuisance. 
The presence of any unlicensed, dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle, or parts thereof, outdoors on any premises in the township zoned for residential purposes is hereby declared a public nuisance and offensive to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 2, 3-12-1986)  
Sec. 22-33. - Time limit for parking or storage. 
No person shall park or store any unlicensed, dismantled, partially dismantled, or inoperable motor vehicle or parts thereof on any premises in the township zoned for residential purposes for a period of more than seven consecutive days, and no person shall permit any dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperable motor vehicle, or parts thereof, to remain on any premises zoned for residential purposes for a period of more than seven days continuously. This section shall not apply to such described vehicles or parts thereof that are stored in an enclosed building. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 3, 3-12-1986)  
Sec. 22-34. - Permit for additional time for making repairs. 
Any person owning an unlicensed, dismantled, partially dismantled, or inoperable motor vehicle who is repairing or intending to repair such motor vehicle may apply to the township police department for a permit to allow such vehicle to remain on the premises for an additional ten-day period from the date of notice of such violation. Such permit, if approved, shall be issued for a sum as established by resolution, with such monies being nonreturnable to the person, and such monies shall be deposited in the police fund of the township. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 4, 3-12-1986)  
Sec. 22-35. - Enforcement. 
The law enforcement agency of the township is hereby authorized to enforce this article. This authority shall include among other authority the following: 
(1)  Investigation of ordinance violations. 
(2)  Serving notice of violations. 
(3)  Serving appearance tickets as authorized under Public Act No. 175 of 1927 (MCL 760.1 et seq.). 
(4)  Appearance in court or judicial proceedings to assist in prosecution of ordinance violators and such other ordinance-enforcing duties as may be delegated by the township supervisor or assigned by the township attorney. 
(Ord. No. 62, § 5, 3-12-1986)  
Secs. 22-36—22-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER DRAINAGE AND LAND IMPROVEMENT CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 108.A, adopted May 12, 2004, repealed art. III and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former art. III, §§ 22-61—22-69 and 22-91—22-103, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 108, §§ II—XXIV, adopted Aug. 9, 2000. 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 62. 
 
Sec. 22-61. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Charter Township of Oxford Stormwater Management and Land Improvement Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § I, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-62. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article shall be: 
(1)  To assure that landowners control stormwater runoff from their property so that lake and stream water quality is protected and flooding reduced. 
(2)  To protect the township's lakes from any adverse effects of stormwater runoff, while at the same time utilizing the water holding capacity of the lakes. 
(3)  To encourage the use of stormwater conveyance and detention systems which serve multiple purposes, including but not limited to flood control, water quality enhancement, recreation and wetlands protection. 
(4)  To provide an opportunity for stormwater management and land balancing systems to be incorporated into the early stages of site planning and design. 
(5)  To allow onsite and/or offsite wetlands to be used for stormwater detention, provided that adverse environmental impacts on wetlands are minimized and provided that any anticipated effects are acceptable to the township and/or other entities responsible for regulating wetlands. 
(6)  To allow for offsite stormwater management if proposals meet the requirements of this article and applicable county and/or state requirements. 
(7)  To assure that all stormwater conveyance and detention measures and facilities will be properly constructed, maintained and preserved. 
(8)  To provide penalties for violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § II, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-63. - Definition of terms. 
The following terms, phrases, words and derivatives shall have the meaning given herein, unless the context otherwise requires: 
Applicant. An applicant for a land improvement permit pursuant to the terms of this article. 
As-built plans. Engineering drawings prepared after installation of all stormwater management appurtenances and facilities provided for under plans and specifications showing the as-built locations and dimensions of all of the stormwater management appurtenances and facilities (sometimes referred to as "record drawings"). 
Building inspector. The township building inspector and/or zoning administrator. 
Certificate of completion. A signed written statement by the township engineer or building official that specific construction has been inspected and found to comply with any approved land improvement permit application and accompanying plans and specifications and/or any stormwater management plan. 
Detention basin. A structure or facility, natural or artificial, which stores stormwater on a temporary basis and releases it at a controlled rate. A detention basin may drain completely after a storm event, or it may be a pond with a fixed minimum water elevation between runoff events. 
Discharge. The rate of flow of water at a given point in time resulting from a storm event, measured in cubic feet per second (cfs). 
Disturbed area. An area of land subjected to the removal of vegetative cover and/or earthmoving activities. 
Drainage system. All facilities, channels and areas which serve to convey, catch, filter, store and/or receive stormwater, either on a temporary or permanent basis. 
Engineering standards ordinance. The township engineering standards ordinance, chapter 42, article IV of this Code. 
Flood. A temporary rise in the level of any water body, watercourse or wetland which causes the inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water. 
Floodplain. The area of land adjoining a river, stream, watercourse, lake or other body of water which will be inundated by a 100-year frequency flood event. 
Grading. Any stripping, excavating, filling, stockpiling or any combination thereof, including the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
Land improvement. The construction or installation, of any sanitary sewer main, storm sewer main, water main (excluding individual building sewer and water leads and maintenance and repair work completed by the municipality or its designated agent), or stormwater retention/detention pond or any activity which will affect the surface water drainage of neighboring property, or any earth change that disturbs one or more acres or is within 500 feet of a lake or stream. Land improvement does not include the plowing and tilling for the purpose of producing and harvesting crops, unless the plowing or tilling will affect surface water drainage on neighboring property, and does not include mining conducted pursuant to a mining permit issued by the township. 
Land improvement permit (permit). Permit required to conduct a land improvement according to the terms of this article. 
Maintenance agreement. A binding agreement between the applicant proprietor and township which sets forth the terms and conditions for stormwater facility maintenance. 
Off-site facility. All or part of a drainage system which is located partially or completely off of the development site which it serves. 
Peak rate of discharge. The maximum allowable rate of stormwater flow from a storm event, as measured at a given point and time in cubic feet per second (cfs). 
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including governmental agencies. 
Planning commission. The township planning commission. 
Plans and specifications (plans). Those plans and specifications detailing the proposed land improvement in accordance with section 22-65. 
Proprietor. A person, public corporation or authority, or a government agency that holds an ownership interest in land, whether recorded or not. 
Retention basin. A stormwater holding area, either natural or manmade, which does not have an outlet to adjoining watercourses or wetlands. Water is removed from retention basins through infiltration and/or evaporation processes, and a retention basin may or may not contain a permanent pool of water. 
Runoff. That part of precipitation which flows off the land, measured in depth of inches. 
Site. Any tract, lot or parcel of land or combination of tracts, lots or parcels of land proposed for development. 
Storm drain. A conduit, pipe, swale, natural channel or manmade structure which serves to transport stormwater runoff. Storm drains may be either enclosed conduits or open drains. 
Stormwater management measures and facilities. Any facility, structure, channel, area or measure which serves to control stormwater runoff in accordance with the purposes and standards of this article. 
Stripping. Any activity which removes or significantly disturbs the vegetative surface cover, including clearing and grubbing operations. 
Surface drainage. Any stormwater collecting on or flowing over the surface of ground. 
Swale. Low-lying area with gradual slopes which transports stormwater, either onsite or offsite. 
Township. Charter Township of Oxford. 
Vegetative cover. Grasses, shrubs, trees and other vegetation which hold and stabilize soils. 
Watercourse. Any waterway or other body of water having reasonably well defined banks, including rivers, streams, creeks and brooks, whether continually or intermittently flowing, and lakes and ponds, and/or as shown on wetlands and watercourses maps. 
Wetlands. Land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances does support wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is commonly referred to as a bog, swamp or marsh and which is any of the following: 
(1)  Contiguous to an inland lake or pond, or a river or stream; 
(2)  Not contiguous to an inland lake or pond, or a river or stream and one acre or more in size. 
Zoning ordinance. Township Zoning Ordinance No. 67. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § III, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-64. - Pre-construction meeting and permit requirement. 
(a)  No person shall commence a land improvement on any parcel of land without having participated in a pre-construction meeting with the township building inspector or, if designated by the township building inspector, the township engineer. 
(b)  No person may schedule a pre-construction meeting as described in subsection (a) without having first applied for and received a land improvement permit in accordance with this article. 
(c)  No person shall commence a land improvement without having first applied for and received a land improvement permit, of the type appropriate for the proposed land improvement under section 22-65, in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § IV, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-65. - Land improvement permit. 
(a)  Types of land improvement permits. A land improvement permit issued pursuant to this article shall be of one or more of the following types, depending upon the nature of the work, in the opinion of the building inspector, to be performed: 
(1)  Paving. Required for all land improvements involving paving. 
(2)  Sanitary. Required for all land improvements involving the construction or repair of sanitary sewerage systems or facilities. 
(3)  Grading. Required for all land improvements involving grading. 
(4)  Stormwater. Required for all land improvements involving stormwater management measures and/or facilities. 
(5)  Water main. Required for all land improvements involving the construction or repair of a water main. 
(b)  Application. Prior to the construction or installation of a land improvement on any parcel of land, the proprietor of such land, or an agent having the written authorization of the proprietor, shall submit an application for a land improvement permit with the township's building inspector. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  Identification of which type(s) of land improvement permit the applicant desires. 
(2)  Proprietor's and applicant's name, mailing address and telephone number. 
(3)  Common description of property. 
(4)  Written description of the proposed land use and the name of the proposed development. 
(5)  Proof of ownership of the property, as well as any offsite easements for stormwater management. If the applicant is not the proprietor, then the proprietor shall provide written, signed authorized for the application. 
(6)  An estimate of the costs of the land improvement. 
(7)  A sketch of the proposed land improvement in sufficient detail and dimension to enable the township's building inspector to determine whether the land improvement will affect stormwater flow on adjacent properties, including dimensions of land, total acreage and net acreage (total acreage minus rights-of-way), existing zoning and zoning of all adjacent properties and location and size of existing and proposed lots, buildings, structures and pavement. 
(8)  If the applicant does not intend to pursue a wetland permit, as otherwise required by subsection (e) of this section, then the applicant must sign the following statement: "I hereby represent that the activity for which a Land Improvement Permit is requested from the Township does not impact a wetland or watercourse regulated by state statute or Township Ordinance." If the applicant does not sign such statement, then the permit shall be required under section 22-69. 
(9)  The appropriate application fee, as set by resolution of the township board. 
(10)  In addition, land improvement plans and specifications in the form and number hereinafter specified in subsection (c) shall be required in the event the land improvement: 
a.  Affects a disturbed area that exceeds one acre in size. 
b.  Requires site plan approval under the zoning ordinance. 
c.  Requires site condominium approval under the zoning ordinance. 
d.  Requires plat approval under chapter 46, article III. 
e.  Will cause stormwater runoff to adjacent properties as determined by the township building inspector upon consultation with the township engineer. 
f.  Will be situated within 25 feet of a watercourse or a regulated wetland, or will discharge into a watercourse or regulated wetland. 
g.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the township building inspector, upon consultation with the township engineer, may waive the requirement for plans and specifications if the land improvement proposed will not adversely affect adjacent property. 
(c)  Plans and specifications. 
(1)  Land improvement plans and specifications shall be prepared by, and each sheet of the plans signed and sealed by, a professional engineer. Plans detailing parcel surveys must be signed and sealed by a licensed land surveyor. 
(2)  Plans shall be prepared on 24-inch × 36-inch size sheets and shall generally be drawn to scale of not more than 50 feet to the inch. The drawings shall contain sufficient detail to properly show the proposed locations and methods of construction or grading and any proposed soil erosion control measures as may be required by the county drain commissioner. The township engineer may require the plans to be drawn to a scale of 20 feet to the inch when deemed necessary for proper review. The plans shall provide detail showing stormwater management associated with a land improvement including the design and dimension of stormwater conveyance facilities, stormwater management measures and facilities including detention and retention basins, and all other stormwater storage facilities. The plans shall also include the following information: 
a.  Proposed changes to the land surface and existing vegetative cover, including delineation of areas to be cut and filled. Final contours at two-foot contour intervals shall be provided. 
b.  Flow routes with directional arrows for stormwater runoff from both the ten-year storm frequency event and the 100-year storm frequency event. 
c.  Proposed outlet points and associated drainage area boundaries. 
d.  The receiving watercourses for stormwater runoff, including but not limited to lakes, streams, wetlands, road drains and county drains, whether located onsite or offsite. 
e.  Calculations of the effect of the development upon the peak rate of discharge, and a preliminary determination of the amount of detention storage required to limit the proposed discharge to the existing levels. 
f.  Entry points where stormwater runoff and watercourses enter the site from offsite locations, with arrows indicating the direction of the flow. 
g.  Outlet point and drainage area boundaries for all watercourses on the site and within 100 feet of the site. 
h.  Description of the location, type and size of stormwater management facilities and measures, including facilities for the conveyance, infiltration and/or storage of stormwater runoff. 
i.  Location of easements to protect the primary and secondary drainage systems, and to provide access for maintenance. 
j.  Other detail and dimensions to enable the township engineer to determine compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(3)  Three complete sets of plans and specifications shall be submitted with the permit application. 
(4)  After completion of the project, as-built plans, in an electronic format and acceptable to the township engineer must be submitted, showing the exact location of all land improvements prior to issuance of a certificate of completion. These plans must be prepared and certified by the owner's engineer. 
(d)  Escrow fee required. An escrow fee, as determined by resolution of the township board, in addition to the application fee, shall be required if plans and specifications are required to be submitted. 
(e)  Required permits and approvals. 
(1)  No land improvement permit shall be issued unless the applicant has obtained all necessary and/or applicable additional approvals as follows, unless the land improvement does not require the otherwise-required permit or approval under the terms of the ordinance, law, regulation, or policy governing such permit or approval: 
a.  Approvals required for a paving permit. 
1.  Approach permit, county road commission (RCOC) or the state department of transportation (MDOT). 
2.  Soil erosion and sedimentation control (SESC) permit. 
3.  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. 
4.  Road plan approval required: 
(i)  Public roads. Road commission for the county and planning commission. 
(ii)  Private roads. Planning commission, pursuant to the township zoning ordinance. 
b.  Approvals required for a sanitary permit. 
1.  State department of environmental quality (MDEQ) sanitary sewer permits (Act 451 Permit). 
2.  County drain commissioner (OCDC) sanitary sewer extension permit. 
3.  Permits for work within the right-of-way: 
(i)  Road commission for the county (RCOC). 
(ii)  State department of transportation (MDOT). 
4.  Soil erosion and sedimentation control (SESC) permit. 
5.  Wetlands permits: 
(i)  Township, pursuant to chapter 22, article IV. 
(ii)  State department of environmental quality (MDEQ). 
6.  Detroit Water and Sewer Department approval. 
c.  Approvals required for a grading permit. 
1.  Soil erosion and sedimentation control (SESC) permit. 
2.  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. 
3.  County drain commissioner (OCDC) stormwater drainage approvals, for county drains and plats. 
4.  Wetlands permit: 
(i)  Township, pursuant to chapter 22, article IV. 
(ii)  State department of environmental quality (MDEQ). 
d.  Approvals required for a stormwater permit. 
1.  Soil erosion and sedimentation control (SESC) permit. 
2.  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. 
3.  County drain commissioner stormwater drainage approvals, for county drains and plats. 
4.  County drain commissioner (OCDC), construction inspection permit. 
5.  Permits for work within the right-of-way. 
(i)  Road commission for the county (RCOC). 
(ii)  State department of transportation (MDOT). 
6.  Wetland permits: 
(i)  Township. 
(ii)  State department of environmental quality (MDEQ). 
e.  Approvals required for a water main permit. 
1.  Soil erosion and sedimentation control (SESC) permit. 
2.  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. 
3.  Permits for work within the right-of-way. 
(i)  Road commission for the county (RCOC). 
(ii)  State department of transportation (MDOT). 
4.  County drain commissioner (OCDC), construction inspection permit. 
5.  Water main plan review/approvals required. 
(i)  Township, pursuant to chapter 62, article II and chapter 42, article IV. 
(ii)  County drain commissioner (OCDC). 
(iii)  State department of environmental quality (MDEQ). 
6.  Wetlands permit: 
(i)  Township, pursuant to chapter 22, article IV. 
(ii)  State department of environmental quality (MDEQ). 
(2)  No land improvement permit shall be issued unless the applicant has obtained final site plan approval under the township zoning ordinance, if such approval is required under the zoning ordinance for the proposed land improvement, or if the proposed land improvement is an element of a larger development that requires site plan approval under the zoning ordinance. 
(3)  No land improvement permit shall be issued unless the applicant has obtained any other permit or approval required for the proposed land improvement by any ordinance, law, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § V, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-66. - Application and plan review fees. 
A base land improvement application fee, and escrow fee to cover the cost of professional review of the application and plans and specifications, if necessary, shall be determined by resolution of the township board. Any unused amount of the escrow fee shall be returned to the applicant. The applicant shall not be required to submit an escrow fee if the applicant has provided an escrow for site plan, site condominium or plat review for the same land improvement project. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § VI, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-67. - Township review. 
Upon receipt of the permit application, cost estimate and appropriate fees, and plans and specifications, as necessary, the township building inspector shall transmit copies to the township engineer and other township professionals for their review as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § VII, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-68. - Review of plans and specifications. 
The township engineer shall review the plans and specifications and approve the same if they comply with the provisions of article IV of chapter 42, this article, and any other applicable township, county or state regulation. If the applicant submits an extra copy of the plans and specifications with its application, then, in the event any item does not comply with chapter 42, article IV, or other applicable ordinance or county or state regulation, the plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant, with notations as to any deficiency. The applicant shall resubmit the number of copies of corrected plans directly to the township engineer in accordance with the requirements of section 22-65. Upon approval of the plans, the engineer shall notify the applicant of such approval. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § VIII, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-69. - Approval of permit. 
(a)  The building inspector, upon consultation with the township engineer, may approve and issue the land improvement permit provided, if necessary, the applicant has obtained any additional approvals required pursuant to section 22-65(e). 
(b)  Applicants required to provide plans and specifications shall submit the appropriate inspection fee, performance guarantee and escrow fee, if necessary, before a permit is issued. 
(c)  If a permit is approved under this subsection, the building inspector shall issue the permit. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § IX, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-70. - Inspection and issuance of certificate of completion. 
Following completion of the project described in the land improvement application, the work shall be inspected by the building inspector who may consult with the township engineer. The building inspector may then issue a certificate of completion if the work complies with the land improvement permit application. For applicants submitting plans and specifications, the building inspector shall issue a certificate of completion, upon consultation with the township engineer, if the work conforms appropriately with the plans and specifications and as-built plans have been submitted. No certificate of occupancy under Township Zoning Ordinance No. 67 for newly-constructed structures shall be issued unless the applicant shall have obtained a certification of completion. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § X, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-71. - Inspection fees. 
The applicant (submitting plans and specifications) shall submit an inspection escrow fee prior to inspection. An inspection escrow fee shall be established on a case-by-case basis by the township engineer based upon a formula determined by resolution of the township board. The unused portion of the escrow fee shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § XI, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-72. - Performance guarantee. 
(a)  The applicant that is required to submit plans and specifications or applicant's contractor shall post a performance guarantee in the form of cash, a certified check, or a letter of credit on a form approved by the township attorney in the name of the township guaranteeing completion of the land improvement in compliance with the plans and specifications as approved by the township engineer. The amount of the performance guarantee shall be 125 percent of the amount of the estimated total cost of completing the land improvement as determined by the building inspector upon consultation with the township engineer. 
(b)  Return of the performance guarantee to the applicant or the applicant's contractor shall be made on the conditions that the applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this article and all of the terms and conditions of the land improvement permit, and has completed all of the work contemplated under the land improvement permit within the time limit specified in the land improvement permit, or, if no time limit is specified, within 180 days after the date of the issuance of the land improvement permit or the completion of on-going work under the permit, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § XII, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-73. - Extension of time. 
If the applicant (submitting plans and specifications) is unable to complete the work within the specified time, he may, at least ten days prior to the expiration of the permit, present in writing to the building inspector a request for an extension of time setting forth the reasons for the requested extension. Upon consultation with the township engineer, additional time for the completion of the work may be granted, but no such extension shall release the owner or surety on the bond or the person furnishing the cash bond. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § XIII, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-74. - Failure to complete work. 
In the event of failure to complete the work or failure to comply with all the requirements, conditions, and terms of the permit, the township building inspector, the township board, or the planning commission, as appropriate, upon consultation with the township engineer, may order such work as is necessary to eliminate any danger to persons or property and to leave the site in a safe condition and may authorize completion of all necessary temporary or permanent measures. The township, after notice to the applicant, may use the posted performance guarantee for the purpose of completing the work. The applicant shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred or expended by the township in causing any and all such work to be done. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § XIV, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-75. - Modification of land improvement plans. 
Any modification of the approved land improvement described in the permit application or in plans and specifications must be submitted to and approved by the building inspector upon consultation with the township engineer. All necessary supporting documentation shall be submitted with any proposal to modify the approved land improvement plans. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § XV, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-76. - Responsibility of applicant with permit. 
During land improvement operations the applicant with permit shall be responsible for: 
(1)  The prevention of damage to any public utilities or services within the limits of grading and along any routes of travel of the equipment. 
(2)  The prevention of damage to adjacent property. (No person shall grade on land so close to the property line as to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley, or any public or private property without supporting and protecting such property from settling, cracking, or other damage which might result.) 
(3)  Carrying out the proposed work in accordance with all the requirements of the permit and this article, and all other applicable township ordinances, including chapter 42, article IV. 
(4)  The prompt removal of all soil, miscellaneous debris, or other materials applied, dumped, or otherwise deposited on public streets, highways, sidewalks, or other public thoroughfares during transit to and from the construction site, where such spillage constitutes a public nuisance or hazard. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § XVI, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-77. - Land improvement and surface drainage plans. 
All land improvement activity and corresponding land improvement plans shall conform with the site grading requirements of chapter 42, article IV. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § XVII, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-78. - Stormwater management. 
Any land improvement requiring submittal of plans and specifications including that activity associated with a site plan, site condominium, or plat, shall provide for stormwater management in the plans and specifications in accordance with the following general standards: 
(1)  Stormwater management conveyance, storage, and infiltration facilities shall be designed to prevent flood hazards and water pollution related to runoff from the proposed development project. 
(2)  Stormwater from upstream and off-site locations shall be conveyed through the Site or stored on-site. 
(3)  Unless otherwise approved, stormwater runoff shall be conveyed through swales and vegetated buffer strips so as to decrease runoff velocity, allow for natural infiltration, allow suspended sediment to settle, and to remove pollutants. 
(4)  Alterations to natural drainage patterns shall not create flooding or a water pollution condition for adjacent or downstream property owners. 
(5)  Watercourses and adjacent streambanks shall not be dredged, cleared of vegetation, deepened, widened, straightened, stabilized or otherwise altered without approval from the state department of environmental quality and/or the township in accordance with the provision of article IV of this chapter, or, if the watercourse is a designated county drain, approval from the county drain commissioner shall be obtained. 
(6)  No modifications of watercourses shall be permitted if the primary purpose is to increase the flow capacity of the watercourse except for the widening of county drains by the office of the county drain commissioner. 
(7)  Discharge of runoff from commercial and industrial sites which may contain oil, grease, toxic chemicals, or other polluting materials shall be prohibited unless measures to reduce and trap pollutants meet the requirements of the state department of environmental quality and the township. 
(8)  Drainage systems shall be designed to protect public health and safety and to be visually attractive. 
(9)  No land improvement permit shall be granted if the proposed action is likely to impact a wetland or watercourse unless a permit has been obtained pursuant to article IV of this chapter. Wetland and watercourses may be utilized for stormwater discharge associated with a land improvement provided the discharge conforms with this article and any necessary permits are obtained pursuant to article IV. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § XVIII, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-79. - Stormwater detention and retention basin standards. 
(a)  The applicant's engineer must submit copies of all design data together with plans for any storm drainage system. Determination of surface runoff and sizing of sewer system pipes, culverts, and open channels shall comply with the standards of the county drain commissioner or chapter 42, article IV, whichever standard is more strict. 
(b)  Any new development or addition(s) to an existing development must retain or detain the increased runoff onsite unless otherwise directed by the township engineer. Acceptable means of retention and/or detention can be achieved through a separate retention and/or detention basin. The county method of retention basin design, as available from the county drain commissioner's office or chapter 42, article IV, shall be utilized in determining the volume of retention and/or detention required based upon whichever standard is more strict. 
(c)  Retention and/or detention basin construction shall satisfy the design criteria of chapter 42, article IV, as it may be amended, and/or the criteria of the county drain commissioner, whichever standard is more stringent. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § XIX, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-80. - Stormwater management easements. 
(a)  Necessity of easements. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the applicant if necessary to assure: 
(1)  Access for stormwater management measures and facilities inspections and maintenance; and 
(2)  Preservation of stormwater management conveyance, infiltration and storage areas, including flood routes for the 100-year storm event. 
(b)  Easements for offsite stormwater management. Stormwater management and flood easements are required for all areas used for offsite stormwater management measures and/or facilities, unless the areas are upon the same parcel as the proposed development site at the time stormwater management provisions of plans and specifications are submitted, or, if plans and specifications are not required, at the time of application. 
(c)  Recording of easements. Easements shall be recorded with the county register of deeds according to county requirements. 
(d)  Recording prior to building permit issuance. The proprietor must provide the building official with evidence of the recording prior to the issuance of a certificate of completion. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § XX, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-81. - Maintenance agreement. 
(a)  Purpose of maintenance agreement. The purpose of the maintenance agreement is to provide the means and assurance that maintenance of stormwater management facilities shall be undertaken. 
(b)  Maintenance agreement required. An applicant for a land improvement permit submitting plans and specifications containing stormwater management measures and facilities, which in the opinion of the township engineer, will require future maintenance to remain effective and workable, shall submit a maintenance agreement to the township in a form acceptable to the township. 
(c)  The maintenance agreement shall provide for routine maintenance and emergency maintenance. 
(d)  The maintenance agreement shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management facilities, and shall be recorded in the land records of the county within 30 days after approval by the township board. 
(e)  A certificate of completion shall not be granted until such time as a maintenance agreement has been submitted to and accepted by the township if required pursuant to subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § XXI, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-82. - Waiver of provisions. 
The planning commission may upon appeal in a specific case authorize such waivers from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship. A waiver from the terms of this article shall not be granted by the planning commission unless and until: 
(1)  A written application for a waiver is submitted demonstrating that literal enforcement of the article will result in either practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship: 
a.  The existence of practical difficulties shall be determined upon consideration of the following factors: 
1.  Strict compliance with the terms of the article will unreasonably prevent the owner from using the property for a permitted purpose or will render article conformity unnecessarily burdensome; 
2.  The waiver will do substantial justice to the applicant, as well as to other property owners; 
3.  A lesser waiver than requested will not give substantial relief to the applicant and will not be more consistent with justice to other property owners; 
4.  The need for the waiver is due to the unique circumstances peculiar to the property and not generally applicable in the area or to other properties; 
5.  The problem and resulting need for the waiver has not been self-created by the applicant and/or the applicant's predecessors; 
b.  Unnecessary hardship shall be established by demonstrating that: 
1.  The property cannot reasonably be used in compliance with this article; and 
2.  The need for the waiver is due to the unique circumstances peculiar to the property and not generally applicable in the area or to other properties; and 
3.  The requested waiver will not adversely affect surrounding properties; and 
4.  The hardship was not unreasonably self-created by the applicant; 
(2)  No incidence of noncompliance with this article by any person or on any property shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a waiver. 
(3)  Notice of a public hearing on the waiver application shall be given. The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(4)  The planning commission shall make findings of fact based upon competent evidence that the requirements of subsection (1)a. or b. have been met. 
(5)  The planning commission shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of a waiver, and that the waiver is the minimum waiver that will make possible the reasonable use of the property; 
(6)  The planning commission shall further make a finding that the granting of the waiver will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(7)  In granting any waiver, the planning commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this article. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the waiver is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this article and punishable as such. Conditions imposed shall meet all of the following requirements: 
a.  Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety and welfare of the community, and to advance the goals of this article. 
b.  Be related to the valid exercise of the police power, and purposes which are affected by the proposed land improvement. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § XXII, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-83. - Telecommunications providers. 
Pursuant to Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002, MCL 484.3101 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time ("Act"), no telecommunications provider, as defined in the Act, shall be required to pay any fee, charge, financial requirement, or other cost under this article beyond that which is permitted by the Act. No provision of this article shall be construed in such a manner as to violate the Act. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § XXIII, 5-12-2004)  
Sec. 22-84. - Penalties and enforcement. 
A person who violates any provision of this article or any of the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined by state statute, and shall be subject to a civil fine of not more than $500.00 along with costs which may include all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the township has been put in connection with the municipal civil infraction. In no case, however, shall costs of less than $9.00 nor more than $500.00 be ordered. A person who violates any provision of this article or any of the terms or conditions of a permit shall also be subject to such additional sanctions and judicial orders as are authorized under state law. Each day that a violation of this article or a permit continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the township may pursue any injunctive or other relief which may be available. Nothing in this section 22-84 shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the township in the event of a violation by a person of this article or a permit. 
(Ord. No. 108.A, § XXV, 5-12-2004) 
APPENDIX A
 
  
Secs. 22-85—22-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WETLAND AND WATERCOURSE PROTECTION[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Waterways, ch. 66. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-131. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Contiguous means any of the following: 
(1)  A permanent surface water connection or other direct physical contact with an inland lake or pond, a river or a stream. 
(2)  A seasonal or intermittent surface water connection to an inland lake or pond, a river or a stream. 
(3)  Two or more areas separated by barriers, such as dikes, roads, berms or other similar features, but with any area contiguous under the criteria described in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition. 
Fill material means soil, rocks, sand, waste of any kind, or any other material which displaces soil or water or reduces water retention potential. 
Minor drainage includes ditching and tiling for the removal of excess soil moisture incidental to the planting, cultivating, protecting, or harvesting of crops or improving the production of land in established use for commercial agriculture, commercial horticulture, commercial silviculture, or commercial lumbering. 
Owner means the title holder, land contract purchaser or lessee. 
Watercourse means any waterway or other body of water having reasonably well-defined banks, including rivers, streams, creeks and brooks, whether continually or intermittently flowing, and lakes and ponds, and/or as shown on wetland and watercourses maps. 
Wetland means land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that under normal circumstances does support wetland vegetation or aquatic life, and is commonly referred to as a bog, swamp, or marsh, and which is any of the following: 
(1)  Contiguous to an inland lake or pond, or a river or stream. 
(2)  Not contiguous to an inland lake or pond, or a river or stream, and one acre or more in size. 
Wetland and watercourses maps means those maps which delineate wetlands and watercourses in the township, as amended and/or updated from time to time, including but not limited to United States Geological Survey maps, United States Soil Conservation Service maps, and state department of environmental quality maps. 
(Ord. No. 80B, § 3, 6-12-1996) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-132. - Purpose of article. 
(a)  Consistent with the letter and spirit of part 303 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.30301 et seq.), the township finds that rapid growth, the spread of development, and increasing demands upon natural resources have had the effect of encroaching upon, polluting, impairing or destroying many of its wetlands and other natural resources and processes associated therewith which, if preserved and maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition, constitute important physical, aesthetic, recreational and economic assets to existing and future residents of the township. 
(b)  Protection of the natural resources is essential to the protection of the public health, safety and welfare within the township. 
(c)  This article provides for the protection, preservation, proper maintenance, and use of township wetlands and watercourses in order to prevent pollution, impairment or destruction of them. This article adopts the definition of a wetland that is provided under part 303 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.30301 et seq.) which is specifically authorized by section 30307(4) of such act (MCL 324.30307(4)). 
(Ord. No. 80B, § 2, 6-12-1996)  
Sec. 22-133. - Penalties; restoration of altered wetlands. 
(a)  Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this article shall become liable to the township for any expense or loss or damage occasioned by the township by reason of such violation. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties provided under subsection (a) of this section, the court may order a person who violates this article to restore as nearly as possible the wetland which was affected by the violation, to its original condition immediately before the violation. The restoration may include the removal of all material deposited in the wetland or the replacement of soil, sand, or minerals. 
(Ord. No. 80B, § 15, 6-12-1996)  
Sec. 22-134. - Areas and facilities subject to article. 
This article shall apply to: 
(1)  Watercourses as defined in this article. 
(2)  Wetlands as defined in this article. 
(3)  All retention and detention facilities constructed for the purpose of collecting and/or directing runoff water into any wetland or watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 80B, § 4, 6-12-1996)  
Sec. 22-135. - Nonconforming activities and structures. 
An activity or structure existing on October 18, 1991, or at the time of subsequent amendments to this article, but which is not in conformity with the provisions of this article, may be continued subject to the following provisions. However, the intent of this section is the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses. 
(1)  No such activity or structure shall be expanded, changed, enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity with this article. 
(2)  On a building or structure devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use or activity, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing to an extent not exceeding 50 percent of the assessed value of the building or structure, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed on October 18, 1991, or at the time of subsequent amendments to this article, shall not be increased. Should any such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost, exclusive of the foundation, at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this article. 
(3)  If a nonconforming activity or use is discontinued for six consecutive months, any resumption of the activity or use shall conform to this article. 
(Ord. No. 80B, § 9, 6-12-1996)  
Sec. 22-136. - Variances. 
The planning commission may, upon appeal in a specific case, authorize such variance from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article would result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of this article shall not be granted by the planning commission unless and until: 
(1)  A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating that: 
a.  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district; 
b.  Literal interpretation of the provisions of this article would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this article; 
c.  The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant; 
d.  Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this article to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district; or 
e.  Unnecessary hardship would result, which was not self-created, such that no useful purpose would be served by strict enforcement of the terms of this article. 
(2)  No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district, and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts, shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
(3)  The planning commission shall make findings of fact based upon competent evidence that the requirements of subsections (a)(1)a through d of this section or subsection (a)(1)e of this section have been met. 
(4)  The planning commission shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of a variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure. 
(5)  The planning commission shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(6)  In granting any variance, the planning commission may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this article. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this article and punishable under section 22-133. Conditions imposed shall meet all of the following requirements: 
a.  Be designed to protect natural resources, health, safety and welfare, and the social and economic well-being of those who will use the building, land or activity under consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed building, land use or activity, and the community as a whole. 
b.  Be related to the valid exercise of police power and purposes which are affected by the proposed building, use or activity. 
c.  Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this article, be related to the standards established in this article for the building, land use or activity under consideration, and be necessary to ensure compliance with those standards. 
(Ord. No. 80B, § 16, 6-12-1996)  
Sec. 22-137. - Wetland inventory map. 
The township hereby adopts and incorporates into this article an amended wetland inventory map as prepared by the township's wetland consultant, Tilton & Associates, Inc. The wetland inventory map does not create any legally enforceable presumptions regarding whether property that is or is not included on the wetland inventory map is or is not a wetland. This wetland inventory map does not necessarily include all of the wetlands within the township that may be subject to regulation under this article or under other law. 
(Ord. No. 80B.001, art. 1, 2-19-2003)  
Secs. 22-138—22-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 22-161. - Activities requiring permit. 
(a)  Except for those activities expressly permitted in this article, the following acts require a prior permit from the township as authorized by section 22-165, and are prohibited unless a permit is first obtained: 
(1)  Depositing or allowing the placing of any fill material in a wetland or watercourse, or within 25 feet of a watercourse. 
(2)  Dredging, removing, or allowing the removal of soil, sand, minerals, or materials, including vegetation, from a wetland or watercourse, or from any area within 25 feet of a watercourse. 
(3)  Constructing, operating, or maintaining any use or structure in a wetland or watercourse, or within an area within 25 feet of a watercourse. 
(4)  Draining surface or subsurface water from or which drains into a wetland or watercourse. 
(5)  Flooding or otherwise altering a watercourse or wetland. 
(6)  Mowing or cutting of plants in a wetland. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the prohibition of subsection (a) of this section, the following activities are permitted within a wetland or watercourse without a use permit subject to other laws of the state and the owner's regulation: 
(1)  Fishing, trapping, or hunting. 
(2)  Swimming or boating. 
(3)  Hiking. 
(4)  Grazing of animals. 
(5)  Farming, horticulture, silviculture, lumbering, and ranching activities, including plowing, irrigation, irrigation ditching, seeding, cultivating, minor drainage, harvesting for the production of food, fiber, and forest products, or upland soil and water conservation practices. Wetlands altered under this article shall not be used for a purpose other than a purpose described in this section without a permit from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. 
(6)  Maintenance or operation of serviceable structure in existence on June 3, 1994 or constructed pursuant to this article. 
(7)  Construction or maintenance of farm or stock ponds. 
(8)  Maintenance, operation, or improvement which includes straightening, widening, or deepening of the following that is necessary for the production or harvesting of agricultural products: 
a.  An existing private agricultural drain. 
b.  That portion of a drain legally established pursuant to Public Act No. 40 of 1956 (MCL 280.1 et seq.), which has been constructed or improved for drainage purposes. 
c.  A drain constructed pursuant to other provisions of this article. 
(9)  Construction or maintenance of farm roads, forest roads, or temporary roads for moving mining or forestry equipment, if the roads are constructed and maintained in a manner to ensure that any adverse effect on the wetland will be otherwise minimized. When the temporary road ceases to be used, the land used for the temporary road shall be restored to its natural state, as near as possible, prior to construction of the temporary road. 
(10)  Drainage necessary for the production and harvesting of agricultural products if the wetland is owned by a person who is engaged in commercial farming and the land is to be used for the production and harvesting of agricultural products. Except as otherwise provided in this article, wetlands improved under this subsection after June 3, 1994, shall not be used for non-farming purposes without a permit from the department. This subsection shall not apply to a wetland which is contiguous to a lake or stream, or to a tributary of a lake or stream, or to a wetland which the department has determined by clear and convincing evidence to be a wetland which is necessary to be preserved for the public interest, in which case a permit shall be required. 
(11)  Maintenance or improvement of public streets, highways, or roads, within the right-of-way and in such manner as to ensure that any adverse effect on the wetland will be otherwise minimized. Maintenance or improvement does not include adding extra lanes, increasing the right-of-way, or deviating from the existing location of the street, highway, or road. 
(12)  Maintenance, repair, or operation of gas or oil pipelines and construction of gas or oil pipelines having a diameter of six inches or less, if the pipelines are constructed, maintained, or repaired in a manner to ensure that any adverse effect on the wetland will be otherwise minimized. 
(13)  Maintenance, repair, or operation of electric transmission and distribution power lines and construction of distribution power lines if the distribution power lines are constructed, maintained, or repaired in a manner to ensure that any adverse effect on the wetland will be otherwise minimized. 
(14)  Operation or maintenance, including reconstruction of recently damaged parts, of serviceable dikes and levees in existence on October 18, 1991, or constructed pursuant to this article. 
(15)  Construction of iron and copper mining tailings basins and water storage areas. 
(16)  After October 18, 1991, but immediately prior to the approval of a state program under section 404 of title 4 of the Clean Water Act of 1977, 33 USC 1344, where a project solely involves the discharge of fill material subject to the individual permit requirements of section 404 of title 4 of the Clean Water Act of 1977, 33 USC 1344, an additional permit shall not be required by this article. 
(17)  The placement of seasonal structures on wetlands and on the bottomland of watercourses to facilitate private noncommercial use of wetlands or watercourses. A seasonal structure includes any type of dock, boat hoist, ramp, raft or other recreational structure which is placed into a wetland or watercourse in the spring or summer and which is removed in the fall. 
(18)  Irrigation of grass, pasture, garden, or other personal property using water from inland lakes, streams and/or wetlands located in the township. 
(Ord. No. 80B, §§ 6, 8, 6-12-1996; Ord. No. 80B.002, art. 1, 10-12-2011)  
Sec. 22-162. - Wetlands less than two acres in area. 
(a)  A permit shall be approved with respect to a noncontiguous wetland less than two acres in area unless the township determines that the wetland is essential to the preservation of the natural resources of the township. 
(b)  All noncontiguous wetland areas of less than two acres which appear on the wetlands inventory map, or which are otherwise identified during a field inspection by the township, shall be analyzed for the purpose of determining whether such areas are essential to the preservation of the natural resources of the township. If there is to be a denial of a permit to dredge, fill, construct, or otherwise undertake an operation in a noncontiguous wetland of less than two acres, then, on the basis of data presented by the applicant, or supplemental data gathered by the township, findings shall be made in writing and given to the applicant stating the basis for the determination that such wetland is essential to the preservation of the natural resources of the township. In order to make such a determination, there shall be a finding that one or more of the following exist within such wetland: 
(1)  The site supports state or federal endangered or threatened plants, fish, or wildlife appearing on a list specified in section 36503 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.36503). 
(2)  The site represents what is identified as a locally rare or unique ecosystem. 
(3)  The site supports plants or animals of an identified local importance. 
(4)  The site provides groundwater recharge documented by a public agency. 
(5)  The site provides flood and storm control by the hydrologic absorption and storage capacity of the wetland. 
(6)  The site provides wildlife habitat by providing breeding, nesting, or feeding grounds or cover for forms of wildlife, waterfowl, including migratory waterfowl, and rare, threatened or endangered wildlife species. 
(7)  The site provides protection of subsurface water resources and provision of valuable watersheds and recharging groundwater supplies. 
(8)  The site provides pollution treatment by serving as a biological and chemical oxidation basin. 
(9)  The site provides erosion control by serving as a sedimentation area and filtering basin, absorbing silt and organic matter. 
(10)  The site provides sources of nutrients in water food cycles and nursery grounds and sanctuaries for fish. 
(c)  The data which must be submitted by the applicant for purposes of making the determination whether the wetland is essential to the preservation of the natural resources of the township shall include an election and response under subsections (1) and (2) of this subsection relative to each noncontiguous wetland area less than two acres: 
(1)  An acknowledgment that one or more of the criteria in subsections (b)(1) through (10) of this section exist on the wetland in question, including a specification of the one or more criteria which do exist; or 
(2)  An analysis prepared by the applicant's qualified wetlands consultant, if the applicant has been required by the township to hire one or has otherwise hired one, with respect to each criterion in subsections (b)(1) through (10) of this section, detailing whether each of the criteria in subsections (b)(1) through (10) exists or does not exist in the wetland in question, including specific reasons for the conclusion in respect to each criterion. 
(Ord. No. 80B, § 7, 6-12-1996)  
Sec. 22-163. - Application requirements; issuance of building permits for single-family homes and accessory structures. 
(a)  A use permit applicant for uses other than construction of a single-family home or accessory buildings on a single parcel shall submit the following materials to the township clerk or designated agent: 
(1)  A completed use permit application on a form provided by the township. The township shall utilize a form provided by the state. 
(2)  A use permit application fee in an amount as set by resolution of the township board. 
(3)  Where the applicant is not the owner of the property, a written authorization from the owner permitting the proposed activity. 
(4)  With the exclusion of single-family residences, a site plan, including a topographical survey drawn at no more than a two-foot contour interval, sealed by a registered engineer or registered surveyor, which includes the following information: 
a.  The shape and dimensions of the lot or parcel, together with the existing and proposed locations of structures and improvements, if any; 
b.  Specification of the extent of all areas to be disturbed, the depths to which removal or deposition activities are proposed, and the angle of repose of all slopes of deposition material and/or sides of channels or excavations resulting from removal operations; 
c.  A soils map drawn at the same scale as the site plan delineating existing general soil conditions throughout the parcel; 
d.  Location and dimensions of all setbacks, easements, and existing and proposed public and private utilities; and 
e.  A grading plan drawn at the same scale as the site plan indicating all grade changes proposed and proposed drainage pattern changes for the lot or parcel and how such changes will affect these regulations, and existing contour data for the entire property with a vertical contour interval of no more than two feet, and vertical contour data at an interval of no more than one foot, for all areas to be disturbed by proposed operations, extending for a distance of at least 50 feet beyond the limits of grading or disturbance of such areas. Indicated elevations shall be based on United States Geological Survey datum. 
f.  A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan consistent with the requirements of the county drain commissioner showing measures to protect watercourses at the 25-foot setback from construction disturbance. 
g.  Stormwater drainage plan and calculations for release of stormwater into any wetland or watercourse. 
h.  A designation on all design plans of the limits or boundaries of all watercourses and wetland areas, regardless of size, which boundaries shall be staked by the applicant or the applicant's agent on the site. 
(b)  As part of the review of any building permit application for construction of a single-family home or single-family accessory building or structure on a parcel of land, the building official or his or her designee shall inspect the property to determine whether the proposed construction would be located within any wetland or watercourse, or within 25 feet of a watercourse. 
(1)  If it appears to the building official or his or her designee that construction is proposed within a wetland or watercourse or within 25 feet of a watercourse, then a building permit shall not be issued until the township has obtained the advice of the township's wetlands consultant. 
(2)  If the township deems it necessary to obtain the advice of the township's wetlands consultant, the property owner shall be charged a fee for such costs as established by resolution of the township board; however, if an applicant can establish economic hardship, the township may waive some or all of the cost for the wetlands consultant's review. 
(3)  No building permit shall be approved if the township planning commission determines that the proposed structure is likely to pollute, impair, or destroy a wetland or watercourse of one acre or more in size, unless it determines that there are no feasible or prudent alternative, and that the approval is consistent with the public interest in light of the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80B, § 10, 6-12-1996)  
Sec. 22-164. - Fees. 
In reviewing wetlands use permit applications, the planning commission may seek opinions and advice from experts with special wetlands knowledge. The fees and costs for such consultants, including costs of field inspections, shall be paid by the applicant as established by resolution of the township board. 
(Ord. No. 80B, § 11, 6-12-1996)  
Sec. 22-165. - Review of application; granting or denial; issuance. 
(a)  The township planning commission, with the assistance of the township engineer and/or wetlands consultant, shall review the application for a wetlands or watercourses permit and shall approve or deny the application within 90 days. The planning commission shall send a copy of the application to the state department of environmental quality. 
(b)  The applicant for an approval required in conjunction with site plan approval or subdivision approval shall, at the time of the submission, elect to have the application processed under one of the following procedures: 
(1)  The wetland application shall be reviewed immediately, either prior to or concurrent with the review of the site plan, plat or other proposed land use submitted by the applicant, with the understanding that the land use review may not be completed at the time the decision is rendered on the wetland application. Election of this alternative may require a re-opening of the wetland application if the land use approval is inconsistent with the wetland approval; or 
(2)  The wetland application shall be reviewed and acted upon concurrently with the review of the site plan, plat or other proposed land use submitted by the applicant, and the 90-day review period limitation specified in section 30307(2) of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.30307(2)) is thereby extended accordingly. 
(c)  In determining whether the activity is in the public interest, the benefit which reasonably may be expected to accrue from the proposal shall be balanced against the reasonably foreseeable detriments of the activity. The decision shall reflect the national, state, and local concern for the protection of natural resources from pollution, impairment, and destruction. The commission may issue development permits for certain acts in the watercourses and wetlands of the township, provided such development permit does not violate the intent of this article or of other township, county, or state ordinances or statutes. In reviewing such application, the commission shall consider the possible effects of the proposed operation upon: 
(1)  Water quality, including filtering action; 
(2)  Fish or wildlife, including their habitats, damage or change; 
(3)  Effect upon adjoining wetland or drainage areas and water tables; 
(4)  Economic impact; 
(5)  Land use for which the property is zoned or planned; and 
(6)  Recreational impact. 
(d)  No approval shall be given if the planning commission determines that the action has or is likely to pollute, impair or destroy a wetland or watercourse of one acre or more in size, unless it determines that there are no feasible and prudent alternatives and that the approval is consistent with the public interest in light of the purposes of this article. 
(e)  The planning commission may hold a public hearing on the application before making a decision. The commission shall provide the applicant with the reasons for denying the permit application. 
(f)  Whenever a use permit is granted, the commission shall: 
(1)  Impose such conditions on the manner and extent of the proposed activity or use as are necessary to ensure that the intent of this article is carried out and that the activity or use will be conducted in such a manner as will cause the least possible damage, encroachment or interference with natural resources and natural processes within the watercourse and/or wetland area. 
(2)  Fix a reasonable time within which any wetland operation must be completed, which time period may be extended by the planning commission only for good cause shown. 
(3)  Require the filing with the township of a cash bond or irrevocable letter of credit, in such form and amount as determined necessary by the township board to ensure compliance with the approved development permit. 
(g)  If a use permit is denied, the commission shall inform the applicant of the reasons for denial in writing. The failure to supply complete information with a permit application may be reason for denial of a permit. 
(h)  After the planning commission reaches its final decision, it shall forward its decision to the state as provided in part 303 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.30301 et seq.). 
(i)  Following approval of the wetland application, a wetland permit shall be issued upon determination that all other requirements of this Code, township ordinances and law have been met, including site plan, plat or land use approval, as applicable, and including issuance of a permit by the state department of environmental quality, if required under part 303 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCL 324.30301 et seq.). In cases where a state department of environmental quality permit allows activities not permitted under this article, the restrictions of approval granted under this article shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 80B, § 12, 6-12-1996)  
Sec. 22-166. - Revaluation of property for assessment purposes when permit is denied. 
If a permit is denied to a landowner to conduct activity in a wetland according to the requirements of this article, such landowner shall be entitled to request a revaluation of the affected property for assessment purposes before the township property tax valuation board of review to determine its fair market value under the use restriction. 
(Ord. No. 80B, § 13, 6-12-1996)  
Secs. 22-167—22-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY PROTECTION[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 62. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-191. - Definitions and policy. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Township means the Charter Township of Oxford, Michigan, or its assignee. 
Wellhead protection overlay zone means an area surrounding a public well's wellhead, the circumference of which represents the area within which contaminants in surface water can travel to the wellhead within a ten-year period and which has been delineated on the appropriate appendix to Ordinance No. 110. 
(b)  Policy. 
(1)  Whereas, the groundwater in the aquifer underlying the Charter Township of Oxford is the source of drinking water for township residents, and the township desires to protect its public water supply and wellhead areas by instituting pollution source controls; and 
(2)  Whereas, the township desires to regulate potential pollutants to the fullest extent authorized by law by enacting the ordinance from which this division was derived as a measure to ensure the protection and availability of public drinking water supplies; and 
(3)  Whereas, pursuant to part 88 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection act (MCL 324.8801 et seq.) and associated regulations, local communities are encouraged to enact a local wellhead protection groundwater ordinance in order to qualify for certain grant funding administered by the Michigan Department of Environmental Equality (MDEQ); 
(4)  Now, therefore, the Charter Township of Oxford, Oakland County, Michigan, hereby ordains as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. 2, 11-8-2000) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-192. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates or continues to violate any provisions of the article beyond the time limit for compliance set forth by the township supervisor, fire chief or their designees, a notice of violation or other compliance schedule shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. If the violation is a continuing one, each day of such violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. 20, 11-8-2000)  
Sec. 22-193. - Scope of article; areas subject to article. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall be effective within the wellhead protection overlay zone shown on the official zoning map of the township. Maps designating the wellhead protection overlay zone shall be included in the official zoning map of the township. A map showing the wellhead protection overlay zone shall be attached to this article as appendix A and may be amended as necessary by resolution of the township board. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed so as to interfere with any existing or future lawful requirements that may be, or heretofore were, imposed by any other governmental entity authorized to enact sanitary, health or water pollution abatement restrictions. In the event of a conflict between the intentions of this article and those of another governmental body, the strictest standard shall apply. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed so as to interfere with the duties and powers of the township or its agents. 
(Ord. No. 110, arts. 1, 6, 11-8-2000)  
Sec. 22-194. - Responsibility for compliance. 
It shall be the responsibility of any person owning real property and/or owning and operating a business within the township to make a determination of the applicability of this article as it pertains to the property and/or business under his ownership or operation, and his failure to do so shall not excuse any violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. 7, 11-8-2000)  
Sec. 22-195. - Falsifying information. 
No person shall make any false statement, representation or certification in any report or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. 14, 11-8-2000)  
Sec. 22-196. - Retention of records. 
Any reports or records compiled or submitted pursuant to this article shall be maintained by the user for a minimum of five years or for so long as enforcement or judicial proceedings are being pursued, whichever is longer. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. 15, 11-8-2000)  
Sec. 22-197. - Underground storage tanks. 
Underground storage tanks located within the wellhead protection overlay zone are defined and regulated within the zone in accordance with part 211 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.21101 et seq.) and with the corresponding administrative regulations. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. 13, 11-8-2000)  
Sec. 22-198. - Damaging or tampering with structures or equipment. 
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, property or equipment which is part of or used in conjunction with the water facilities, or which results in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. 18, 11-8-2000)  
Secs. 22-199—22-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 22-221. - Generally. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, the township supervisor, or his designated agents, shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. 3, 11-8-2000)  
Sec. 22-222. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  Any person found in violation of this article or any order, requirement, rule or regulation issued under the authority of this article will be served with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing reasonable time for compliance. If a person enforcing this article has previously promulgated a schedule of compliance or issued an order addressing the same type of or a similar violation and the time for compliance has passed, that person may dispense with establishing another time for compliance. 
(b)  The notice shall be served by first class mail, return receipt requested. Where the address of the violator is unknown, service may be made upon the owner of the property involved at the tax mailing address of the owner as shown on the county tax record. 
(c)  The township supervisor or his designee and/or the fire chief of the township fire department or his designee may issue a notice of violation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. 4, 11-8-2000)  
Sec. 22-223. - Inspections. 
The persons described in section 22-222(c) shall have the authority, bearing proper identification, to request entry in order to enter any premises or structure or other private property at reasonable times to inspect. Prior to entering into a space not otherwise open to the general public, the persons authorized to conduct inspection under section 22-222(c) shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises, present proper identification and request entry. If requested entry is refused or not obtained, the authorized person may pursue recourse as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. 5, 11-8-2000)  
Sec. 22-224. - Appearance tickets. 
The fire chief and the township supervisor are hereby authorized to issue appearance tickets for a violation of this article along with other persons authorized to do so by other ordinances or state law. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. 21, 11-8-2000)  
Sec. 22-225. - Enforcement actions. 
(a)  If any activity or use of a regulated substance is deemed by the township supervisor to pose a real and present danger of contaminating surface water and/or groundwater which would normally enter the public water supply, the township supervisor or fire chief is authorized to: 
(1)  Cause cessation of the activity or use of regulated substance; 
(2)  Require the provision of administrative controls and/or facilities sufficient to mitigate such danger; and/or 
(3)  Cause the provision of pollution control and/or abatement activities. However, no legal action can be taken without the authorization of the township supervisor or fire chief. 
(b)  When considering the exercise of any of the authorities or actions described in subsection (a) of this section, the township supervisor or fire chief shall ensure that the township's public water supply is reasonably and adequately protected from contamination for the present and the future, shall make every reasonable effort to coordinate and act in concert with other regulatory entities in the exercise of such authority, and may take into consideration any evidence represented by the entity regarding cost effectiveness and the economic effectiveness and the economic impact imposed by the requirements or actions. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. 16, 11-8-2000)  
Sec. 22-226. - Appeals. 
(a)  Filing. Any person may appeal an action of the township supervisor, the fire chief, or their designees made pursuant to section 22-222 by filing with the township supervisor a notice of appeal within 21 days of such action and a statement of appeal within 30 days of the date that the order being appealed was issued. A notice of appeal shall include, as a minimum, name, address, telephone number, date and a statement of intent to appeal. A statement of appeal shall include all information contained in the notice of appeal, a description of the nature of the appeal and any pertinent documentation. 
(b)  Appeals board. The board of wellhead protection appeals is hereby established. The board shall consist of the township supervisor and three designees to be named by the township supervisor. No appointment shall be final unless approved by the township board. The three designees shall serve for a term of two years. The appeals board shall have the authority to take appeals, investigate matters related to such appeals, and deny, uphold or otherwise modify or waive the actions pursuant to section 22-222 on a case-by-case basis. The appeals board shall develop rules and regulations of operation consistent with its authority, and subject to approval by the township supervisor. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. 17, 11-8-2000)  
Secs. 22-227—22-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REGULATED SUBSTANCES 
 
Sec. 22-251. - Designated. 
The substances to be regulated under this article (referred to in this division as "regulated substances"), are chemicals and mixtures of chemicals which are health hazards. Regulated substances include: 
(1)  Those substances as defined by the state occupational safety and health administration (MIOSHA) as regulated under title III of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act (SARA), currently reported on MIOSHA material safety data sheets. A booklet listing substances regulated under this section shall be made available at the township offices. 
(2)  Petroleum and non-solid petroleum derivatives (except non-PCB di-electric fluids). 
(Ord. No. 110, art. 8, 11-8-2000)  
Sec. 22-252. - Exclusions. 
(a)  Any exclusions set forth in this section shall apply provided that the exclusion does not substantially increase any risk or hazard to the public health or water supply, wells or wellfields, and provided further that any spill, leak, discharge or mishandling shall be subject to the provisions of section 22-255. Any exclusions granted in this section shall not remove or limit the liability and responsibility of any person or activity involved. 
(b)  A limited exclusion from regulated substance activity inventory reporting and handling restrictions pursuant to section 22-253 is hereby authorized for incidental uses of regulated substances provided the uses are limited as follows: 
(1)  The aggregate of regulated substances in use may not exceed 20 gallons or 160 pounds at any time. 
(2)  The total use of regulated substances may not exceed 50 gallons or 400 pounds in any 12-month period. 
(c)  A limited exclusion from regulated substance activity inventory reporting and handling restrictions pursuant to section 22-253 is hereby authorized for non-routine maintenance or repair of property in the wellhead protection overlay zone provided the uses are limited as follows: 
(1)  The aggregate of regulated substances in use may not exceed 50 gallons or 400 pounds at any time. 
(2)  The total use of regulated substances may not exceed 100 gallons or 800 pounds in any 12-month period. 
(d)  A limited exclusion from regulated substance activity inventory reporting and handling restrictions pursuant to section 22-253 is hereby authorized for regulated substances which are cleaning agents, provided such cleaning agents are packaged for personal or household use or are present in the same form and concentration as a product packaged for use by the general public, and provided the aggregate inventory of such cleaning agents shall not exceed 100 gallons or 800 pounds at any time. In no case shall regulated substances claimed under the exclusion include hydrocarbon or halogenated hydrocarbon solvents. 
(e)  A limited exclusion from regulated substance activity inventory reporting and handling restrictions pursuant to section 22-253 is hereby authorized for medical and research laboratory uses in the wellhead protection overlay zone; provided, however, regulated substances shall be stored, handled or used in containers not to exceed five gallons or 40 pounds of each substance and the aggregate inventory of regulated substances shall not exceed 250 gallons or 2,000 pounds. 
(f)  An exclusion from regulated substance activity inventory reporting and handling restrictions pursuant to section 22-253 is hereby authorized for the transportation of regulated substances through the wellhead protection overlay zone provided that the transporting vehicle is in compliance with the applicable township ordinances and federal and state laws and regulations, and provided that the regulated substance is fueling the transporting vehicle or the transporting vehicle is in continuous transit, making deliveries, or is stopped for a period of time not to exceed ten hours. 
(g)  A limited exclusion from regulated substance activity inventory reporting and handling restrictions pursuant to section 22-253 is hereby authorized for owners and occupants of single-family or two-family residences; provided, however, the storage and use of regulated substances are related to the maintenance of the residence or vehicles under control of the occupant and provided waste regulated substances are appropriately and legally disposed of. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. 11, 11-8-2000)  
Sec. 22-253. - Storage, use and other handling restricted. 
No person shall place, deposit or permit to be deposited, store, process, use, produce, dispose of, transport or discharge (referred to in this division as "handle") any regulated substance on public or private property within the wellhead protection overlay zone, except as provided by law, statute, ordinance, rule or regulation and except as allowed for limited quantities pursuant to section 22-252. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. 9, 11-8-2000)  
Sec. 22-254. - Activity inventory reports. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 22-252, any owner or occupant of any land in the wellhead protection overlay zone at the effective date of Ordinance No. 110 shall file a regulated substance activity inventory report, which shall consist of a copy of the MIOSHA material safety data sheets or a hazardous substance reporting form available at the township. The report shall be filed within 180 days of the effective date of Ordinance No. 110 and at 24-month intervals thereafter. 
(b)  Except as provided in section 22-252, any new owner or occupant of any land in the wellhead protection overlay zone shall file a regulated substance activity inventory report prior to receipt of a certificate of occupancy and at 24-month intervals following the date of occupancy. For purposes of this article, the term "new" shall be defined as subsequent to the effective date of Ordinance No. 110. 
(c)  Where a person owns, operates or occupies more than one location, regulated substance activity inventory reports shall be made for each location. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. 10, 11-8-2000)  
Sec. 22-255. - Spills, leaks or discharges. 
(a)  Any person with direct knowledge of a spill, leak or discharge of a regulated substance within the wellhead protection overlay zone shall, if such spill, leak or discharge escapes or has potential to escape containment or contacts a non-impervious ground surface and is not immediately and completely remediated, give notice to the township fire department. The notification shall include, at a minimum, the location of the incident, name and telephone number, date and time thereof, type of substance, concentration and volume, and control or corrective action taken. Such notification shall in no way alleviate other local, state and federal reporting obligations as required by law. Notice to the township shall be provided within one hour of the spill, leak or discharge. 
(b)  Any person who spills, leaks or discharges such substance shall be liable for any reasonable expense, loss or damages incurred by the township in response to such an incident, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on account thereof under state and federal law. Such person shall document and maintain sufficient records so as to reflect accurately the circumstances related to any such incident and develop and implement procedures to substantially eliminate the likelihood of reoccurrence of such spills, leaks or discharges as soon as practicable following the incident, but no later than 180 days after the incident. 
(c)  The township shall post signs in conspicuous places advising residents and transporters of regulated substances of the existence of the wellhead protection overlay zone and of the notification procedures in the event of a spill or accidental discharge. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. 12, 11-8-2000) 
 
  
Secs. 22-256—22-299. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 22-300. - Adoption of rules by reference. 
Part 91 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act and the Administrative Rules promulgated under Part 91 are adopted by reference. A copy of Part 91 and the Rules shall be on file at the building department of the township. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such rules and regulations are adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 129, 12-10-2014)  
Sec. 22-301. - Municipal enforcing agency. 
The building department of the township shall become the municipal enforcing agency in regard to Part 91, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended (Part 91) being MCL 324.9101 et seq. and Administrative Rules promulgated by the state department of environmental quality as amended, within the municipal limits of the township. 
(Ord. No. 129, 12-10-2014)  
Sec. 22-302. - Permit and inspection fees. 
Soil erosion permit and inspection fees shall be established by the township board of trustees and shall bear a reasonable relationship to the cost, including overhead, of the service or act. The following fee schedule is applied to soil erosion permit and inspection fees: 
(1)  Residential/single lot permits: 
a.  Annual plan review and inspection fee: $250.00. 
b.  Additional inspections/re-inspections: $100.00 per inspection. 
c.  Bond: $500.00. 
(2)  Commercial permits: 
a.  Plan review fee: $250.00. 
b.  Annual inspection fee: $1,500.00. 
c.  Additional inspections/re-inspections: $100.00 per inspection. 
d.  Bond: $5,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 129, 12-10-2014)  
Sec. 22-303. - Fees and bonds. 
Fees for plan examination, permits and inspections and required bond amounts which may become due and payable under this chapter shall be determined by resolution of the township board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 129, 12-10-2014)  
Sec. 22-304. - Appeals. 
Any applicant who is aggrieved by an administrative determination by the building department, pursuant to this chapter, may appeal such determination to the township supervisor or designee, which shall afford a hearing to the applicant within 30 days following the written submission of such an appeal. The township supervisor or designee shall render its decision following such hearing, which decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 129, 12-10-2014)  
Sec. 22-305. - Penalty. 
Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is responsible for a civil infraction and shall be subject to the provisions of a civil fine as provided for in Part 91, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, as amended, being MCL 324.9121 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 129, 12-10-2014)  
Chapter 26 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; emergency services, ch. 18; fires in parks, § 34-35. 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fire department means all personnel, facilities and equipment utilized for the prevention of fires and the protection of persons and property from exposure to the damages of fires and explosions. 
Governing body means the township, an authority created under state law, or any other governmental or intergovernmental body authorized to administer and govern the fire department under state law by agreement or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 95.001, §§ 1.5, 1.6, 12-12-2001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-2. - Enforcement; appearance tickets. 
(a)  Enforcement of this chapter may be by the fire chief and/or any other local law enforcement officials so designated in accordance with law. 
(b)  Such enforcement officers shall have the authority to issue appearance citations, as provided by law, for violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 95.001, art. 11, 12-12-2001)  
Sec. 26-3. - Organization and regulation of fire department. 
(a)  Departmental regulations. Members of the fire department are hereby authorized to recommend from time to time rules and regulations for the control, management and government of the department, such rules and regulations requiring the approval of the governing body prior to implementation. Nothing in this section shall preclude the governing body from giving directions for the operation of the department to the fire chief within the scope of service to the community. Any changes implemented through township board directive will be written into the body of the regulations at the next updating. 
(b)  Records. The fire chief is required to devise forms or methods of keeping records and shall see that records are kept of all fires, fire losses, methods of extinguishment, drills, hose, apparatus, major and minor equipment and condition of hydrants, and such information is to be filed with the governing body. 
(c)  Authority at scene of fire. The fire chief or officers in command at any fire hereby are vested, insofar as allowed by law, with full and complete police misdemeanor and civil infraction enforcement authority for the purpose of scene control and are hereby authorized and directed to require the removal of and to secure any and all obstructions from in front of and around fire hydrants and/or fire apparatus. 
(d)  Compensation. Remuneration for the services of the fire chief and all members of the fire department shall be established by the governing body at the time of the annual budget to become effective January 1, annually. 
(Ord. No. 95.001, §§ 2.1—2.4, 12-12-2001)  
Sec. 26-4. - Interference with fire department vehicles or operations. 
It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of or block the path of travel of any fire department emergency vehicle in any way or to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any fire department operation. 
(Ord. No. 95.001, § 2.5, 12-12-2001)  
Sec. 26-5. - Compliance with orders of fire chief. 
A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the fire chief or duly authorized representative or interfere with attempts of another individual to comply with any lawful order or direction of the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 95.001, § 2.6, 12-12-2001)  
Sec. 26-6. - Boarding or tampering with fire department vehicles. 
A person shall not, without proper authorization from the fire chief or authorized representative in charge of the fire department emergency equipment, cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board, or swing upon any fire department emergency vehicle, whether the vehicle is in motion or at rest, sound the siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon, or manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, or pumps or any equipment or protective clothing on or a part of any fire department emergency vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 95.001, § 2.7, 12-12-2001)  
Sec. 26-7. - Damaging fire department vehicles or injuring personnel. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, deface, or attempt or conspire to damage or deface any fire department emergency vehicle at any time, or to injure, or attempt or conspire to injure, fire department personnel who are performing departmental duties. 
(Ord. No. 95.001, § 2.7, 12-12-2001)  
Sec. 26-8. - International Fire Code adopted. 
(a)  A certain document, a complete copy of which is on file for public use and inspection at the office of the township clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code of 2006, is hereby adopted as the fire prevention code of the township, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, set forth in this chapter. The International Fire Code of 2006 shall be referred to in this chapter as "the fire code." 
(b)  Complete printed copies of the International Fire Code of 2006 shall be available for public use and inspection at the office of the building department or the fire department. 
(c)  If a specific provision of this chapter is in direct conflict with a parallel provision of the fire code, the provision in this chapter shall supersede the provision of the fire code. 
(d)  The terms "municipality," "city," "village," and "township," whenever used in the fire code, shall mean the township. 
(e)  Any amendment additions and deletions to the International Fire Code of 2006, including any subsequent annual International Fire Codes, are hereby automatically adopted by reference by this section at such time as a complete printed copy of the same are made available for public use and inspection at the office of the building department or fire department. 
(Ord. No. 95.001, §§ 1.1—1.3, 1.7, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 95.003, art. I, 7-8-2009)  
Sec. 26-9. - Authority of fire chief on finding dangerous conditions. 
The fire chief, or the fire chief's subordinate, upon finding an emergency condition dangerous to persons or property, may take all necessary steps and prescribe all necessary restrictions and requirements, as allowed by law, to protect persons and property until the dangerous condition is abated. 
(Ord. No. 95.001, § 3.3, 12-12-2001)  
Sec. 26-10. - Fire limits. 
(a)  The fire limits of the township shall be composed of the areas containing congested, commercial, manufacturing and industrial uses, or areas in which such uses are developing. The limits of such areas are to be established by resolution of the township board, upon recommendation of the fire chief. (see appendix A) 
(b)  Open burning, as defined in section 26-17(b), shall be unlawful within the fire limits, except for those activities permitted under section 26-17(d)(1). 
(Ord. No. 95.001, art. 4, 12-12-2001)  
Sec. 26-11. - Standards for fire extinguishers. 
A person shall not sell, trade, loan or give away any form, type or kind of fire extinguisher which is not approved by the fire chief or duly authorized representative or which is not in proper working order, or the contents of which do not meet the requirements of the fire chief or duly authorized representative as specified in National Fire Protection Association Standard 10. The requirements of this section shall not apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or damaged equipment or junk when such units are permanently disfigured or marked with a permanent sign identifying the unit as junk. 
(Ord. No. 95.001, § 2.8, 12-12-2001)  
Sec. 26-12. - Fireworks. 
(a)  Definitions and adoption by reference. As used in this section, the following words and phrases have the meanings indicated. 
(1)  "Act" means the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act No. 256 of the Public Acts of 2011, MCL 28.451 et seq., as amended. 
(2)  "Consumer fireworks" means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States consumer product safety commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA Standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks. 
(3)  "Firework" or "fireworks" means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, and special effects. 
(4)  "Low-impact fireworks" means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA Standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5. 
(5)  "National holiday" means the following legal public holidays: 
New Years Day (January 1); 
Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr. (third Monday in January); 
Washington's Birthday (third Monday in February); 
Memorial Day (last Monday in May); 
Independence Day (July 4); 
Labor Day (First Monday in September); 
Columbus Day (Second Monday on October); 
Veteran's Day (November 11); 
Thanksgiving Day (fourth Thursday in November); 
Christmas Day (December 25). 
(6)  "Person" means an individual, agent, association, charitable organization, company, limited liability company, corporation, labor organization, legal representative, partnership, unincorporated organization, or any other legal or commercial entity. 
(b)  Except as provided in this section, the use, storage, sale and possession of fireworks, explosives and pyrotechnics of any type and the use of consumer fireworks on the day preceding the day of and the day after a national holiday within the township shall be governed in accordance with state law found at MCL 28.451 et seq., as amended. 
(c)  A permit from the township is required for the ignition, discharge, and use of consumer fireworks within the township (a "permit"). 
(d)  An applicant for a permit under subsection (c) shall pay to the township a nonrefundable application fee to defray the township's costs of reviewing the application, with the amount of such fee set by resolution of the township board. Additionally, an applicant for a permit under this section shall pay to the township an amount of money, as determined by resolution of the township board, to be placed in escrow, to defray the cost to the township for outside reviews of the application, including but not necessarily limited to a review by the township attorney. Any amount of money placed into the escrow that is not used to defray such review costs shall be returned to the applicant, and, if the initial amount of money placed into escrow is insufficient to cover the cost of the reviews, then the applicant shall be required to place such additional amount of money into escrow as needed to defray such costs. Permits will be considered by action of the township board as requested and with the approval of the township fire department. 
(e)  The township shall notify, at the applicant's expense, by written notice to the address of record, the owners of all property located within one-quarter mile of a fireworks display proposed under subsection (b), of the date and time of any township board meeting at which the application for a permit for such display will be considered by the township board. 
(f)  A condition of any permit granted pursuant to subsection (c) shall be that any fireworks display conducted pursuant to such permit shall be concluded prior to 11:00 p.m. eastern standard time. 
(g)  Compliance with applicable ordinances and codes. Unless otherwise provided in this section, a retailer or wholesaler of fireworks located in the township must comply with the requirements of the Township Zoning Ordinance, NFPA standards, the International Fire Code, as well as all building codes and regulations, and nothing in this section or in Public Act No. 256 of the Public Acts of 2011 shall preclude the enforcement of ordinances prohibiting offensive conduct that is secondary or incidental to the use, discharge or ignition of fireworks, regardless of the day. Any retailer or wholesaler of fireworks located in the township must post or display a copy of Township Fireworks Ordinance No. 124A so it is accessible by the general public for review. 
(h)  Prohibited ignition, discharge, and use of consumer fireworks. No person shall ignite, discharge, and use fireworks within the township at any time, except that: 
(1)  Fireworks may be discharged in strict compliance with any permit issued by the township in accordance with the Act. 
(2)  Consumer fireworks may be discharged without a permit on the day preceding, the day of, and the day after a national holiday. 
(3)  Per MCL 28.457(7) of Public Act No. 256 of the Public Acts of 2011, consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged, or used between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. Eastern Standard Time on the day preceding, the day of, or the day following the national holidays as listed in section 26-12(a)(5) except that consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged, or used between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. Eastern Standard Time on New Year's Day. 
(4)  Except as provided in subsection (7) below, this subsection (h) shall not apply to low-impact fireworks. 
(5)  Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged, or used on public, school, church, or private property of another person without the express written permission from the person or entity legally in possession and control of that property, to use those fireworks on that property. 
(6)  Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged, or used by a person under the influence of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of both. 
(7)  Low-impact fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged, or used by a person under the influence of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of both. 
(8)  Unmanned free floating devices. Any unmanned free-floating device (sky lanterns) which requires fire underneath to propel it and is not moored to the ground while aloft, have an uncontrolled and unpredictable flight path and descent area so as to pose a potential fire risk and are therefore prohibited. 
(i)  Enforcement. This section 26-12 may be enforced by the township supervisor or their designee, the township fire chief or their designee(s), and any sworn law enforcement officer. 
(j)  Determination of violation; seizure of fireworks. If an enforcing official determines that a violation of this section has occurred, the official may seize the fireworks as evidence of such violation. 
(k)  Penalties. Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to a misdemeanor violation as set forth in section 1-7 of this Code. 
The township may sue in any court of competent jurisdiction for damages to recover its fees, costs and expenses incurred from any person, firm, association or corporation who violates this section. 
(Ord. No. 95.001, § 3.1, 12-12-2001; Ord. No. 95.002, art. 1, 7-12-2006; Ord. No. 124, 9-12-2012; Ord. No. 124A, 8-14-2013)  
Sec. 26-13. - Smoking in places of public assembly. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to smoke at any time in any theater, church or other place designated by the fire code. Any chief, officer or firefighter of the fire department or police department, upon proper identification, shall order the discontinuance thereof, and if the party does not obey such order a citation shall be issued to the violator. 
(Ord. No. 95.001, § 3.2, 12-12-2001) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42.  
Sec. 26-14. - Hazardous material and incendiary type fire incidents. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
Hazardous material incident means a fire, explosion, spill, leak or other accidental, negligent, intentional, improper, or dangerous discharge or release of a hazardous material. 
Hazardous materials. 
(1)  Hazardous materials means any substance or material which is dangerous or harmful to the environment or human or animal life, health or safety, or constitutes a danger or threat to the public health, safety or welfare, including, but not limited to, explosives, pyrotechnics, flammable gas, flammable compressed gas, nonflammable compressed gas, flammable liquids, oxidizing material, poisonous gas, poisonous liquids, irritating material, etiologic material, radioactive material, corrosive material, liquefied petroleum gas, and/or any other hazardous substance or material as defined under subsection (2) of this definition. 
(2)  In addition to the substances and materials defined as hazardous materials under subsection (1) of this definition, any substances or materials defined as hazardous in the following statutes shall also be defined as hazardous materials under this chapter: the Fire Prevention Code (MCL 29.1 et seq.), the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, parts 111 (MCL 324.11101 et seq.) and 201 (MCL 324.20101 et seq.), and the Comprehensive Environmental Response Act (42 USC 9601 et seq.), which definitions are hereby adopted by reference. 
Incendiary type fire means a fire that is intentionally set, or an unintentionally set fire that is intentionally or negligently allowed to become dangerous or harmful to the environment, human or animal life, health or safety, and/or the public health, safety or welfare. 
Responsible party means any person who owns, possesses or controls a hazardous material involved in a hazardous material incident and any person whose transportation, storage, handling, sale, use or processing of a hazardous material causes or results in a hazardous material incident; or, in the case of incendiary type fires, the person who lit the fire and/or allowed it, intentionally or through negligence, to become dangerous or harmful to the environment, human or animal life, health or safety, and/or the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  Reporting of incidents. A responsible party shall immediately and fully report to the fire department the known details regarding the occurrence of a hazardous material incident. 
(c)  Cleanup of hazardous material and restoration of area. Except in regard to a hazardous material incident which in the fire department's determination creates, causes or may result in a dangerous or emergency condition, the responsible party shall immediately, fully, safely and lawfully clean up, remove and dispose of the hazardous material involved in the hazardous material incident and fully restore the area to its prior condition. 
(d)  Dangerous or emergency conditions resulting from hazardous materials incident. In regard to a hazardous material incident which, in the fire chief's determination, creates, causes or may result in a dangerous or emergency condition, the fire chief may take any necessary steps and prescribe any necessary restrictions and requirements, as allowed by law, to protect persons and property until the dangerous or emergency condition is abated. 
(e)  Reimbursement of costs of response to hazardous material incident. Where, due to a responsible party's neglect, failure or inability to immediately, fully or properly fulfill the requirements of this section, or due to the existence of a dangerous or emergency condition, it is necessary for the township and/or the fire department to inspect, investigate, clean up or otherwise respond to or take action to abate a hazardous material incident, the responsible party shall be liable to and shall reimburse the township and/or the fire department, within 30 days of billing, for the township's and/or the fire department's cost incurred. 
(f)  Items included in costs. The township's and/or fire department's costs to be reimbursed under subsection (e) of this section shall include: 
(1)  Labor. Actual labor costs of township and/or fire department personnel, including worker's compensation benefits, fringe benefits and administrative overhead; 
(2)  Equipment. The cost of equipment operation; 
(3)  Materials. The cost of material obtained or used; 
(4)  Contracts. The cost of any contracted labor and materials; and 
(5)  Other costs. Any other costs reasonably incurred by the township in connection with the inspection, investigation, cleanup or other response or action undertaken to abate a hazardous material incident. 
(g)  Reimbursement of costs incurred in conjunction with incendiary type fire. The fire department and/or the township shall be entitled to recover, from the responsible party, all costs and damages incurred in conjunction with any incendiary type fire, except for those incendiary type fires which are also defined as open burning under section 26-17 and which were conducted in violation of section 26-17 or in violation of a permit granted thereunder. Such costs shall include, but are not limited to, those associated with the fire extinguishment and investigation, including, but not limited to, the costs described in subsection (f) of this section. The responsible party shall be liable to and shall reimburse the township and/or fire department within 30 days of billing for the township's and/or the fire department's cost incurred. 
(h)  Collection of costs. If a responsible party neglects or fails to reimburse the township and/or fire department as required in subsections (e) and (g) of this section, the township and/or the governing body may institute appropriate civil legal actions or equitable remedies in circuit court to recover the township's and/or fire department's costs and may also institute a lien in the manner prescribed by the general laws of this state. 
(Ord. No. 95.001, art. 5, 12-12-2001)  
Sec. 26-15. - Review of site plans, subdivision plats and building plans. 
(a)  The fire chief or his designated officer shall review and make recommendations on all site plans, subdivision plats and building plans. However, the plot plan and construction plan for single-family dwellings shall not be subject to this review unless required by the homeowner. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for building construction, demolition or occupancy for any use other than single-family dwellings without first having submitted the plans for such to the fire department for inspection. A plan review and inspection of the proposed improvement shall be conducted by the fire department. Acknowledgment of such inspection of plans shall be in writing from the fire department. Plan review fees are to be set by resolution of the township board. 
(c)  The fire chief shall be given advance notice of all hearings before the planning commission or site plan review committee and the zoning board of appeals or building board of appeals and shall be given an opportunity to present comments on any proposed action. 
(Ord. No. 95.001, art. 6, 12-12-2001)  
Sec. 26-16. - Fire hydrants and private fire protection systems. 
(a)  Fire hydrants generally. 
(1)  The fire chief shall recommend to the township supervisor the location or relocation of new or existing fire hydrants and the placement or replacement of inadequate (for fire suppression services) water mains located upon public property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and distribution pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from service until approved by the fire chief and the fire department has been notified by the water supplier. Whenever a fire hydrant or related appliance is removed as permitted in this section, it shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished. Defective and non-approved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the fire chief or duly authorized representative. 
(2)  A person shall not obstruct, obscure from view, remove, tamper with, damage, deface or otherwise disturb or restrict the access to any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of the fire code except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging or making necessary repairs, or when permitted by the fire chief. If, upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation, obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the fire chief shall proceed to remove the obstructions or encroachments. The person responsible for the obstruction or obscuration shall pay the costs associated with its removal within 30 days of billing. If the person responsible fails to pay the costs, the township or the governing body may institute appropriate civil legal action or equitable remedies in circuit court to recover costs and may also institute a lien in the manner provided by the general laws of this state. 
(3)  A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of the fire department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first secures approval from the township and obtains a permit for such use from the water company having authority over the hydrant. This section shall not apply to the use of such hydrants by a person employed by and authorized to make such use by the water supplier having authority over the hydrants. 
(b)  Private yard systems and hydrants. 
(1)  All new and existing petroleum storage, processing and/or distribution plants, lumberyards, amusement and/or exhibition parks and educational or institutional complexes, multifamily residential complexes, shopping centers, manufacturing and industrial plants, office and/or commercial developments, transportation facilities, or other similar uses which are not served by a municipal water system or which require quantities of water for fire protection which exceed the capacities of the municipal system shall be provided with a yard system and properly situated fire hydrants, with water pressure and volume as set by the fire chief. A yard system shall be defined as a private water system with sufficient capacity to protect any of the specific private developments described in this subsection. The yard system shall be composed of appropriate hydrants, water wells, storage facilities, water lines, mains and other appurtenances to provide sufficient fire protection independent of the municipal water system. 
(2)  The fire chief shall designate and approve the number, type and location of all fire hydrants, and such hydrants shall be installed by the property owner, and may also require the installation of sufficient fire hose and equipment housed in accordance with the fire code or other rules and may require the establishment of a trained fire brigade when the hazard involved requires such measure. Private hydrants shall not be placed into or removed from service until approved by the fire chief. 
(3)  The yard system and hydrants shall be designed and constructed in accordance with accepted engineering practices and with any applicable fire code specifications and shall be capable of supplying adequate fire flows as defined by the fire chief. 
(4)  The yard system and hydrants shall not be placed into or removed from service until approved by the fire chief. 
(5)  Where, in the judgment of the fire chief, an alternate means of water supply, such as a reservoir, can adequately provide water for fire protection purposes, the fire chief may grant a waiver of the required yard system. 
(Ord. No. 95.001, art. 7, 12-12-2001)  
Sec. 26-17. - Open burning. 
(a)  Intent. The township board has determined that open burning contributes to creating detrimental environmental effects, health hazards and serious and significant effects on the value of properties within the township. It is the intent of this section to regulate and restrict open burning in order to protect the safety and welfare of the township. Open burning may be permitted pursuant to the provisions of this section, subject, however, to additional restrictions and/or prohibitions pursuant to state, county and federal laws or regulations, including regulations promulgated by the state air pollution control commission. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
Open burning means the setting on fire, igniting or combustion of any natural or manmade material, item or thing out of doors. 
Party responsible for the open burning means the person who sets on fire any thing out of doors. 
(c)  General prohibition. 
(1)  Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit or maintain any open burning on property situated within the township and outside the fire limits, such fire limits being set forth in section 26-10 and appendix A. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (d)(1) of this section, and with all other exceptions in this section notwithstanding, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, or maintain any open burning within the fire limits set forth in section 26-10 and appendix A. 
(d)  Exceptions; permit requirements; regulations; fees. 
(1)  Exceptions. The following open burning shall be permitted, as specified: 
a.  Open burning shall be allowed without prior notification to the fire department for highway safety flares, smudge pots and similar occupational needs. 
b.  The burning and/or use of candles, lanterns, lamps, bug repellent torches, fireplaces, cigarettes, cigars, pipes, charcoal cookers, braziers, hibachis, liquefied gas fire stoves, or similar devices maintained and used solely for the preparation of food on the premises of the owner or occupant shall be permitted, and, this subsection withstanding, shall not be governed by this section. 
c.  Controlled fires caused and maintained for training of firefighters by the fire department shall be permitted, and, this subsection withstanding, shall not be governed by this section. 
(2)  Open burning requiring permit. Open burning for the following purposes shall be permitted upon issuance of a permit from the fire department, subject to the regulations in this section: 
a.  Open burning on parcels less than one acre in size may be permitted only for the following purposes: 
1.  A bonfire or campfire that meets the requirements of the regulations set forth in subsection (d)(3) of this section. 
2.  Burning for pest/disease control, provided that a variance is first obtained from the fire chief. 
b.  Open burning on parcels larger than one acre in size may be permitted for recognized silviculture and range or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, bonfires, campfires, and burning of yard waste such as branches and twigs; however, the burning of leaves is prohibited. 
(3)  Regulations for open burning with permit. The following regulations shall apply to open burning which has been authorized by permit: 
a.  A permit for open burning permitted in this section shall be requested by and may be issued to the owner or person in control of land upon which the burning is to occur. 
b.  Permits issued shall be in effect for a period of one year or less, as indicated on the permit. Permits shall be applied for by making application at the township fire station. Upon completion of the application for a permit, if the permit is issued, the applicant shall sign the permit after reading the burning guidelines and retaining a copy of the permit for his records. 
c.  A bonfire and/or campfire shall be allowed if such a fire is not more than two feet by four feet by two feet in dimension in a designated pit and if such fire does not burn longer than ten hours, provided that authorization for bonfires and campfires shall be subject to atmospheric conditions being conducive for burning without creating a danger and/or nuisance. Fuel for a bonfire and campfire shall consist only of seasoned dry firewood and shall be ignited with a small quantity of paper. 
d.  The grant of a permit under this section shall be subject to applicable subdivision or deed restrictions. 
e.  No open burning shall be allowed in or on any public road right-of-way or safety path. 
f.  The location of any open burning shall not be less than 50 feet from any structure, and for parcels greater than one acre shall not be closer than 50 feet to any lot line. 
g.  Open burning shall not be used for waste disposal purposes (with the exceptions of brush, limbs and tree cuttings) and shall be of a size two feet by four feet by two feet in dimension. 
h.  Any open burning shall be constantly attended by a person 14 years of age or older until the fire is extinguished. Fire extinguishing equipment, approved by the fire chief, shall be kept available near the fire for immediate use. 
i.  On each day that burning will occur under this subsection, the person responsible for the fire must notify the fire department. 
j.  In addition to the regulations otherwise set forth in this subsection, open burning on parcels larger than one acre shall also be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  As a condition to the issuance of a permit, the fire chief shall make an inspection of the site and specify any safety precautions uniquely applicable under the circumstances. 
2.  Materials which may be burned must be from the site and shall not be brought to the site for the purpose of burning. 
3.  The fuel, if any, selected to ignite the material to be burned shall be selected so as to minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants. 
4.  Burning of yard waste, including brush, limbs and tree cuttings (burning of leaves is prohibited), shall be permitted to the extent, on the dates and during the times directed by duly adopted and public resolution of the township board. (see appendix B) 
k.  The fire chief may, based upon the exercise of reasonable discretion, prohibit open burning otherwise authorized under this section if such burning would, in the opinion of the fire chief, be offensive or objectionable due to smoke, odor or particle emissions when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires a potential hazard or nuisance or when any burning would be in violation of any state, county or federal law or regulation. Prohibition under this subsection may be determined prior to the igniting of a fire or following ignition by order of extinguishment. 
(4)  Revocation of permit. 
a.  A burning permit may be revoked at the discretion of the fire chief if the fire chief determines that continued burning would constitute a fire hazard for any reason. If a complaint is received by the fire department, an on-site inspection and determination shall be made as to whether burning should continue. For purposes of decision-making under this provision, the fire chief shall make a determination as to whether continued burning would be unsafe, would result in excessive smoke, or would occur in a location which would be unsafe and/or disruptive to others, or whether the permit should be revoked for another specific reason disclosed to the permit holder by the fire chief. 
b.  The owner/occupant shall have the right to request a hearing with the fire chief to review such revocation or whether the permit should be revoked for another specific reason disclosed to the permit holder by the fire chief. 
(5)  Permit fees. Fees for permits applied for under this section shall be in an amount established by township board resolution. (see appendix B) 
(e)  Cost recovery. 
(1)  The township and/or the fire department shall be entitled to recover all costs and damages incurred in conjunction with any open burning conducted in violation of this section or in violation of a permit issued thereunder, except for those costs incurred in exercising the township's and/or the fire department's responsibilities for the issuance, revocation, or oversight of open burning permits as directed by this section, or any other responsibility given to the township and/or the fire department under this section. Such recoverable costs shall include, but are not limited to, those costs described in section 26-14(f). 
(2)  The costs described in subsection (e)(1) of this section shall be recoverable from the party responsible for the open burning in response to which the costs and/or damages were incurred. If the party responsible for the open burning cannot be ascertained with certainty, and the open burning incident in response to which the costs and/or damages were incurred involved open burning pursuant to a permit, then holder of the permit shall be presumed to be the party responsible for the open burning. 
(3)  The party responsible for the open burning shall be liable to and shall reimburse the township and/or fire department within 30 days of billing for the township's and/or the fire department's cost incurred. 
(4)  If the party responsible for the open burning neglects or fails to reimburse the township and/or fire department as required in subsection (e)(1) of this section, the township and/or the governing body may institute appropriate civil legal actions or equitable remedies in circuit court to recover the township's and/or fire department's costs and may also institute a lien in the manner prescribed by the general laws of this state. 
(Ord. No. 95.001, art. 8, 12-12-2001)  
Sec. 26-18. - Emergency medical service cost recovery. 
Each person requesting and/or utilizing the emergency medical services of the governing body shall be required to pay a response fee unless exempted by resolution of the township board. The response fee shall be set by resolution of the township board. (see appendix C) 
(Ord. No. 95.001, art. 9, 12-12-2001)  
Sec. 26-19. - Fire lanes. 
(a)  Designation; posting of signs. The fire chief may require and designate public or private fire lanes as deemed necessary for the efficient and effective use of fire apparatus. He shall make his recommendation to the planning commission, which will confirm the designation and shall pass the designation on to the township board, which will cause the enactment of the fire lanes. If the fire lane is on a public street, the appropriate traffic control engineer orders will be issued. If the fire lane is designated on private property, the owner of the property will erect signs at the owner's expense, and maintain the signs. 
(b)  Locations. Locations where fire lanes may be required include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Multifamily residential buildings and complexes. 
(2)  Public assembly buildings and complexes. 
(3)  Churches and schools. 
(4)  Hospitals, convalescent homes, nursing homes, etc. 
(5)  Hotels, motels, etc. 
(6)  Industrial buildings and complexes. 
(7)  Mercantile buildings and complexes. 
(8)  Office and professional buildings and complexes. 
(9)  Residential subdivisions. 
(c)  Standards for signs and markings; failure to erect signs. All fire lanes shall be conspicuously posted with uniform fire lane signs in keeping with the standard established in the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices as revised and as prescribed by the fire chief or the fire chief's designated representative. Such signs shall be erected no further than 100 feet apart in all areas designated as fire lanes. When such fire lanes are adjacent to a parking lot, such fire lanes shall be clearly outlined with curbing, posts or other parking raised above the grade sufficiently so they will not be obscured by snow or other materials. Any owner who, upon notification that a fire lane has been established on his property and within 30 days after the notice, if no appeal is filed with the township board, fails to erect uniform fire lane signs shall be in violation of this section. When such signs are not erected within 30 days, the township board may direct the signs to be erected and the owner may be assessed the cost of erecting the signs. If the owner fails to pay the costs within 30 days, the township or the governing body may institute appropriate civil legal action or equitable remedies in circuit court to recover costs and may also issue a lien against the property in accordance with the general laws of this state. 
(d)  Obstructions and encroachments. The occupant of every premises adjoining a fire lane, or the owner of such premises if the premises are not occupied, shall not obstruct the fire lane. This includes the express prohibition of speed bumps. Designated fire lanes shall be maintained free of all obstructions, gates, barriers, chains or bars and vehicles or obstructions of any type, including accumulations of snow. If, upon expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation, obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the fire chief shall proceed to remove the obstructions or encroachments. The person responsible for the obstruction or encroachment shall pay the costs associated with its removal within 30 days of billing. If the person responsible fails to pay the costs, the township or the governing body may institute appropriate civil legal action or equitable remedies in circuit court to recover costs and may also institute a lien in the manner provided by the general laws of this state. 
(Ord. No. 95.001, art. 10, 12-12-2001)  
Sec. 26-20. - Outdoor wood boilers. 
(a)  Title. This section shall be known as the "Charter Township of Oxford Outdoor Wood Boiler Ordinance," and it shall be deemed sufficient in any action for enforcement of the provisions hereof to define the same by such short title and by reference to the number thereof. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms are defined as follows: 
Fire chief. The duly appointed and acting fire chief of the township fire department, or a duly authorized employee of the department. 
Garbage or other combustible refuse or waste material. All substances of any kind being discharged, abandoned, and/or placed for disposal by their owners and includes by way of description, but not by way of limitation, commercial and household solid waste, leaves, brush, tree trimmings, and grass. 
Lot and lot line. A lot and lot line, as defined in the township zoning ordinance. 
Outdoor wood boiler (OWB). Any equipment or device which is installed or established outdoors for the primary purpose of combustion of fuel to produce heat or energy used as a component of a heating system providing heat or hot water for domestic use. 
(c)  Permit. A permit must be obtained from the township prior to the installation of an outdoor wood boiler (OWB). The installation must meet all applicable state, county and township requirements prior to issuance of the permit as well as the following requirements: 
(1)  The property must be meet the requirements of subsection (d)(1) below. 
(2)  The OWB must be only located in the rear yard and side yard on any lot of which it is located and meet all applicable setback requirements for the zoning district it is located in, as defined by the township zoning ordinance. 
(3)  The OWB's chimney must be higher than the highest portion of any structure within 150 feet of the OWB, excluding the dwelling unit serviced by the OWB or, if greater than 150 feet, per the manufacturer's minimum specification. 
(4)  The OWB must meet the requirements of subsection (d)(3) below. 
(d)  Prohibition of outdoor wood boilers. 
(1)  No outdoor wood boiler (OWB) may be erected and installed in properties identified on the township zoning map as R-3, R-2, R-1, R-1A, RM, MHC, or any nonresidential zoning district on parcels less than or equal to one acre in size. Parcels greater than one acre in size in the above zoning districts, with the exception of any nonresidential zoning district, are permitted to erect and install an outdoor wood boiler. 
(2)  The prohibition against OWBs contained in subsection A shall not apply to an OWB erected and installed in the township prior to January 1, 2012, but only if all of the following criteria are met: 
a.  The property owner must notify the township by telephone directly to the township building department either personally or by voicemail, email, or letter within 30 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived that OWB was installed on the property prior to January 1, 2012. If the township suspects that an OWB is in place on a parcel and had been constructed prior to January 1, 2012, the township will take reasonable efforts to notify the property owner of this section's requirements. 
b.  The OWB must pass, or already have passed, any required State of Michigan inspections. 
c.  The OWB must be only located in the rear yard or side yard of any lot on which it is located and meet all applicable setback requirements for the zoning district that it is located in, as defined in the township zoning ordinance. 
d.  The OWB's chimney must be higher than the highest portion of any structure within 150 feet of the OWB, excluding the dwelling unit serviced by the OWB or, if greater than 150 feet, per the manufacturer's minimum specification. If the chimney is not higher than the requirement contained in this subsection, the Township shall allow the property owner a reasonable period of time to bring the chimney into compliance. 
(3)  All OWBs shall be limited to use only natural untreated wood products or corn pellets as fuel. Further, the following fuels are strictly prohibited: 
a.  Processed wood products and other non-wood products not permitted by the OWB manufacturer; 
b.  Garbage or trash; 
c.  Painted or treated wood, particle board, plywood, railroad ties, telephone poles or pressure treated wood; 
d.  Material treated with petroleum products; 
e.  Tires; 
f.  Gasoline; 
g.  Plastics; 
h.  Leaves or yard waste; 
i.  Paper products and cardboard; and 
j.  Any other material that may cause offensive or noxious odors, smoke, airborne ash or debris. 
(4)  An OWB that meets the requirements of this section, but as a result of a land division becomes noncomplying, shall be removed from the lot or moved to a different location on the lot that meets all requirements with regard to lot size and setbacks. 
(e)  Declaration of nuisance. Any violation of this section constitutes a public nuisance which may be abated as provided in this section, any other ordinance of the township pertaining to the abatement of nuisances, and any applicable provision of state law. 
(f)  Notice to abate nuisance. Whenever any officer of the township shall determine that there exists a nuisance within the meaning of this section, such officer shall cause a notice to be served to the owner or occupant of the premises on which the nuisance exists, requiring such person to abate the nuisance within the time specified in the notice. Service of the notice shall be made: 
(1)  By delivering the notice to owner or occupant, personally, or by leaving the same at his/her residence, office, or place of business with some person of suitable age and discretion; or 
(2)  By mailing the notice by certified mail to such owner or occupant at his/her last known address; or 
(3)  If the owner or occupant is unknown by posting the notice in some conspicuous place on the premises for five days. 
(g)  Violation and penalties. 
(1)  Municipal civil infraction/payment of fine. Any person, firm or corporation violating a provision of this section, upon an admission or a finding of responsibility for such violation, shall be deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction as that term is defined and used in MCL 600.101 et seq. as amended, and shall pay a civil fine as prescribed by ordinance or as determined by the district court, district court judge, or district court magistrate. 
(2)  Costs. A person, firm, or corporation ordered to pay a fine under subsection (1) shall be ordered by the district court judge or magistrate to pay costs of not less than $9.00 or more than $500.00, which costs may include all expenses, direct or indirect, to which the township has been put in connection with the violation of the section up to the entry of the court's judgment or order to pay fines and costs. 
(3)  Additional writs and orders. A person who admits or is found responsible for violation of this section shall comply with any order, writ, or judgment issued by the district court to enforce this section pursuant to Chapter 83 and 87, of the Revised Judicature Act, MCL 600.101 et seq., as amended. 
(4)  Default on payment of fines and costs. A default in payment of a civil fine, costs, or damages, or expenses ordered under subsection (1) or (2) or an installment of the fine, costs, or damages or expenses as allowed by the court, may be collected by the township by a means authorized for the enforcement of a judgment under Chapter 40 or 60 of the Revised Judicature Act, MCL 600.101 et seq., as amended. 
(5)  Failure to comply with judgment or order. If a defendant fails to comply with an order or judgment issued pursuant to this section within the time prescribed by the court, the court may proceed under subsection (7). 
(6)  Failure to appear in court. A defendant who fails to answer a citation or notice to appear in court for a violation of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 plus costs and/or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. 
(7)  Civil contempt. 
a.  If a defendant defaults in the payment of a civil fine, costs, or other damages or expenses, or installment as ordered by the district court, upon motion of the township or upon its own motion, the court may require the defendant to show cause why the defendant should not be held in civil contempt and may issue a summons, order to show cause, or bench warrant of arrest for the defendant's appearance. 
b.  If a corporation or an association is ordered to pay a civil fine, costs, or damages or expenses, the individuals authorized to make disbursements shall pay the fine, costs, or damages or expenses, and their failure to do so shall be civil contempt unless they make the showing required in this subsection. 
c.  Unless the defendant shows that the default was not attributable to an intentional refusal to obey the order of the court or to a failure on his or her part to make a good faith effort to obtain the funds required for payment, the court shall find that the default constitutes a civil contempt and may order the defendant committed until all or a specified part of the amount due is paid. 
d.  If it appears that the default in the payment of a fine, costs, or damages or expenses does not constitute civil contempt, the court may enter an order allowing the defendant additional time for payment, reducing the amount of payment or of each installment or revoking the fine, costs, or damages or expenses. 
e.  The term of imprisonment on civil contempt for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs, or damages or expenses shall be specified in the order of commitment and shall not exceed one day for each $30.00 due. A person committed for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs, or damages or expenses shall be given credit toward payment for each day of imprisonment and each day of detention in default of recognizance before judgment at the rate of $30.00 per day. 
f.  A defendant committed to imprisonment for civil contempt for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs, or damages or expenses shall not be discharged from custody until one of the following occurs: 
1.  Defendant is credited with an amount due pursuant to subsection e. 
2.  The amount due is collected through execution of process or otherwise. 
3.  The amount due is satisfied pursuant to a combination of subsections 1. and 2. 
g.  The civil contempt shall be purged upon discharge of the defendant pursuant to subsection f. 
(8)  Lien against land, building or structure. If a defendant does not pay a civil fine or costs or installment ordered under subsection (1) or (2) within 30 days after the date upon which the payment is due for a violation of this section involving the use or occupation of land or a building or other structure, the township may obtain a lien against the land, building, or structure involved in the violation by recording a copy of the court order requiring payment of the fine and costs with the register of deeds for the county. The court order shall not be recorded unless a legal description of the property is incorporated in or attached to the court order. 
a.  The lien is effective immediately upon recording of the court order with the register of deeds. 
b.  The court order recorded with the register of deeds shall constitute the pendency of the lien. In addition, a written notice of the lien shall be sent by the township by first class mail to the owner of record of the land, building, or structure at the owner's last known address. 
c.  The lien may be enforced and discharged by the township in the manner prescribed by its Charter, by the General Property Tax Act, Act No. 206 of the Public Acts of 1893, being MCL 211.1 et seq., or by an ordinance duly passed by the township. However, property is not subject to sale under Section 60 of Act No. 206 of the Public Acts of 1893, being MCL 211.60, for nonpayment of a civil fine or costs or an installment ordered under subsection (1) or (2) unless the property is also subject to sale under Act No. 206 of the Public Acts of 1893 for delinquent property taxes. 
d.  A lien created under this section has priority over any other lien unless one or more of the following apply: 
1.  The other lien is a lien for taxes or special assessments. 
2.  The other lien is created before the effective date of the amended ordinance that added this section. 
3.  Federal law provides the other lien has priority. 
4.  The other lien is recorded before the lien under this section is recorded. 
e.  The township may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of the fines and costs imposed by a court order for a violation of this section. However, an attempt by the township to collect the fines or costs does not invalidate or waive the lien upon the land, building, or structure. 
f.  A lien provided for by this subsection shall not continue for a period longer than five years after a copy of the court order imposing a fine or cost is recorded unless within that time an action to enforce the lien is commenced. 
(Ord. No. 120, §§ 1—7, 1-11-2012) 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX D
 
  
Chapter 30 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 58. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Firearm, except as otherwise specifically defined in this Code, shall be construed to include any weapon from which a dangerous projectile may be propelled by using explosives, gas, or air as a means of propulsion. 
Public place means any street, alley, park, public building, any place of business or assembly open to or frequented by the public, and any other place which is open to the public view, or to which the public has access. 
(Ord. No. 43A, §§ 43-A.1, 43-A.3, 10-12-1988)  
Sec. 30-2. - Illegal businesses. 
No person shall: 
(1)  Knowingly attend, frequent, operate or be an occupant or inmate of any place where prostitution, gambling, or the illegal sale of intoxicating liquor, or any other illegal business or occupation, is permitted or conducted. 
(2)  Engage in prostitution, gambling, the illegal sale of intoxicating liquor, or any other illegal business or occupation. 
(3)  Solicit or accost any person for the purpose of inducing the commission of any illegal act. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.2(13)—(15), 10-12-1988)  
Sec. 30-3. - Throwing objects. 
No person shall: 
(1)  Wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object from any moving automobile. 
(2)  Wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object toward any person or automobile. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.2(19), (20), 10-12-1988)  
Sec. 30-4. - Littering. 
(a)  No person shall dump, deposit, place, throw or leave or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of junk, paper, trash, rubbish, auto parts, or any other discarded or cast-off material and litter of any type on any public or private property in the township, including but not limited to any road, street, highway, alley, boulevard, park, playground, recreational area, parking lot, building or recreational property. A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $400.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  In a proceeding for a violation of this section involving litter from a motor vehicle, proof that a particular vehicle described in the citation, complaint or warrant was used in the violation, together with proof that the defendant named in the citation, complaint, or warrant was the registered owner of the vehicle at the time of the violation, constitutes in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the driver of the vehicle at the time of the violation. The driver of the vehicle is presumed to be responsible for litter which is thrown, dumped deposited, placed, or left from the vehicle on public or private property. In interpretation and enforcement of this section, the term "vehicle" means every motor vehicle registered under Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq.). 
(c)  The court, in lieu of any other sentence imposed, may direct a substitution of litter-gathering labor, including but not limited to the litter connected with the particular violation, under the supervision of the court. 
(d)  The purpose of this section is to promote and preserve the peace, health, safety, and welfare of the people of the Township of Oxford by setting forth provisions to cope with the problems of litter upon private and public property within the township. 
(Ord. No. 41, §§ 1—3, 4-14-1976; Ord. No. 41A, §§ 1—3, 12-14-1977)  
Sec. 30-5. - Selling, giving, or furnishing tobacco products to person under 18 years of age. 
(a)  A person shall not sell, give, or furnish any cigarette, cigar, chewing tobacco, tobacco snuff, or tobacco in any other form to a person under 18 years of age. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00 for each offense. 
(b)  A person who sells tobacco products at retail shall post, in a place close to the point of sale and conspicuous to both employees and customers, a sign produced by the department of public health that includes the following statement: "The purchase of tobacco products by a minor under 18 years of age and the provision of tobacco products to a minor are prohibited by law. A minor unlawfully purchasing or using tobacco products is subject to criminal penalties." 
(c)  If the sign required under subsection (b) of this section is more than six feet from the point of sale, it shall be 5½ inches by 8½ inches, and the statement required under subsection (b) shall be printed in 36-point boldface type. If the sign required under subsection (b) is six feet or less from the point of sale, it shall be two inches by four inches, and the statement required under subsection (b) shall be printed in 20-point boldface type. 
(d)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge pursuant to subsection (a) of this section that the defendant had in force at the time of arrest and continues to have in force a written policy to prevent the sale of cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, tobacco snuff, and other tobacco products to persons under 18 years of age, and that the defendant enforced and continues to 
enforce the policy. A defendant who proposes to offer evidence of the affirmative defense described in this subsection shall file and serve notice of the defense, in writing, upon the court and the prosecutor. The notice shall be served not less than 14 days before the date set for trial. 
(e)  If the prosecutor proposes to offer testimony to rebut the affirmative defense described in subsection (d) of this section, the prosecutor shall file and serve a notice of rebuttal, in writing, upon the court and the defendant. The notice shall be served not less than seven days before the date set for trial, and shall contain the name and address of each rebuttal witness. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.3(b), 10-12-1988)  
Sec. 30-6. - Abandonment of children under 11 years of age in parked motor vehicles. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful within the township for any individual person, parent, guardian, custodian, or any one else to whose care a child or children under 11 years of age are entrusted, to leave, neglect, or abandon such child or children in a parked motor vehicle in any public place or place open to the public without furnishing someone over the age of 17 for supervision of such child or children. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both a fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 118, arts. 1, 2, 4-9-2003)  
Sec. 30-7. - Criminal conduct causing a police response. 
(a)  Short title. This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Criminal Conduct Causing a Police Response Ordinance." 
(b)  Purpose and intent. An ordinance to regulate conduct to limit the use of law enforcement and recoup costs of the township when criminal conduct requires a police response. 
(c)  Definitions. 
Crime means any federal or state felony or misdemeanor; and any county or local misdemeanor. 
Person means a natural person and any corporation, partnership, or other business entity. 
Police and police officer means any federal, state, county or local law enforcement officer. 
(d)  Offense. 
(1)  A person who engages in conduct for which a police response was solicited by another or initiated by a police officer, and for which the court determines as part of a plea of responsible to the secondary offense that there was probable cause a crime had been committed to justify a police response, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction of causing a police response punishable as provided below. 
(2)  A violation of subsection (d)(1) is a "secondary offense." A person may only plead responsible to a violation of subsection (d)(1) upon the concurrence or recommendation of the township's prosecuting attorney. 
(e)  Violations and penalties. 
(1)  Municipal civil infraction/payment of fine. Any person violating a provision of this section, upon an admission or a finding of responsibility for such violation, shall be deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction, as that term is defined and used in MCL 600.101 et seq., as amended, and shall pay a civil fine not to exceed and $250.00. 
(2)  Costs. Upon application by the township's prosecuting attorney, any person ordered to pay a fine under subsection (e)(1) shall be ordered by the district court judge or magistrate judge to pay costs of not less than $9.00 or more than $500.00, for reimbursement of all expenses which the township has been put arising out of and in the course of the police response. 
(Ord. No. 131, §§ 1—5, 7-12-2017)  
Sec. 30-8. - Attempt to commit crime. 
(a)  Title. This section shall be known as and may be cited as the "Attempt to Commit Crime Ordinance." 
(b)  Purpose and intent. This is a section to adopt MCL 750.92, titled "Attempt to Commit Crime" by reference and to provide penalties for a violation of that section, being Public Act 328 of 1931. 
(c)  Adoption by reference. 
(1)  Adoption. MCL 750.92 is hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  Penalty. A person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 45 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both. 
(3)  Application. The township shall not enforce any provision of MCL 750.92 for any crime for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days. 
(Ord. No. 130, §§ 1—3, 7-12-2017)  
Sec. 30-9. - Marihuana establishments prohibited. 
(a)  Title. This section shall be known as and may be cited as the "Charter Township of Oxford Prohibition of Marihuana Establishments Ordinance." 
(b)  Definitions. Words used herein shall have the definitions as provided for in Initiated Law 1 of 2018, MCL 333.27951 et seq., as may be amended. 
(c)  No marihuana establishments. The township hereby prohibits all marihuana establishments within the boundaries of the township pursuant to Initiated Law 1 of 2018, MCL 333.27951 et seq., as may be amended. 
(d)  Violations and penalties. 
(1)  Any person who disobeys, or who neglects to or refuses to comply with, any provision of this section or who causes, allows or consents to any of the same shall be deemed to be responsible for the violation of this section. A violation of this section is deemed to be a nuisance per se. 
(2)  A violation of this section is a municipal civil infraction, for which the fines shall not be less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00, in the discretion of the court. The foregoing sanctions shall be in addition to the rights of the township to proceed at law or equity with other appropriate and proper remedies. Additionally, the violator shall pay costs which may include all expenses, direct and indirect, which the township incurs in connection with the municipal civil infraction. 
(3)  Each day during which any violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(4)  In addition, the township may seek injunctive relief against any person alleged to be in violation of this section, and such other relief as may be provided by law. 
(5)  This section shall be administered and enforced by the ordinance enforcement officer of the township or by such other person(s) as designated by the township board from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 132, §§ 1—4, 2-13-2019)  
Secs. 30-10—30-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 
 
Sec. 30-31. - Assault and battery. 
No person shall commit an assault, or an assault and battery, on any person. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.2(1), 10-12-1988)  
Secs. 30-32—30-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY RIGHTS 
 
Sec. 30-61. - Larceny. 
No person shall commit the offense of larceny by stealing of the personal property of another any money, goods, or chattels, or any bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of exchange, or other bill, draft, order, or certificate, or any book of accounts for or concerning money or goods, due or to become due, or to be delivered, of the value of $100.00 or less. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.2(22), 10-12-1988)  
Sec. 30-62. - Retail fraud. 
No person shall: 
(1)  In a store or in its immediate vicinity, while a store is open to the public, alter, transfer, remove and replace, conceal or otherwise misrepresent the price at which property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale, if the resulting difference in price is less than $200.00. 
(2)  In a store or in its immediate vicinity, while a store is open to the public, steal property of the store that is offered for sale at a price of less than $200.00. 
(3)  In a store or in its immediate vicinity, with intent to defraud, obtain or attempt to obtain money or property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid for and belongs to the store, if the amount of money, or the value of the property, obtained or attempted to be obtained is less than $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 43A.002, art. 1, 4-11-2001)  
Sec. 30-63. - Stolen property. 
No person shall buy, receive, conceal, aid in the concealing, possess, transport, or have under his control, either on his person or in any motor vehicle, the money, goods, or property of another of the value of $100.00 or less, knowing such money, goods or property to have been stolen. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.2(25), 10-12-1988)  
Sec. 30-64. - Trespass. 
No person shall enter in or remain upon the lands or premises of another without the written consent of the owner or occupant, or the agent, servant, or lessee of the owner or occupant, under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  The lands are fenced or enclosed in a manner to exclude intruders. 
(2)  The lands are posted in a conspicuous manner against entry. The minimum letter height on the posting signs shall be two inches and the signs shall be so spaced as will enable a person to observe not less than one sign at any point of entry upon the lands. 
When neither of these conditions exists, no person shall enter upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority or after having been forbidden to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent, servant or lessee of the owner or occupant, nor shall such person neglect or refuse to depart therefrom upon being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or by the agent, servant or lessee of the owner or occupant. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.2(23), 10-12-1988)  
Sec. 30-65. - Malicious mischief. 
No person shall willfully destroy, remove, damage, alter or in any manner deface any property not his own, or any public school building, or any street sign, traffic control device, railroad sign or signal, parking meter, or shade tree belonging to the township or located or in any manner mar the walls of any public building, or fence, tree or pole within the township, or remove the same from the building or place where it may be kept, placed or stored, without proper authority, or disturb, tamper with, disconnect or damage any township water meter without proper authority. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.2(8), 10-12-1988)  
Sec. 30-66. - Damaging or tampering with motor vehicles. 
(a)  Any person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor who shall: 
(1)  Intentionally, and without authority from the owner, start or cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle or maliciously shift or change the starting device or gears of a standing motor vehicle to a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver of the motor vehicle; 
(2)  Intentionally cut, mark, scratch or damage the chassis, running gear, body, sides, top covering or upholstering of any motor vehicle, being the property of another, or intentionally cut, mash, mark, destroy, or damage such motor vehicle, or any of the accessories, equipment, appurtenances or attachments thereof, or any spare or extra parts thereon being or thereto attached, without the permission of the owner thereof; 
(3)  Intentionally, and without authority of the owner, open any door, trunk, hood or window of a motor vehicle, or enter into or be physically in any motor vehicle; or 
(4)  Intentionally release the brake upon any standing motor vehicle, with intent to injure the machine, or cause the machine to be removed without the consent of the owner. 
(b)  This section shall not apply in case of moving or starting of motor vehicles by the police under authority of local ordinance or by members of the fire department in case of emergency in the vicinity of a fire. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.6, 10-12-1988) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 58.  
Secs. 30-67—30-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DISORDERLY CONDUCT OFFENSES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-91. - Indecent conduct. 
No person shall engage in any indecent, insulting or obscene conduct in any public place, if such conduct can reasonably be expected to provoke an immediate breach of the peace. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.2(3), 10-12-1988)  
Sec. 30-92. - Loud, boisterous or vulgar conduct. 
No person shall disturb the public peace and quiet by loud, boisterous, or vulgar conduct. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.2(16), 10-12-1988)  
Sec. 30-93. - Profane language. 
No person shall utter vile, profane, or obscene language in any public place, if such language can reasonably be expected to provoke an immediate breach of the peace. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.2(6), 10-12-1988)  
Sec. 30-94. - Insulting others. 
No person shall insult, accost, molest, or otherwise annoy, either by word of mouth, sign, or motion, any person in any public place, if such conduct can reasonably be expected to provoke an immediate breach of the peace. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.2(10), 10-12-1988)  
Sec. 30-95. - Fights. 
No person shall engage in any disturbance, fight, or quarrel in a public place. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.2(11), 10-12-1988)  
Sec. 30-96. - Obstructing public ways or buildings. 
No person shall loiter on any street or sidewalk or in any park or public building and engage in conduct that obstructs the free and uninterrupted passage of persons. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.2(12), 10-12-1988) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42.  
Secs. 30-97—30-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 
 
Sec. 30-121. - Indecent exposure. 
No person shall make any indecent exposure of his or her person. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.2(7), 10-12-1988)  
Sec. 30-122. - Voyeurism. 
(a)  No person shall peep into an occupied dwelling of another person or go upon the land of another with the intent to peep into an occupied dwelling of another person. 
(b)  No person shall peep into an area where an occupant of the area reasonably can be expected to disrobe, including restrooms, baths, showers, and dressing rooms, without the consent of the other person. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.2(5), 10-12-1988)  
Sec. 30-123. - Open house parties. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
Adult means a person 17 years of age or older. 
Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by weight. The percentage of alcohol by weight shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of MCL 436.2, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Control means any form of regulation or dominion including a possessory right. 
Drug means a controlled substance as defined now or hereafter by the Public Acts of the State of Michigan. Currently, such controlled substances are defined by Act No. 196 of the Public Acts of 1971, as amended, being MCL 335.301 to 335.367. 
Minor means a person not legally permitted by reason of age to possess alcoholic beverages pursuant to MCL 436.33b, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Open house party means a social gathering of persons at a residence, other than the owner or those with rights of possession or their immediate family members. 
Residence or premises means a motel room, hotel room, home, apartment, condominium, or other dwelling unit, including the curtilage of such dwelling unit, or a hall, meeting room or other place of assembly, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for social function's and whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without compensation. 
(b)  No adult having control of any residence or premises shall allow an open house party to take place at the residence or premises if any alcoholic beverage or drug is possessed or consumed at the residence or drug is possessed or consumed at the residence or premises by any minor where the adult knew or reasonably should have known that any alcoholic beverage or drug was in the possession of or being consumed by a minor at the residence or premises, and where the adult failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of the alcoholic beverage or drug at the residence or premises. 
(c)  Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to legally protected religious observances or legally protected educational activities. 
(d)  Penalties. The penalties for violation of this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the first violation, a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(2)  For subsequent violations, a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 68, §§ 1—7, 11-9-1988)  
Sec. 30-124. - Disorderly persons. 
(a)  The following persons shall be deemed disorderly persons: 
(1)  Any common prostitute, or any person employed in, or found in any house of prostitution or ill fame, or place where prostitution or lewdness is practiced, encouraged or allowed, or in any house of assignation, or the keeper, operator, proprietor of such a place, or the owner of property who shall knowingly permit such property to be used for such a place, or any person who shall solicit for any such place, or who shall solicit, accost, call or invite another person for any common prostitute, or for any act of prostitution or lewdness or who shall attempt to procure the commission by another or by others of any act of illicit intercourse or lewdness. 
(2)  Any person who shall use indecent, obscene, immoral, vile, vulgar, or profane language in any public place, or who shall use such language in the presence or hearing of any woman or child, or who shall communicate such language to any woman or child via telephone. 
(3)  Any person who shall be drunk or intoxicated in any public place, and any person who shall imbibe any intoxicating liquor including beer and wine, in any public place not licensed to sell such liquor for consumption on the premises. 
(4)  All persons who are found lounging in, or prowling in or about, or loitering around any bus depot, designated bus stop, banking institution, place of public amusement, motel, hotel, store, shop, public way, public convenience, public gathering, public assembly, public building, private dwelling house, or any public place, and with no valid reason for being there, shall be deemed guilty of disorderly conduct. 
(5)  Any person found unnecessarily shoving or jostling people in any public place, and any person who shall create any disturbance in any public place, or who shall create a disturbance in any private place which shall result in any annoyance to the occupants and invitees of the immediate vicinity, or who shall in any wise cause a breach of the peace. 
(6)  Any person who shall knowingly loiter in and about any place where an illegal occupation or business prohibited by state law or local ordinance is being conducted, practiced, encouraged or allowed. 
(7)  Any person who shall illegally sell, keep for sale, offer for sale or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages, or spirituous liquor either by the bottle or glass; any person who shall aid and abet in the illegal sale of liquor beverage or spirituous liquor; any person who shall have in his possession illegally an alcoholic beverage or spirituous liquor, any person found loitering in or about a place where alcoholic beverages or spirituous liquor, either by bottle or glass, is illegally sold, offered for sale, or otherwise dispensed; any person who shall represent his or her age to be 21 years or over, when such person shall be under the age of 21 years, for the purpose of illegally obtaining any alcoholic beverage, or spirituous liquor. 
(8)  Any person who stands, loiters, or strolls in any public place awaiting or seeking an opportunity to obtain money or valuable things from others by trick or fraud, or to aid or assist therein. 
(9)  All persons who engage in or aid and abet in any fight, quarrel, riot or other disturbance in the township. 
(10)  It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to use or possess any firearm or to use and possess any handgun designed and manufactured exclusively for propelling BBs, not exceeding 0.177 caliber by means of spring, gas, or air, outside the curtilage of his domicile unless he is accompanied by a person over 18 years of age. 
(11)  Any person who shall harbor or keep any dog which, by loud, frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling, shall cause a serious annoyance to the neighborhood, or to people passing to and from upon the street. 
(b)  The term "public place" as used herein shall mean any structure, building, alley, street, house, hall, room or other place to which the public has access. 
(c)  No person or persons shall collect, stand in crowds, or remain loitering in, on or about any streets or other public places so as to hinder the free and uninterrupted passage of other persons, nor hinder or impede the free access to and departure from or inside of any public hall, courtroom, or place of entertainment or worship, nor shall any person commit any act or acts constituting a disturbance, public quarrel or riot, nor aid and abet in the commission of such act or acts, nor shall any persons riotously congregate or assemble in the township. 
(d)  Actual commission of any of the acts aforementioned shall be deemed acts of disorderly conduct within the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Any person committing any of the acts of disorderly conduct hereinbefore mentioned or who shall be a disorderly person within the meaning hereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, before a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment in the Oakland County Jail, not to exceed 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 128, § 3, 1-8-2014)  
Sec. 30-125. - Domestic assault. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault, or an assault and battery on his or her spouse or former spouse, an individual with whom he or she has had a dating relationship, an individual with whom he or she has had a child in common, or a resident or a former resident of his or her household. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section "dating relationship" means frequent, intimate associations primarily characterized by the expectation of affectional involvement. This term does not include a casual relationship or an ordinary fraternization between two individuals in a business or social context. 
(c)  Any person violating this section may be imprisoned for not more than 93 days and/or fined mot more than $500.00 or both. 
(Ord. No. 125, § 3, 1-8-2014)  
Sec. 30-126. - Reserved.  
Sec. 30-127. - Curfew. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 17 years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, frequent, travel in or upon a motor vehicle, watercraft, or otherwise be or remain in or upon any of the public sidewalks, streets, alleys, parks or public buildings or places of amusement or entertainment or other public grounds or places in the township between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., immediately following, unless such minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian, or some adult delegated by the parent or guardian, custodian, or some such minor is in the performance of an errand or duty directed by such parent, guardian, or custodian, or unless such minor is returning directly home from a school or church function or entertainment, or unless the employment of such minor makes it necessary to be upon the streets, alleys, or other public places during the prohibited hours hereinabove mentioned. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, custodian or other person having legal care and custody of any minor under the age of 17 years, to allow or permit any such minor to violate the provisions of this section unless such presence of such minor shall fall within one of the exceptions in subsection (a). 
(c)  No person shall assist, aid, abet, or encourage any minor under the age of 17 to violate the provisions of this section. 
(d)  (1)  Municipal civil infraction/payment of fine. Any person, firm, or corporation violating a provision of this section, upon an admission or a finding of responsibility for such violation, shall be deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction as that term is defined and used in MCL 600.101 et seq.; MSA 27A.101 et seq., as amended, and shall pay a civil fine as prescribed by ordinance or as determined by the district court, district court judge, or district court magistrate. 
(2)  Costs. A person, firm, or corporation ordered to pay a fine under subsection (1) shall be ordered by the district court judge or magistrate to pay costs of not less than $9.00 or more than $500.00, which costs may include all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the township has been put in connection with the violation of the ordinance up to the entry of the court's judgment or order to pay fine and costs. 
(3)  Additional writs and orders. A person who admits or is found responsible for violation of this section shall comply with any order, writ, or judgment issued by the district court to enforce this section pursuant to Chapter 83 and Chapter 87 of the Revised Judicature Act, MCL 600.101 et seq.; MSA 27A.101 et seq., as amended. 
(4)  Default on payment of fines and costs. A default in payment of a civil fine, costs, or damages or expenses ordered under subsection (1) or (2) or an installment of the fine, costs, or damages or expenses as allowed by the court, may be collected by the township by a means authorized for the enforcement of a judgment under Chapters 40 or 60 of the Revised Judicature Act, MCL 600.101 et seq.; MSA 27A.101 et seq., as amended. 
(5)  Failure to comply with judgment or order. If a defendant fails to comply with an order or judgment issued pursuant to this section within the time prescribed by the court, the court may proceed under subsection (7). 
(6)  Failure to appear in court. A defendant who fails to answer a citation or notice to appear in court for a violation of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 plus costs and/or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. 
(7)  Civil contempt. 
a.  If a defendant defaults in the payment of a civil fine, costs, or other damages or expenses, or installment as ordered by the district court, upon motion of the township or upon its own motion, the court may require the defendant to show cause why the defendant should not be held in civil contempt and may issue a summons, order to show cause, or bench warrant of arrest for the defendant's appearance. 
b.  If a corporation or association is ordered to pay a civil fine, costs, or damages or expenses, the individuals authorized to make disbursements shall pay the fine, costs, or damages or expenses, and their failure to do so shall be civil contempt unless they make the showing required in this subsection. 
c.  Unless the defendant shows that the default was not attributable to an intentional refusal to obey the order of the court or to a failure on his or her part to make a good faith effort to obtain the funds required for payment, the court shall find that the default constitutes a civil contempt and may order the defendant committed until all or a specified part of the amount due is paid. 
d.  If it appears the default in the payment of a fine, costs, or damages does not constitute civil contempt, the court may enter an order allowing the defendant additional time for payment, reducing the amount of payment or of each installment or revoking the fine costs, or damages or expenses. 
e.  The term of imprisonment on civil contempt for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs, or damages or expenses shall be specified in the order of commitment and shall not exceed one day for each $30.00 due. A person committed for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs, or damages or expenses shall be given credit toward payment for each day of imprisonment and each day of detention in default of recognizance before judgment at the rate of $30.00 per day. 
f.  A defendant committed to imprisonment for civil contempt for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs, or damages or expenses shall not be discharged from custody until one of the following occurs: 
1.  Defendant is credited with an amount due pursuant to subsection e. above. 
2.  The amount due is collected through execution of process or otherwise. 
3.  The amount due is satisfied pursuant to a combination of subsections 1. and 2. above. 
g.  The civil contempt shall be purged upon discharge of the defendant pursuant to subsection f. above. 
(Ord. No. 127, § 3, 1-8-2014)  
Secs. 30-128—30-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY OR GOVERNMENTAL OPERATIONS 
 
Sec. 30-151. - Obstructing police. 
No person shall obstruct, resist, hinder, or oppose any member of the police force, or any peace officer, in the discharge of his duties as such. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.2(17), 10-12-1988)  
Sec. 30-152. - False alarms. 
No person shall summon, as a joke or prank or otherwise without any good reason therefor, by telephone or otherwise, the police or the fire department or any public or private ambulance, to go to any address where the service called for is not needed. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.2(9), 10-12-1988)  
Secs. 30-153—30-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-181. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Controlled substance means a controlled substance as that term is defined in Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCL 333.1101 et seq.). 
Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state or local law. It includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived. 
(2)  Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances. 
(3)  Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance. 
(4)  Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances. 
(5)  Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances. 
(6)  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances. 
(7)  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana. 
(8)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances. 
(9)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances. 
(10)  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances. 
(11)  Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body. 
(12)  Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes, with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls. 
b.  Water pipes. 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices. 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks. 
e.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand. 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials. 
g.  Chamber pipes. 
h.  Carburetor pipes. 
i.  Electric pipes. 
j.  Air-driven pipes. 
k.  Chillums. 
l.  Bongs. 
m.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
Marijuana means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufactured salt derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom, fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is capable of germination. 
(Ord. No. 43A.002, art. 2, § 43-A.4(1), (2), (11), 4-11-2001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-182. - Possession and use of marijuana. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of marijuana if he knowingly or intentionally possesses marijuana except as authorized by the provisions of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.1101 et seq.). 
(b)  A person commits the offense of unlawful use of marijuana if he uses marijuana except as authorized by the provisions of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.1101 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 43A.002, art. 2, § 43-A.4(11), 4-11-2001)  
Sec. 30-183. - Obtaining controlled substance or drug paraphernalia by fraudulent means; unauthorized use. 
Any fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, subterfuge, or concealment of a material fact, or the use of a false name or the giving of a false address, for the purpose of obtaining any controlled substance or drug paraphernalia, or false statement on any prescription blank, shall be unlawful. No person who shall have obtained the possession of any controlled substance or drug paraphernalia pursuant to the terms of this section shall use the such controlled substance or drug paraphernalia or permit or authorize their use for any purpose other than that specifically authorized in the prescription or order by means of which such possession was obtained. 
(Ord. No. 43A.002, art. 2, § 43-A.4(8), 4-11-2001)  
Sec. 30-184. - Sale of purported controlled substance. 
Any fraud, scheme, device, trick, deceit, misrepresentation, subterfuge or any other form of concealment for the purpose of obtaining money or any other thing of value by the sale, furnishing, supplying or giving away of any substance represented to be a controlled substance, when such substance may or may not be a controlled substance, is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 43A.002, art. 2, § 43-A.4(9), 4-11-2001)  
Sec. 30-185. - Frequenting place where controlled substances and drug paraphernalia are used, sold, furnished or kept. 
No person shall knowingly loiter about, frequent or live in any building, apartment, store, automobile, boat, boathouse, airplane, or other place of any description whatsoever where controlled substances and drug paraphernalia are used, sold, dispensed, furnished, given away, stored or kept illegally. 
(Ord. No. 43A.002, art. 2, § 43-A.4(10), 4-11-2001)  
Secs. 30-186—30-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 
 
Sec. 30-211. - Exemptions. 
This division shall not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians, pharmacists and embalmers in the normal legal course of their respective business or profession, nor shall it apply to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma or any other medical conditions requiring use of an instrument otherwise characterized in this article as drug paraphernalia for purposes of self-injection, or common carriers or warehousemen or employees engaged in lawful transport or storage. 
(Ord. No. 43A.002, art. 2, § 43-A.4(6), 4-11-2001)  
Sec. 30-212. - Determination as to whether object is drug paraphernalia. 
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
(1)  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use. 
(2)  The proximity of the object to controlled substances. 
(3)  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to direct violation of state law. 
(4)  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object. 
(5)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of state or local law. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of state law shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use or designed for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(6)  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use. 
(7)  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use. 
(8)  National and local advertising concerning its use. 
(9)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale. 
(10)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the objects to the total sales of the business enterprise. 
(11)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community. 
(12)  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(13)  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products. 
(Ord. No. 43A.002, art. 2, § 43-A.4(13), 4-11-2001)  
Sec. 30-213. - Use or possession. 
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, infect, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 43A.002, art. 2, § 43-A.4(3), 4-11-2001)  
Sec. 30-214. - Sale or manufacture. 
It is unlawful for any person to deliver, sell, possess with intent to deliver or sell or manufacture with intent to deliver or sell drug paraphernalia knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 43A.002, art. 2, § 43-A.4(4), 4-11-2001)  
Sec. 30-215. - Advertisement. 
It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, sign, poster or other publication any advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(Ord. No. 43A.002, art. 2, § 43-A.4(5), 4-11-2001)  
Sec. 30-216. - Seizure and forfeiture. 
Any drug paraphernalia used, sold, possessed with intent to use or sell, or manufactured with intent to sell in violation of this division shall be seized and forfeited to the township. 
(Ord. No. 43A.002, art. 2, § 43-A.4(7), 4-11-2001)  
Secs. 30-217—30-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - WEAPONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Firearms and other weapons, explosives and dangerous substances, § 34-40. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-241. - Hunting and discharge of firearms prohibitions. 
(a)  A person shall not hunt or discharge a firearm within 150 yards of an occupied building, dwelling, house, residence, or cabin, or any barn or other building used in connection with a farm operation, without obtaining the written permission of the owner, renter, or occupant of the property as provided in Section 324.40111(4) of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (excerpt), Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994. 
(b)  Hunting with or the discharge of a center fire rifle is unlawful in the township except at a target range recognized and approved by the township board. 
(c)  The prohibitions contained in this section shall not apply to peace officers or members of any branch of the armed forces in the discharge of their proper duties. 
(Ord. No. 78, §§ 1, 2, 4, 10-10-1990; Ord. No. 78.001, art. 1, 7-13-2011)  
Sec. 30-242. - Possession of firearms, other weapons or traps. 
(a)  A person shall not carry or transport a firearm, slingshot, bow and arrow, crossbow, or trap while in any area frequented by wild animals unless that person has in his possession a license as required by part 435 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.43501 et seq.). 
(b)  A person may carry, transport, or possess a firearm without a hunting license while at or going to and from a recognized rifle or target range, or trap or skeet shooting ground, if the firearm is unloaded in both barrel and magazine and either enclosed in a case or carried in the trunk of a vehicle. 
(c)  Regardless of whether the person has a license or it is open season for the taking of game, a person may carry, transport or possess a firearm if all of the following apply: 
(1)  The person is not taking or attempting to take game but is engaged in one or more of the following activities: 
a.  Target practice using an identifiable, artificially constructed target. 
b.  Practice with silhouettes, plinking, skeet, or trap. 
c.  Sighting-in the firearm. 
(2)  The person is, or is accompanied by or has the permission of, either of the following: 
a.  The owner of the property on which the activity under subsection (c)(1) of this section is taking place. 
b.  The lessee of that property for a term of not less than one year. 
(3)  The owner or lessee of the property does not receive remuneration for the activity under subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(d)  A person may carry or possess an unloaded weapon at any time if the person is traveling to or from or participating in an historical reenactment. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.5(2), 10-22-1988)  
Sec. 30-243. - Possession of firearms by underage persons. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, an individual less than 18 years of age shall not possess a firearm in public except under the direct supervision of an individual 18 years of age or older. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to an individual less than 18 years of age who possesses a firearm in accordance with part 401 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.40101 et seq.), or part 435 of such act (MCL 324.43501 et seq.). However, an individual less than 18 years of age may possess a firearm without a hunting license while at, or going to or from, a recognized target range or trap or skeet shooting ground if, while going to or from the range or ground, the firearm is enclosed and securely fastened in a case or locked in the trunk of a motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 43A, § 43-A.5(3), 10-22-1988)  
Secs. 30-244—30-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TARGET RANGES  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Sec. 30-261. - Purpose of division. 
The purpose of this division is to provide rules and regulations for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the people, and to ensure the protection of the community from the discharge of firearms, and to provide for the issuance of a permit to provide for authorized and recognized target ranges within the meaning of section 30-241. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.1(1), 8-19-1978)  
Secs. 30-262—30-270. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Administration[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 30-271. - Generally. 
The township board is hereby granted authority under this division to entertain applications, hold public hearings, grant permits and do all other acts authorized in this division and in the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.1(2), 8-19-1978)  
Sec. 30-272. - Enforcement officer. 
This division shall be enforced by the zoning administrator for the township. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.1(3)(a), 8-19-1978) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq.  
Sec. 30-273. - Appearance tickets. 
The township zoning administrator and his representatives and enforcement officers shall have authority to issue appearance tickets for a violation of this division, pursuant to Public Act No. 175 of 1927 (MCL 760.1 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.1(3)(c), 8-19-1978)  
Sec. 30-274. - Reports of violations. 
The township zoning administrator and his representatives and enforcement officers shall have the authority to advise the police authority for the township, the township police department, of any target range which is operating without a permit as an unapproved and unrecognized target range so as to not be an exception within the meaning of section 30-241, and to instruct the police force to enforce such section. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.1(3)(d), 8-19-1978)  
Secs. 30-275—30-290. - Reserved.  
Subdivision III. - Permit 
 
Sec. 30-291. - Required. 
A target range shall not be "recognized" or "approved" within the meaning of section 30-241 unless a target range permit has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.1(4), 8-19-1978)  
Sec. 30-292. - Application; issuance. 
(a)  An application for a target range permit shall be submitted to the township board containing the following information: 
(1)  Full names and addresses of all parties of interest in the premises, including but not limited to stockholders, partners, and proprietors, and setting forth their legal interest. 
(2)  A detailed and full description of the premises wherein the operations are proposed. 
(3)  A topographical survey map at a scale showing existing and proposed grades of the proposed range, as to be constructed. 
(4)  Plans showing the proposed layout of the range, including the positioning, and where applicable the material used, with the following items: 
a.  Target lines and frames. 
b.  Back stops. 
c.  Impact area and safety zone. 
d.  Shotgun facilities. 
e.  Side berms. 
f.  Safety baffle (where applicable). 
g.  Range material for construction. 
h.  Direction of firing. 
i.  Positions for posting as required in this division. 
j.  Positioning for fencing. 
k.  Positioning for pennant posting as required. 
In addition, such plans shall contain sufficient measurements to demonstrate size, shape and distance of these requisite items. 
(5)  The name of the proposed safety range officer and his certifications or qualifications. 
(b)  The township board, in issuing a permit, shall give weight and consideration to the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.1(8), (9), 8-19-1978)  
Sec. 30-293. - Fee. 
Upon application and any renewal of a permit under this subdivision, a fee shall be paid to the township in the amount established by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.1(6), 8-19-1978)  
Sec. 30-294. - Compliance with zoning ordinance. 
A permit required by this subdivision shall not be issued for a target range that will not comply with the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.1(7), 8-19-1978)  
Sec. 30-295. - Term; renewal. 
A permit required by this subdivision will be issued and valid for a period of one year, and may be renewed thereafter on a yearly basis, subject to inspection and approval by the township zoning inspector. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.1(5), 8-19-1978)  
Sec. 30-296. - Insurance. 
Prior to the issuance of the permit under this subdivision and any renewal thereof, proof of insurance must be provided to the township board prepaid for a period of one year in an amount as determined by resolution of the township board from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.10, 8-19-1978)  
Sec. 30-297. - Indemnification of township. 
The permit holder and its shareholders and members agree by acceptance of a target range permit to hold harmless and indemnify the township and its officers, agents and employees from any claims arising out of the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.11, 8-19-1978)  
Sec. 30-298. - Consent to inspections. 
By accepting the permit issued under this subdivision, the owner and operator of any operation shall be presumed to have consented to regular and routine inspections of the property. Such consent shall be authority to go onto any property under permit for the purpose of any inspection. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.1(3)(b), 8-19-1978)  
Sec. 30-299. - Rescission. 
(a)  Failure to enforce any of the range rules may result in a rescission of a target range permit by the township board. 
(b)  After issuance of a permit for a recognized and authorized target range, all conditions as existed at the time of issuance of the permit shall be maintained or improved (principally for safety) and all rules as stated in this division shall be enforced. Whether an alteration in the target range constitutes an improvement shall be determined by the township board. Violation of any of the provisions of this division may result in a rescission of the permit by the township board. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.9, 8-19-1978)  
Secs. 30-300—30-310. - Reserved.  
Subdivision IV. - Requirements 
 
Sec. 30-311. - General construction regulations; location. 
(a)  Target ranges shall be located to ensure reduced noise problems, impact on urban growth on the range site in the future, if not isolated by natural barriers, the positioning in terms of prevailing winds of the range from population concentration so as to reduce noise problems, and topographical location of the site, whether on a valley, flat area or knoll, considering in addition any natural barriers. 
(b)  The firing line shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The line shall be level, smooth, and at the same elevation as the target line parallel to it. 
(2)  The line shall be less than 3 percent grade from line to target line up to 200 yards, and 2 percent over 300 yards; 4-5 percent may be used in extremes, but is not desirable. 
(3)  Sodding or concrete is preferred as opposed to gravel or blacktopping of the line. 
(4)  Spacing of firing points for safety and comfort shall be as follows: 
a.  High power rifle: Not less than six feet. 
b.  Smallbore rifle: Not less than five feet. 
c.  Pistol and rifle: Not less than six feet. 
d.  Bullseye pistol: Not less than four feet. 
e.  Combat pistol: Not less than six feet. 
f.  Benchrest: Not less than six feet. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.2, 8-19-1978)  
Sec. 30-312. - Target line and frames. 
(a)  There is a preference for wood, metal rods, or metal angled straps. Metal should have no flat surface facing shooters. Bolt heads and nuts should not be visible to shooters. 
(b)  Backstops are required in all but a few unusual circumstances. Backstops must be capable of stopping and containing bullets used on the range. Natural hills or manmade embankments are acceptable if they meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The backstop shall be 15 to 30 feet high, depending on use and area. 
(2)  The backstop shall be free of rocks or hard materials which might cause ricochet. 
(3)  The backstop slope, dependent on natural grade of repose of the local soil, should be as steep as possible. 
(4)  The backstop shall be extended beyond the end of the target line. 
(5)  The impact area behind the backstop shall be heavily wooded. Other suitable backstops may be acceptable, including sand bags at least two feet thick, and stacked automobile tires filled with sand or earth. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.3, 8-19-1978)  
Sec. 30-313. - Impact area safety zone. 
(a)  Baffling can be required as little as 300 yards behind the backstop. Bullets from smallbore rifles or pistols fired at 35 degrees can travel more than one mile. Bullets from high power rifles fired at 35 degrees can travel more than three miles. 
(b)  A safety zone extending to maximum range potential behind backstops for rifle and pistol ranges is required as an absolute. However, other factors such as strict control, topography or baffling may reduce the safety zone as determined in the discretion of the township board. The safety zone shall be uninhabited and posted against trespassing. The safety zone shall include a 25- to 35-degree safety fan extending 1,200 yards for ricochet control (U.S. Army specifications). 
(c)  For shotgun facilities, there shall be a safety fan of 300 yards. For skeet, there shall be an arc of 180 degrees, right to left of houses. For trap, there shall be an arc of 94 to 100 degrees centered on the trap house. 
(d)  Side berms are required to separate ranges of different types shall be eight to ten feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.4, 8-19-1978)  
Sec. 30-314. - Safety baffles. 
Safety baffles are required where safety zones and impact areas are inadequate and shall be constructed to ensure the safety of the community from ricochet and stray bullets. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.5, 8-19-1978)  
Sec. 30-315. - Range control and supervision. 
(a)  At least one range supervisor shall be on duty when the range is open. 
(b)  The control station or booth for the supervisor shall be at one end of the range rather than in the center. The station shall be enclosed, if possible. 
(c)  No separation of any kind shall be placed between firing points so that the range supervisor cannot see what each shooter is doing. 
(d)  The days and hours the range is to be open shall be posted. The township police department is to be advised of these hours for enforcement purposes. 
(e)  "Shooting Range—No Trespassing" signs shall be posted to apply when the range is closed. 
(f)  Fencing and locked gates may be required for some ranges to prevent unauthorized use or accidental trespassing. 
(g)  A red pennant shall be displayed when the range is operating. 
(h)  Signs shall be posted marking impact area and safety zones. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.6, 8-19-1978)  
Sec. 30-316. - Direction of firing. 
The township board is to consider approval of direction of firing for safety primarily. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.7, 8-19-1978)  
Sec. 30-317. - Range rules. 
The following range rules shall be posted and enforced by the range supervisor. Violation of any of these rules may, in the township board's discretion, result in rescission of the permit. 
(1)  Never close the action on a live cartridge until the firearm is pointed directly at the backstop. 
(2)  Place targets so that bullets passing through them will impact directly into the backstop without ricochet. 
(3)  Targets must be hung only in frames provided. 
(4)  The only targets which may be used are those for which the range is designed. 
(5)  All firing must be done from specified firing lines or stations. 
(6)  Do not touch the trigger until the sights are on target, and you are ready to fire. 
(7)  All shooters must become thoroughly familiar with NRA official rules, range operation and range commands. While the main objective of rules is to govern competitive shooting, safety is a major consideration when a rule or range command is written. The official NRA rule book is a great help in maintaining a smooth operation and a well-disciplined range. 
(8)  Discipline: The safety of shooters, range personnel, and spectators requires self-discipline on the part of all. Where such self-discipline is lacking it is the duty of the range personnel to enforce discipline and the duty of the shooter to assist in such enforcement. 
(9)  All unsafe actions on a range must be corrected immediately. 
(10)  Treat all firearms as if they were loaded, at all times. 
(11)  All barrels should be checked for obstruction before firing. 
(12)  Keep the muzzle of the firearm under control, and pointed in a safe direction, at all times. 
(13)  Never use a firearm which is malfunctioning or in need of repair. 
(14)  Actions of uncased firearms should be kept open except when on the firing line, ready to fire. 
(15)  All firearms will be unloaded immediately upon the command "cease firing," regardless of when this command is given. Action will remain open until further commands are given. 
(16)  Dry firing should be permitted on the firing line or in designated dry fire areas only. 
(17)  Be sure you have only ammunition of the proper size for the firearm being used. 
(18)  All inexperienced shooters should be accompanied by an experienced shooter. 
(19)  On ranges where shooters must go down-range to change targets and score, movement must be controlled by a range official. 
(20)  Loud or abusive language will not be permitted. Shooters and range personnel will limit their conversation directly behind the firing line to official business. 
(21)  All shooters should police their firing point when they have completed their firing. Do not disturb shooters on adjacent points. 
(22)  No alcoholic beverages shall be on the range property at any time. 
(Ord. No. 46, § 46.8, 8-19-1978)  
Secs. 30-318—30-340. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OUTDOOR GATHERINGS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 34. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 30-341. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Activity and event mean any outdoor gathering (outside of a permanent structure), including but not limited to auctions, theatrical exhibitions, public shows, entertainment, musical festivals, rock festivals, peace festivals, motion picture theaters and/or drive-in theaters, etc., to which the public is invited where admission is charged to participate in the outdoor gathering and/or where the public is charged for goods or services available for purchase at the outdoor gathering, not including residential garage sales. 
(Ord. No. 99, § 1, 7-22-1998; Ord. No. 99.003, art. 1, 7-11-2001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-343. - Compliance with law and ordinances. 
A licensee under this article shall at all times during the term of the license comply with all applicable township ordinances and state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 99, § 16, 7-22-1998)  
Sec. 30-342. - Exemptions. 
All persons possessing a valid license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be exempt from the provisions of this article for that portion of the premises that is so licensed by the state liquor control commission. 
(Ord. No. 99, § 15, 7-22-1998)  
Secs. 30-344—30-360. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 30-361. - Required. 
No person shall set up, promote, publish, advertise, or otherwise aid and/or assist in the operation, promotion, holding, setting up of or participating in any outdoor gathering (outside of a permanent structure), including but not limited to auctions, theatrical exhibitions, public shows, entertainment, musical festivals, rock festivals, peace festivals, motion picture theaters and/or drive-in theaters, etc., to which the public is invited where admission is charged to participate in the outdoor gathering and/or where the public is charged for goods or services available for purchase at the outdoor gathering (not including residential garage sales) within the limits of the township without having obtained a license from the township board authorizing such outdoor gathering. 
(Ord. No. 99, § 1, 7-22-1998; Ord. No. 99.003, art. 1, 7-11-2001)  
Sec. 30-362. - Application. 
Before any license, as required by this division, is granted, an application shall be made to the township clerk, at least 90 days prior to the scheduled event, upon forms to be provided by the clerk. The applicant shall provide three copies of the application and any supporting documents to the clerk. The application shall be in writing and under oath which shall include among other things, the following information: 
(1)  A drawing, diagram, blueprint and/or sketch of the premises involved, all buildings on the premises, all proposed buildings on the premises and all adjacent structures and roadways within 500 feet of the premises. Such drawing, sketch, diagram and/or blueprint shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 300 feet. If the operation to be conducted is to be held under cover of a temporary covering, such as a tent, a diagram of such temporary covering shall be included therewith. 
(2)  The seating arrangement, if any, for spectators, including engineering and building plans therefor. 
(3)  The means of ingress and egress for such spectators which shall consist of at least two aisles not less than six feet in width, and it shall provide one such aisle for each 1,000 seats provided for spectators. 
(4)  The location and construction of all off-street and on-site parking facilities. 
(5)  The location and type of fencing, if any, to be used on the property. 
(6)  The location and type of sanitary facilities available. 
(7)  The zoning designation of the premises. 
(8)  The name and address of each owner and party in interest of the premises for which a license is being applied for. 
(9)  The exact legal description of the premises for which the license is being applied for. 
(10)  The dates and times of all performances which the licensee will sell admissions to spectators. 
(11)  Whether alcohol will be served at the event. If alcohol is to be served, a demonstration of how minors will be prevented from obtaining such alcohol and the hours it will be served. 
(12)  Measures taken to control the affect of sound, dust and vibration from neighboring residential areas. 
(13)  A single portable sign may be utilized to announce the event. The location and type of sign to be placed on the premises shall be identified. The sign shall not be greater than four feet in width and eight feet in height and shall not contain any flashing lights. The sign may be posted no more than 30 days prior to the event and must be removed within 48 hours after the conclusion of the event. 
(Ord. No. 99, § 2, 7-22-1998; Ord. No. 99.001, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 30-363. - Parking facilities. 
No license shall be granted under this division unless the licensee provides a minimum of one automobile parking space for every four admission tickets available to be sold for each performance. 
(Ord. No. 99, § 3, 7-22-1998)  
Sec. 30-364. - Traffic impact. 
No license shall be granted under this division unless the licensee demonstrates that there will be no significant adverse traffic impact caused by the activity on adjacent property and uses. 
(Ord. No. 99, § 4, 7-22-1998)  
Sec. 30-365. - Fencing. 
If any performance or event is to be held out-of-doors, no license shall be granted unless the licensee constructs a fence of sturdy construction, and kept in good repair, clean and painted, at a minimum height of six feet, around the entire premises, including parking facilities, for which the license application is sought, unless the township board determines that a fence is not required in order to protect adjacent property from significant adverse impacts caused by the event. 
(Ord. No. 99, § 5, 7-22-1998)  
Sec. 30-366. - Sanitary and first aid facilities. 
(a)  No license shall be granted under this division unless the licensee constructs and provides adequate sanitary facilities for all spectators, employees, servants and agents. 
(b)  No license shall be granted unless the licensee provides suitable and adequate facilities for the rendering of first aid to spectators, agents, servants, employees and participants. 
(Ord. No. 99, § 6, 7-22-1998)  
Sec. 30-367. - Public liability insurance. 
(a)  No license shall be granted unless the licensee shows evidence of having obtained and continued in full force and effect public liability insurance in the amount of not less then $1,000,000.00 for property damage, $1,000,000.00 for injury to one person and not less than $2,000,000.00 for injury arising out of one occurrence. On all policies, the Township, the Oxford Public, Fire and EMS Commission ("OPFEC"), the county's elected and appointed officials, the county sheriff, and the county sheriff's department, shall be included as additional insureds. 
(b)  If alcohol is to be served, no license shall be granted, unless the licensee shows evidence of having obtained and continued in full force and effect a special events liquor policy in the amount of $1,000,000.00. On all policies the township; the Oxford Public, Fire and EMS Commission; the county and its elected and appointed officials; the county sheriff; and the county sheriff's department shall be included as additional insureds. 
(c)  All insurance policies shall be reviewed and approved by the township attorney prior to a license being issued. 
(Ord. No. 99, § 7, 7-22-1998; Ord. No. 99.001, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 30-368. - Construction permits. 
No license shall be granted under this division until the township building inspector has approved the construction plans and issued a building permit for the construction of any and all structures to be located upon the premises. If no structure or building is to be located upon the premises, then the license shall not be granted until the building inspector has approved the construction plans and issued a building permit for construction and a final inspection certificate for any temporary seats to be used for spectators. The building inspector shall not issue a building permit or final inspection certificate until it reasonably appears that the structural strength of any temporary seats shall be adequate to sustain the weight necessary for the seats to bear and to permit the spectators to enter upon, leave and view the exhibition, race or amusement in safety. 
(Ord. No. 99, § 8, 7-22-1998)  
Sec. 30-369. - Compliance with applicable ordinances and state and federal law. 
No license shall be granted to a licensee under this division until the licensee has fully complied with all applicable township ordinances and state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 99, § 9, 7-22-1998)  
Sec. 30-370. - Security personnel. 
(a)  No license shall be granted under this division unless the licensee demonstrates adequate security and supervision plans for the control of and production for the event. 
(b)  The licensee shall employ at his own expense such security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide for the adequate security and protection of the maximum number of attendants and spectators at the licensed event and for the preservation of order and protection of property in and around the site of such event, and no license shall be issued unless the chief law enforcement officers for all cognizant police departments and law enforcement agencies are satisfied that such necessary and sufficient security personnel will be provided by the licensee for the duration of the licensed event. 
(c)  If, in the determination of the applicable law enforcement agency, insufficient security personnel will be provided by the licensee, the law enforcement agency shall have the option and authority to designate police officers to act as additional security personnel at the event. The applicant shall be responsible for the expense of any police officers serving as security personnel and shall deposit the reasonable cost of providing such officers with the police department in advance of the event. 
(Ord. No. 99, § 19, 7-22-1998)  
Sec. 30-371. - Inspections; approval by fire and sheriff's departments. 
(a)  It shall be a condition of all licenses issued under this division that the operation and facilities be at all times subject to the inspection of all duly authorized officials of the township. 
(b)  The application shall be submitted to the county sheriff's department and Oxford Fire Department for their review. No license shall be issued to any applicant until both the county sheriff's department and the Oxford Fire Department have provided written approval of the application. 
(Ord. No. 99, § 10, 7-22-1998; Ord. No. 99.001, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 30-372. - Setbacks; protection of pedestrian traffic. 
(a)  No license shall be granted for any activity authorized under this article unless the activity is set back a minimum of 500 feet from any residential use, unless this requirement is waived by the township board based upon a showing that the nature of the proposed activity will not have a significant adverse impact on adjoining property and uses. 
(b)  No license shall be granted for any activity authorized under this article unless the pedestrian traffic associated with the activity is separated from vehicular traffic by a fence or other protective barrier and the pedestrian traffic is set back a minimum of 150 feet from any public roadway, unless a written opinion from the law enforcement agency of the township advises that a variance is acceptable. 
(Ord. No. 99, § 11, 7-22-1998; Ord. No. 99.001, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 30-373. - Term. 
All licenses issued under this division shall automatically expire at midnight on November 19 following the date of issuance thereof, if an expiration date has not been set by the township board. 
(Ord. No. 99, § 12, 7-22-1998)  
Sec. 30-374. - Fee; escrow deposit. 
Each applicant for a license under this division shall submit with an application a standard application fee of $100.00, which is nonrefundable. Each applicant shall also submit an escrow fee, in an amount to be determined by resolution, that is sufficient to cover the township's costs associated with review of the application, including costs of township professionals and consultants. If the initial escrow fee is exhausted, the applicant shall submit additional escrow fee(s), of an equal amount as the initial escrow fee, to cover any additional township costs as necessary. At the time the application for a license is granted or denied, the applicant shall be refunded any unused amount of the escrow fee. The standard application fee shall be waived for license applications for an event that is conducted or sponsored by a governmental unit or agency on publicly owned land or property; or an event which is conducted or sponsored by any applicant qualifying for tax exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, being 26 USC 501(c)(3) as incorporated by reference in section 1 of Public Act No. 281 of 1967 (MCL 206.201). 
(Ord. No. 99, § 13, 7-22-1998; Ord. No. 99.001, 9-13-2000; Ord. No. 99.003, art. 2, 7-11-2001)  
Sec. 30-375. - Revocation. 
Any licensee under this division may have his license revoked for failure to comply with any of the requirements as established under this article or for failure to comply with any reasonable safety requirements of fire marshals and/or building inspectors. 
(Ord. No. 99, § 14, 7-22-1998) 
APPENDIX A
  
Chapter 34 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 22; outdoor gatherings, § 30-341 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42; waterways, ch. 66. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC CONDUCT IN PARKS 
 
Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commission means the Oxford Township Parks and Recreation Commission. ;rn0;2; Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-32. - Purpose of parks and recreation commission; compliance with park rules. 
The purpose of the commission is to maintain and operate the public parks under its control in the best interests of the people of the township, and to ensure maximum recreational benefits from these parks. Entry into lands under the commission's jurisdiction and enjoyment of the parks and park facilities is a privilege which is extended to members of the community only during their compliance with the rules and regulations in this article. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 1, 5-13-1981)  
Sec. 34-33. - Park hours and use. 
Stony Lake Park shall be open from sunrise to sunset; Powell Lake Park shall be open from sunrise to sunset; Oakwood Lake Park shall be open from sunrise to sunset; and Seymour Lake Park shall be open from sunrise to 10:00 p.m., unless otherwise posted. No parent or legal guardian shall permit a child under the age of seven for whom the parent or guardian is responsible to enter, use or occupy park lands or waters within such parks for any purpose unless accompanied by a responsible person who is 14 years of age or older. No person shall enter, use or occupy the park lands or waters for any purpose when the lands are posted against such entry, use or occupancy. Camping in township parks is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 5, 5-13-1981; Ord. of 11-14-1990, § 1; Ord. No. 56.004, § 1, 5-13-1997; Ord. No. 56.007, Art. I, 7-11-2018)  
Sec. 34-34. - Preservation of property, natural resources and wildlife. 
No person shall injure, deface, disturb, befoul or in any manner destroy or cause to be destroyed any part of any park or any facility, building, sign structure, equipment, utilities or other property found therein. No person shall dig for, remove, injure or destroy any tree, flower, shrub, plant or growing thing, or any rock, mineral or other materials, within any park. No person shall kill, trap, hunt or pursue any wild bird or animal within any park. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 2, 5-13-1981)  
Sec. 34-35. - Fires. 
Fires may be built in parks on or in picnic stoves or in other equipment or space approved by the commission. No person shall start or cause to be started any other fire whatsoever in any park. No person shall dump any burning or hot ash into any trash receptacle or elsewhere unless the container is marked as a receptacle for such material. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 3, 5-13-1981) ;rn0;2; Fire prevention and protection, ch. 26.  
Sec. 34-36. - Alcoholic liquor and controlled substances. 
(a)  No person shall possess or consume any alcoholic liquor or any controlled substance anywhere within any of the parks under the control of the commission. 
(b)  In this section the term "alcoholic liquor" means any spirituous, vinous, malt, or fermented liquor, liquids and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume which are fit for use for beverage purposes. In this section the term "controlled substance" means a controlled substance or controlled substance analogue as defined in section 7104 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.7104). 
(Ord. No. 56, § 4, 5-13-1981; Ord. No. 56.005, art. 1, 5-22-2001) ;rn0;2; Alcoholic liquor, ch. 6.  
Sec. 34-37. - Motor vehicles. 
Operation of motor-powered vehicles, including but not limited to minibikes, motorcycles, dunemobiles, snowmobiles, converted snowmobiles, or amphibious vehicles, in areas not designated is prohibited in parks, with the exception of emergency service and authorized vehicles. The speed limit shall be 15 miles per hour on designated roadways, unless otherwise posted. Parking shall be permitted only in designated areas. Any motor vehicle found parked in a township park for a continuous period of more than 24 hours shall be removed at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 6, 5-13-1981) ;rn0;2; Traffic and vehicles, ch. 58.  
Sec. 34-38. - Disposal of refuse. 
No person shall deposit or abandon in any park or in the waters on or adjacent to any park any garbage, sewage, refuse, trash, waste or other obnoxious material, except in receptacles or pits provided for such purposes. Household refuse, as defined by state law, shall not be deposited in any park. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 7, 5-13-1981)  
Sec. 34-39. - Fireworks. 
No person shall store, display or have in his possession any fireworks in any park. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 8, 5-13-1981)  
Sec. 34-40. - Firearms and other weapons, explosives and dangerous substances. 
No person shall have in his possession or control any rifle, shotgun, pistol or other firearm, slingshot, pellet gun, air rifle, explosives or other dangerous substances within any park. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 9, 5-13-1981) ;rn0;2; Weapons, § 30-241 et seq.  
Sec. 34-41. - Dogs and pets. 
It shall be unlawful while on park property to bring, drive, lead or carry any dog or other animal or pet which is unleashed, or which is upon a leash more than six feet in length, or which is not under the immediate control of a competent person unless otherwise posted. Owners are responsible for pets at all times. Those creating problems will be asked to leave. Owners must clean up pet waste. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 10, 5-13-1981; Ord. No. 56.006, art 1, 4-27-2005)  
Sec. 34-42. - Musical instruments, radios and other sound-amplifying devices. 
No person shall operate or play any musical instrument, radio, mechanical record or tape player, etc., of any kind within the boundaries of any park in such a manner as to cause the sound emanating therefrom to exceed a loudness of 75 decibels when measured at a distance of 15 feet from the sound source. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 11, 5-13-1981)  
Sec. 34-43. - Peddling or soliciting; distribution of handbills; posting of signs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle or solicit business of any nature whatever, or to distribute commercial handbills or other advertising matter, to post unauthorized signs on any lands, waters, structures, or property, in any park, or to use such lands, waters, structures or property unless first authorized in writing by the commission or its representative. Such authorization shall be granted upon a showing that the proposed activity will not interfere with the public right to use the parks or endanger public property. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 12, 5-13-1981) ;rn0;2; Peddlers and solicitors, ch. 38.  
Sec. 34-44. - Obstruction of use. 
No person shall, by force, threats, intimidation, unlawful fencing, enclosing or other means, prevent or obstruct any person from entering, leaving or making full use of any park property without permission of the commission or its representative. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 13, 5-13-1981)  
Sec. 34-45. - Assemblies. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, conduct or address any public assembly, meeting or gathering within any park without first obtaining written permission from the commission or its representative. Such permission shall be granted upon a showing that the proposed activity will not interfere with the public's right to use the park or endanger public safety. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 14, 5-13-1981)  
Sec. 34-46. - Glass containers. 
No glass containers are allowed in any beach area in any public park. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 15, 5-13-1981)  
Sec. 34-47. - Boats. 
No person shall store or leave a boat in a park without obtaining written permission from the commission or its representative, which will be granted only in cases of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 56, § 16, 5-13-1981) ;rn0;2; Waterways, ch. 66.  
Sec. 34-48. - Swimming, bathing or wading. 
No person shall swim, bathe, or wade in any public park except at such times and places as may be provided or designated for such purpose by the commission. 
(Ord. of 4-10-1985, § 17) ;rn0;2; Waterways, § 34-48.  
Chapter 38 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14; peddling or soliciting; distribution of handbills; posting of signs, § 34-43; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Solicit and solicitation mean the request of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value, or any part thereof, will be used for a charitable, religious, patriotic, civic, educational or philanthropic purpose, by telephone, personal interview, or otherwise. Such words shall also mean and include the sale or offer to sell any article, tag, ticket, emblem, publication, advertisement, subscription or other thing, whether of value or not, on the plea or representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will be used for a charitable, religious, patriotic, civic, educational or philanthropic purpose. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 1, 5-10-1978) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 38-32. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, or filing or causing to be filed an application for a permit or certificate under this article containing any false or fraudulent statements, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than $100.00 and costs, or shall be imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or may be punished by both such fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 12, 5-10-1978)  
Secs. 38-33—38-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 38-51. - Required; exceptions. 
No person shall solicit for any cause whatsoever, except as otherwise provided in this article, within the township without a permit from the township authorizing such solicitation. The provisions of this article shall not apply to solicitations conducted exclusively within the membership of an organization by its own officers and members. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 2, 5-10-1978)  
Sec. 38-52. - Contents of application. 
Applications for permits under this division shall be filed with the township clerk upon forms to be furnished by the township clerk. The application shall contain the following information, or, in lieu thereof, a detailed statement of the reason why such information cannot be furnished: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number and headquarters of the person applying for the permit. 
(2)  If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant's principal officers and managers. 
(3)  The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made and the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom, or property purchased if the property is to be distributed by the solicitor; provided, however, no applicant under this division shall be required to provide information about its political goals and activities for evaluation by a public official before its members and agents may canvass or solicit door to door. 
(4)  The name of the person by whom the receipts of such solicitation shall be disbursed. 
(5)  The names and addresses of the persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation. 
(6)  An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitation. 
(7)  The time when such solicitations shall be made, giving the proposed dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitations. 
(8)  The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses, or emoluments to be expended or paid to any persons in connection with such solicitation, together with the manner in which such wages, fees, expenses, commissions, or emoluments are to be expended, to whom paid and the amount thereof. 
(9)  The estimated cost of the solicitation. 
(10)  Such other information as may be required by the township supervisor for him to determine the kind and character of the proposed solicitation and whether such solicitation is in the interest of, and not inimical to, the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 3, 5-10-1978; Ord. of 9-14-1984, § 3)  
Sec. 38-53. - Filing false application. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person knowingly to file, or to cause to be filed, an application containing one or more false statements. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 4, 5-10-1978)  
Sec. 38-54. - Standards for granting or denial. 
The township supervisor shall authorize the permit provided for in this division whenever he shall find the following facts to exist: 
(1)  The applicant is a person or organization which is, as a matter of fact, engaged in charitable, patriotic, civic, educational, philanthropic or religious activity, or engaged in raising funds for distribution to such persons or organizations. 
(2)  The net proceeds derived from the solicitations authorized under the permit shall be used exclusively for charitable, civic, educational, patriotic, philanthropic, or religious purposes. 
(3)  None of the proceeds derived from the solicitations authorized by the permit will be divided in any manner with persons who actually make the solicitations. 
(4)  The proceeds of the solicitations authorized by the permit will not be divided or in any manner shared, either directly or indirectly, with any person or organization other than the applicant for the permit, or the person or organization for whose benefit the solicitation is made. 
(5)  The applicant is of good moral character. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 5, 5-10-1978)  
Sec. 38-55. - Form; term; dates of solicitation. 
Permits issued under this division shall bear the name and address of the person by whom the solicitation is to be made, the date of issuance, the dates within which the permit holder may solicit, and a statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the township of the purpose of the solicitation or of the person conducting the solicitation. The dates within which the permit holder may solicit shall be determined by the township supervisor, but no permit shall grant the right to solicit for a longer period than one year from its date of issuance. In determining the dates of solicitation, the township supervisor shall, whenever possible, honor the dates of solicitation proposed by the applicant, and shall only alter such dates when the dates proposed by the applicant would conflict with other solicitations previously authorized, and where simultaneous solicitations by two or more groups would tend to be confusing to the public. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 6, 5-10-1978)  
Sec. 38-56. - Fees. 
At the time when application is made for a permit under this division there shall be paid to the township treasurer the sum established by resolution to cover the cost of an investigation into the qualifications of the applicant, as provided in this division. There shall be no further charge for the permit, but a sum established by resolution shall be paid for each facsimile copy of the permit that is desired. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 7, 5-10-1978)  
Sec. 38-57. - Transfer. 
Any permit approved and issued under this division shall be nontransferable; provided, however, that this shall not prevent any permittee from using any number of solicitors and representatives. The township supervisor may, at his discretion, require that each solicitor and representative shall carry a facsimile copy of such permit while engaged in solicitation. All permits and facsimile copies shall be returned to the township clerk within two days of the date of expiration. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 8, 5-10-1978)  
Sec. 38-58. - Representing that permit constitutes endorsement by township. 
No person shall represent that the granting of a permit under this division is an endorsement by the township of the particular organization involved, and any such representation is hereby declared to be a misrepresentation of fact and subject to the provisions for revocation of the permit as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 9, 5-10-1978)  
Sec. 38-59. - Suspension or revocation. 
If, upon receipt of written information or upon his own investigation, the township supervisor has reason to believe that any officer, agent or representative of a permittee under this division is misrepresenting facts or making untrue statements, or has misrepresented facts or made untrue statements, either with words or by implication, with regard to solicitations or the purposes thereof, or has made untrue statements in the application, or that in any other way the solicitations have been conducted or are being conducted in violation of any part of this article and not in conformity with the intent and purpose of this article, then the township supervisor shall immediately suspend such permit. Before any permit is revoked, the township supervisor shall cause to be mailed to the permit holder a notice that a hearing is to be had before the township board. Such notice shall be mailed or served upon the permittee personally, at least 24 hours before the hearing. At such hearing, the facts shall be ascertained, and the facts shall be reported to the township board at its next meeting. If the township board shall find that any of the reasons set forth in this section for revoking the permit exist, the permit shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 45, § 10, 5-10-1978)  
Secs. 38-60—38-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS 
 
Sec. 38-81. - Commercial peddlers, solicitors, transient merchants. 
(a)  Definitions. Except as may otherwise be provided or clearly implied by context, all terms shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Peddler. A person who goes, or causes another person to go, from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the purpose of offering for sale, displaying, or exposing for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering immediately upon sale, the goods, wares, products, food or beverage products, merchandise, or other personal property that the person is carrying or otherwise transporting. The term "peddler" shall mean the same as the term "hawker." 
Person. Any natural individual, group, organization, corporation, company, partnership, or association. As applied to groups, organizations, corporations, companies, partnerships, and associations, the term shall include each member, officer, or partner. 
Regular business day. Any day during which the township office is normally open for the purpose of conducting public business. Holidays defined by state law shall not be counted as regular business days. 
Solicitor. A person who goes, or causes another person to go, from house-to-house, door-to-door, business-to-business, street-to-street, or any other type of place-to-place, for the purpose of obtaining or attempting to obtain orders for goods, wares, products, merchandise, other personal property, or services of which he or she may be carrying or transporting samples, or that may be described in a catalog or by other means, and for which delivery or performance shall occur at a later time. The absence of samples or catalogs shall not remove a person from the scope of this provision if the actual purpose of the person's activity is to obtain or attempt to obtain orders as discussed above. The term shall mean the same as the term "canvasser." 
Transient merchant. A person who temporarily sets up business out of a vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store front for the purpose of exposing or displaying for sale, selling or attempting to sell, and delivering, goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personal property and who does not remain or intend to remain in any one location for more than 14 consecutive days. 
(b)  Exceptions to definitions. 
(1)  For the purpose of the requirements of this section, the terms "peddler," "solicitor," and "transient merchant" shall not apply to any person selling or attempting to sell at wholesale any goods, wares, products, merchandise, or other personal property to a retailer of the items being sold by the wholesaler. 
(2)  In addition, persons conducting the type of sales commonly known as garage sales, rummage sales, or estate sales, as well as those persons participating in an organized multi-person bazaar or flea market and minor children selling lemonade or other products on residential property owned or rented by their parent(s), shall be exempt from the definitions of "peddler," "solicitor," and "transient merchant," as shall be anyone conducting an auction as a properly licensed auctioneer, or any officer of the court conducting a court-ordered sale. Exemption from the definitions for the scope of this section shall not excuse any person from complying with any other applicable statutory provision or local ordinance. 
(c)  Registration. All solicitors, peddlers and transient merchants shall be required to register with the township and obtain a certificate of registration prior to conducting business as a peddler, solicitor or transient merchant in the township. Registration shall be at the township office at 300 Dunlap Road, Oxford, Michigan on any regular business day on a form supplied by the township. The registration fee shall be $100.00 for the period of one year from the date of issuance of a certificate of registration. Any applicant seeking to do business beyond that time period must re-register and pay the registration fee annually. By signing a registration form, all registrants shall thereby agree that they have been provided with a copy of the township ordinance pertaining to commercial peddlers, solicitors, and transient merchants and have read it and agree to comply with the terms of the ordinance. 
(d)  Persons ineligible for a certificate of registration. No certificate of registration shall be granted if the applicant: 
(1)  Has been the subject of an action by a consumer protection agency or state attorney general's office that directly relates to a pattern of disregard of consumer rights in the conduct of business; 
(2)  Has had a registration, license and/or identification card for being a solicitor, peddler, or transient merchant revoked by the township within three years before the application date; 
(3)  Has knowingly falsified or misrepresented information on the registration application. 
(e)  Registration application consideration. No later than ten working days after the submission of a fully completed registration application, the township clerk shall accept or deny the registration application in accordance with this section. If the application is denied, the township shall notify the applicant of the determination in writing. The written notice shall be mailed to the applicant at the address provided in the application and it shall inform the applicant of the applicant's right, within 20 days of receipt of the notice by the applicant, to request an appeal of the township's determination to the township board. If an appeal to the township board is timely received by the township, the hearing before the township board shall take place at the next regularly scheduled township board meeting provided the township received the notice of appeal not less than 14 calendar days before such township board meeting. 
(f)  Prohibited activities. No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall conduct business in any of the following manners: 
(1)  Calling attention to his or her business or items to be sold by means of blowing any horn or whistle, ringing any bell, crying out, or by any other noise, as to be unreasonably audible within an enclosed structure. 
(2)  Obstructing the free flow of either vehicular or pedestrian traffic on any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public right-of-way. 
(3)  Conducting business in a way that would violate any township ordinance or state law or regulation. 
(4)  Failing to provide proof of license or registration, and identification, when requested; or using the license or registration of another person. 
(5)  Making any false or misleading statements about the product or service being sold, including untrue statements of endorsement. No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant shall claim to have the endorsement of the township solely based on the township having issued a license or certificate of registration to that person. 
(6)  Remaining on the property of another when requested to leave. 
(g)  Hours. Suggested hours of conducting business should be no earlier than 9:00 a.m. and no later than 8:00 p.m. 
(h)  Exclusions by placard. No peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant, unless invited to do so by the property owner or tenant, shall enter the property of another for the purpose of conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant when the property is marked with a sign or placard purchased from the township stating "no solicitors". No person other than the property owner or tenant shall remove, deface, or otherwise tamper with any sign or placard under this section. 
(i)  Copy of ordinance and list of those purchasing signs from township. Upon registering, all solicitors, peddlers, and transient merchants shall be provided with a copy of this ordinance and a list of those who have purchased "no solicitors" signs from the township who have agreed to be included on the list. 
(j)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates the provision of this section that requires registration with the township and obtaining a certificate of registration prior to conducting business as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant in the township is responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined by Michigan law and is subject to a civil fine as follows: 
a.  For the first offense, there will be a $100.00 fine, which will be waived if the violator registers at Oxford Township within ten calendar days. 
b.  For the second offense, there will be a $250.00 fine and the violator must immediately register at the Oxford Township offices. 
c.  For the third offense, there will be a $500.00 fine and the violator must immediately register at the Oxford Township offices. 
d.  For the fourth offense, there will be a $500.00 fine and the violator will be barred from any future registration as a peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant in Oxford Township. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in section 38-81(j)(1) above, any person who violates any of the provisions of this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined by Michigan law and subject to a civil fine of not more than $500.00 plus costs, which may include all direct and indirect expenses to which the township has been put in connection with the violation. In no case, however, shall costs of less than $9.00 or more than $500.00 be ordered. 
(3)  The township may further pursue injunctive relief or other remedies permitted at law to enforce this section. Each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. The township authorizes the county sheriff's department to issue citations for violations of this section. 
(k)  Severability. If any section, subsection, clause, phrase or portion of this section is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion of this section, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 44.001, § 1.A., 11-14-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 44.001, § 1.A., adopted November 14, 2018, repealed former section 38-81, which pertained to going upon residential property without invitation and derived from Ord. No. 44, adopted May 10, 1978.  
Chapter 42 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessment saved from repeal, § 1-11(9); any ordinance dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley saved from repeal, § 1-11(10); any ordinance establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk saved from repeal, § 1-11(11); buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 22; smoking in places of public assembly, § 26-13; obstructing public ways or buildings, § 30-96; parks and recreation, ch. 34; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 38; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 46; design standards for streets in subdivisions, § 46-132; improvements to streets in subdivisions, § 46-162; improvements to sidewalks in subdivisions, § 46-164; telecommunications, ch. 54; telecommunications providers and rights-of-way, § 54-121 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 62; waterways, ch. 66; zoning, app. B. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRIC AND GAS SUPPLY FRANCHISES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 62; franchises, app. A. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 42-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Customer means a residential, commercial or industrial end-user of electricity or natural gas in the township. 
Disruption means a physical change, modification, alteration, disturbance, injury and/or damage to or in a right-of-way, including but not limited to construction, installation, location, maintenance, modification, alteration, replacement or repair of facilities, and the removal or alteration of a right-of-way surface grade or material, tree, sign, marker, hydrant or other material or object. 
Facility and facilities mean any overhead or underground cable, wire, line, main, pipe, pole, building, structure, or equipment and all other manmade or man-placed materials or objects or combinations thereof, for the transmission or distribution of electricity or natural gas to customers. 
Franchise means a nonexclusive limited authorization to transact a local business and the right to incidental use of right-of-way under this article. 
Grantee means the holder of a valid and effective franchise granted by the township. 
MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission. 
Right-of-way means any and all public right-of-way, streets, highways, roads, sidewalks, alleys, thoroughfares, public easements and public places located within the township. 
Supplier means a person that supplies electricity (electric generation) or natural gas to customers in the township through facilities in the township in which the person has no ownership, operation, leasehold, repair or maintenance rights or responsibilities. 
Utility means a person that owns, operates and maintains facilities used to provide electricity or natural gas to customers in the township. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 1.3, 9-13-2000) ;rn0;2; Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 42-32. - Purpose of article; findings. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 29 of article 7 of the Michigan Constitution of 1963, use of the highways, streets, alleys and other public places for operation of a public utility requires the consent of the township and the transaction of local business in the township by a public utility requires that a franchise first be obtained. This article is adopted for the purpose of conforming and providing the process, terms and conditions for suppliers of electricity and natural gas to obtain the required consents and franchises and to fully exercise the township's constitutional authority, which includes the reasonable control of its highways, streets, alleys and public places. 
(b)  As a result of regulator changes that have or may occur, and interpretations of existing laws, at the state and federal levels, specifically including the Michigan public service commission (referred to in this section as "deregulation"), the persons that may be authorized to supply electricity and natural gas to customers in the township are no longer limited to the public utility that owns and operates the facilities used to deliver electricity and natural gas to customers. This article is adopted in recognition of the deregulation which has and may continue to occur, with the intent and purpose of confirming that all persons supplying electricity or natural gas to customers in the township are required to have a franchise as provided in this article, regardless of whether it is required as a condition of state or federal regulatory permits, approvals or certificates. 
(c)  The township will incur costs and expenses in reviewing and acting on franchise requests, and, upon granting a franchise, monitoring and enforcing its terms and conditions. Such costs and expenses should be paid by franchise applicants and holders as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 1.2, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-33. - Franchise required; effect of franchise. 
Being a supplier of electricity or natural gas to customers in the township is the transaction of local business of a public utility, which shall not be done without a franchise. A franchise granted under this article constitutes the township's consent to the grantee's limited and incidental use of right-of-way to the extent that facilities are located within it. 
(Ord. No. 109, §§ 1.4, 1.5, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-34. - Application requirements. 
Applications for franchises shall be made to the clerk by providing the following written information and documents: 
(1)  A nonrefundable franchise application fee of $3,500.00. 
(2)  The name, age if an individual, and address of the applicant, and, if the applicant is not a natural person, the date, state and form of business organization. 
(3)  A description of the local business the applicant proposes to transact. 
(4)  Copies of certificates, articles, permits, approvals, licenses, the last annual report and other written documentation of the applicant's lawful incorporation, organization, existence, authorization and good standing to conduct its proposed business in the state. If any of the listed items have not been received, documentation that they have been applied for must be provided. 
(5)  If applicable, the applicant's minimum quantity requirements of existing and potential customers. 
(6)  The length of the franchise term being requested, which shall have a duration of not longer than ten years. 
(7)  An acknowledgment and agreement to accept and comply with a franchise in the form of an ordinance that contains and incorporates by reference all of the terms and conditions contained in division 2 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 2.1, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-35. - Processing of application; adoption of franchise ordinance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a franchise application, the clerk shall schedule the application and a proposed ordinance that would grant the franchise requested, for introduction at the first available township board meeting. 
(b)  The applicant or its representative shall receive notice and may appear at the meeting when its franchise request is introduced. If the application meets the requirements of this article, the proposed ordinance will be accepted for introduction and scheduled for possible adoption at the first meeting thereafter that allows time to satisfy any publication and legal requirements for adoption of a valid franchise ordinance. 
(c)  After all publication and other legal requirements for adoption of a valid franchise ordinance have been satisfied, at a regular or special meeting, the township board may adopt, reject or table adoption of a proposed franchise ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 2.2, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-36. - Acceptance by grantee. 
After a franchise ordinance is adopted and all publication and other legal requirements for it to become effective are satisfied, a certified copy of the ordinance shall be delivered or mailed to the approved grantee together with a written acceptance for the approved grantee to sign under oath, confirming its acknowledgment, agreement and acceptance of the franchise and all of its terms and conditions. If the required signed and notarized acceptance is not delivered to the clerk within 30 days of the delivery or mailing of the franchise ordinance and agreement to the grantee, the effectiveness of the ordinance will be automatically terminated. Upon the approved grantee's timely acceptance of the franchise ordinance, it shall constitute a contract between the township and the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 2.3, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-37. - Provisions of article to be incorporated in franchise ordinance. 
Unless amended by the individual franchise ordinance, all of the definitions in section 42-31, the terms and conditions in division 2 of this article and section 42-38 and the penalties and relief in section 42-41 shall apply and be incorporated by reference as part of every supplier's individual franchise ordinance. Any amendments to this article shall be automatically included in every franchise. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 2.4, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-38. - Term; renewal. 
(a)  Term. No franchise granted under this article shall be for longer than ten years. The term of each franchise shall be stated in the individual franchise ordinance. 
(b)  Renewals and extensions. There is no right to a franchise renewal or extension. Franchise renewal or extension may be applied for and approved as provided in sections 42-34 through 42-37. 
(Ord. No. 109, §§ 4.1, 4.2, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-39. - Provisions of article do not constitute waiver of rights by township. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as a waiver of any of the rights, remedies and/or authority of the township pursuant to any laws, ordinances, codes or regulations of the township, and the township reserves the right to exercise all authority and take any and all action granted to it by any constitution, law, township ordinance, code and/or regulation. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit and/or preclude the township from exercising its right of eminent domain. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 6.1, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-40. - Notices. 
Any notices required to be sent to the grantee by this article may be delivered, or may be sent by first class mail to the grantee, at the address listed in the franchise application or such other address as the grantee has provided to the clerk in writing. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 6.2, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-41. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Transacting business without franchise. Any person transacting business without a franchise required by this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall pay a fine in the following amount: 
(1)  First offense: $3,500.00. 
(2)  Second or subsequent offense: $5,000.00. 
(b)  Restoration of damaged right-of-way. Any person in violation of the franchise requirement of this article or a franchise issued under it who damages a right-of-way shall be responsible for restoration of the right-of-way to the condition that existed prior to the violation. If such person fails or refuses to restore the right-of-way after 30 days' notice from the township, and if the township determines that the civil infraction remedy is inadequate under the circumstances, the township may initiate proceedings in the appropriate court to recover the cost estimated to accomplish the restoration, or recover such costs as have been actually expended by the township in achieving the restoration, as the case may be. Such costs shall include finance and reasonable administrative costs estimated or incurred. 
(c)  Separate offenses. Each occurrence of a violation, and each day a violation exists, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  Nuisances . Violations of this article or a franchise issued under it are considered to be a nuisance per se with such violations and correction of any conditions resulting from violations subject to abatement by injunctive or other appropriate order by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(e)  Election of remedies. Violations of this article and franchises issued under it subject the violator to franchise revocation, if applicable, and township enforcement through one or more of the remedies provided herein, and the election by the township to pursue one form of remedy does not waive or restrict the township's option to pursue other remedies at the same or later time. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 5, 9-13-2000)  
Secs. 42-42—42-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL FRANCHISE TERMS AND CONDITIONS 
 
Sec. 42-61. - Rights granted by franchise. 
Subject to all terms and conditions in this division and the individual franchise ordinance, a franchise grants the grantee the right to transact a local business of supplying electricity or gas, as designated in the individual franchise ordinance, to customers in the township using facilities of an identified utility to the extent that it is lawful under applicable legislation, administrative rules, including those of the MPSC, and express or implied contract or agreement with the utility. A franchise does not grant the right to own, construct, operate, maintain or repair facilities in the township. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3.1, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-62. - Revocation or termination. 
The term of a franchise, which shall be stated in the individual franchise ordinance, is subject to revocation at the will of the township, and the franchise may be surrendered and terminated by the grantee on 30 days' notice to the township. Any unsatisfied obligations of the grantee to the township shall survive revocation or termination and be enforceable by the township as provided in the franchise, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3.2, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-63. - Franchise nonexclusive. 
A franchise is nonexclusive and does not restrict the township from approving additional franchises or establish any priority between grantees to transact local business and the incidental use of right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3.3, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-64. - Assignment. 
A franchise may not be sold, leased, assigned, transferred or used by any person other than the grantee without the written approval of the township by ordinance amendment. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3.4, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-65. - Compliance with laws and ordinances. 
A franchise requires grantee compliance with all applicable current and future township, state and federal ordinances, laws, rules and regulations and any permit, approval, certificate or license requirements and conditions under such laws, and shall not be construed as a waiver by the grantee of any of its rights under state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3.5, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-66. - Disruption or obstruction of right-of-way. 
Disruption or obstruction of and physical entry in or upon a right-of-way by a grantee or its personnel or equipment is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3.6, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-67. - Franchise subject to rights of township. 
A franchise and the rights granted by it shall at all times be subject to the paramount rights of the township in its right-of-way, and shall be subject to immediate suspension or termination by the township in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3.7, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-68. - Effect of vacation of right-of-way. 
If a right-of-way is vacated, discontinued, abandoned, terminated or released, a grantee's incidental right to use the right-of-way shall immediately terminate. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3.8, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-69. - Rights of township in case of public emergencies. 
Without prior notice, the township has the right to remove, damage, destroy or otherwise disrupt and/or order a cessation of use of facilities used by the grantee or its customers, when necessary, due to a public emergency. For purposes of this section, public emergency means any situation which, in the opinion of the township official authorized to declare an emergency, presents an immediate threat to persons or property in the township. The township shall have no liability or responsibility for repairing or restoring facilities damaged by actions taken under this section. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3.9, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-70. - Township's authority to regulate and control right-of-way. 
A franchise shall not be construed in any manner as a waiver or limitation of the township's discretion and authority or rights to regulate and control the use of right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3.10, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-71. - Assumption of risk by grantee. 
A grantee assumes all risks of damages or injuries to its officers, employees, agents and contractors from dangers of right-of-way conditions, if any. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3.11, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-72. - Nonliability of township. 
The township and its officials, employees, agents and contractors shall have no liability for damages or injuries to any person or property, including the grantee, that arise from granting, enforcement or exercise of rights under a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3.12, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-73. - Indemnification of township. 
A grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, defend, indemnify and hold harmless the township and its officials, employees, agents, contractors, right-of-way and property from all claims and liability for damages or injury to persons or property caused by or resulting from the actions or omissions of the grantee and/or its officers, employees, agents and contractors. This obligation extends to all costs and expenses, including attorneys' fees, that may be incurred by the beneficiaries of the grantee's obligation. The township shall notify the grantee of any claim or liability that is covered by the grantee's obligations, and shall not be prevented from participating in the defense of any claim by its own attorney, the cost of which shall be the grantee's responsibility. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3.13, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-74. - Insurance. 
No franchise shall be granted unless the grantee shows evidence of having obtained, and continued in full force and effect, public liability insurance in the amount of not less than $1,000,000.00 for property damage, $1,000,000.00 for injury to one person and $2,000,000.00 for injury arising out of one occurrence. On its policy, the township shall be included as an additional insured. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3.14, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-75. - Information to be provided to township. 
The grantee shall provide and update written disclosure to the township of its contact person(s), address, telephone numbers, fax numbers, E-mail addresses, if applicable, and procedures for service requests and complaints, together with a written disclosure of pricing, billing, warranty and contract rates, terms, policies and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3.15, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-76. - Supply requirements. 
The grantee shall supply electricity or natural gas in accordance with all applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3.16, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-77. - Franchise fees. 
Every three years commencing after December 31, 2001, the township has the right, after providing prior notice and an opportunity to comment to the grantee, to require the payment by the grantee, on a periodic basis, of a franchise fee, provided that any such fee is applied equally to all grantees under this article that are supplying the same commodity (electricity or natural gas) as the grantee. Such a franchise fee would be an additional franchise term and condition, to be adopted and presented to the grantee for acknowledgment, agreement and acceptance as an ordinance amendment as provided in section 42-36. In any such fee review, the grantee shall disclose and the township may consider if the grantee pays a franchise fee, charge or other periodic payment for a franchise to any other Michigan municipalities and the manner in which such fees are computed. It is a condition of a franchise that the grantee notify the township of any such fees that are paid, and the township shall have the right to inspect the grantee's books and records to monitor, enforce and determine the grantee's compliance and the accuracy of amounts paid or to be paid by the grantee under this section. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3.17, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-78. - Reimbursement of enforcement costs. 
The grantee shall reimburse the township for any costs it incurs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, in enforcing franchise terms and conditions. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3.18, 9-13-2000)  
Sec. 42-79. - Reservation of township's rights. 
A franchise shall at all times be subject to the rights of the township, which are hereby reserved, to make all regulations, take all actions and do all things provided for in the Charter Township Act (MCL 42.1 et seq.) or by law. 
(Ord. No. 109, § 3.19, 9-13-2000)  
Secs. 42-90—42-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SAFETY PATHS AND SIDEWALKS 
 
Sec. 42-101. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Charter Township of Oxford Safety Path and Sidewalk Regulation Ordinance," and it shall be deemed sufficient in any action for the enforcement of the provisions hereof to define the same by such short title and by reference to the number hereof. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 1, 2-11-2004)  
Sec. 42-102. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article shall be: 
(1)  In the consideration and enactment of this article, the township board finds that there are public safety paths which are part of the township system intended for general public use during times when accumulations of snow and/or ice are not on the safety paths; and, that there are sidewalks that are not part of the township's system of safety paths as shown on the official safety path map, maintained by the township. It is the intent of the township board to finance the maintenance and repair of safety paths from the safety path fund or through a safety path millage, if adopted, and to finance needed maintenance and repair of sidewalks by special assessment. 
(2)  To further secure and protect the general welfare and safety of the citizens and other persons within the township. 
(3)  To regulate the development and construction of safety paths within the township, by reference to the township's adopted design standard ordinance, article IV of this chapter. 
(4)  To provide for the maintenance of those safety paths, as well as signage along them. 
(5)  To authorize the issuance of permits for the construction of safety paths. 
(6)  To authorize the collection of fees for the construction of safety paths. 
(7)  To provide for penalties upon the violation of these provisions. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 2, 2-11-2004)  
Sec. 42-103. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section: 
Board means the board of trustees of the Charter Township of Oxford. 
Commission means the planning commission of the Charter Township of Oxford. 
Committee means the safety path committee of the Charter Township of Oxford. 
Condition of disrepair means having any one or more of the following characteristics; provided, however, that the existence of any one or more of these characteristics shall not create a presumption or other indication that such characteristics were the cause of any injury or damage which may occur: 
(1)  Hole. Place where the surface is missing; 
(2)  Gap. Separation of material proportion on the surface of the safety path or sidewalk itself or between the safety path or sidewalk and the adjacent surface; 
(3)  Rise or drop. Abrupt change in grade where one surface vertically separates from an adjacent surface; 
(4)  Tilt. Incline where the safety path or sidewalk surface has rotated and is no longer oriented in gradient or cross slope; 
(5)  Swell or depression. Place where the surface undulates due to uplift or subsidence of underlying materials; 
(6)  Object or debris. Obstruction that covers some or all of the surface of the safety path or sidewalk; 
(7)  Suspension. Object or material hanging over the surface of the sidewalk or safety path below a height of 8.5 feet. 
Developer means a person causing a development to be created on property they own or have interest in. 
Development means any land development project requiring approval of a site plan, condominium site plan, or subdivision plat in accordance with Ordinance No. 67 or chapter 46, article III of this Code. 
Existing fixed object means an object that cannot be easily moved without the assistance of mechanical tools and/or without causing destruction to the property to which it is attached, including, but not limited to, buildings, driveways, utility poles, and fences. 
Master plan means the Charter Township of Oxford Master Plan; prepared and adopted under Act No. 168 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1959, as amended. 
Owner means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or other legal entity or combination of them which may hold any ownership interest in land whether recorded or not. 
Pathway, for purposes of this article only, shall be synonymous with the term "safety path." 
Person means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or other legal entity. 
Report means minutes of any meeting of the safety path committee, prepared by the committee. 
Road, public means a road accepted by dedication or otherwise by the road commission for the county. 
Safety path plan means the recommended and approved plan showing all planned safety paths, existing or future, incorporated as a portion of the open space and greenway plan that has been adopted as part of the township's master plan. 
Sidewalk and safety path shall be synonymous in terms of their basic substantive meaning, being a constructed surface located in a public right-of-way, but separate from any improved portion of a roadway or highway, dedicated primarily for use by pedestrians and persons operating nonmotorized vehicles. For purposes of regulation under this article only, sidewalks and safety paths shall be broken into two sub-classifications, as follows: 
(1)  A "safety path" shall mean a certain type of sidewalk constructed for the benefit of the general public in the township, as shown on the official safety path map maintained by the township. The use of the term "safety path" itself does not mean, and shall not be construed or relied upon in any way as meaning, that such safety paths are inherently safe or in a safe condition. Instead, the reference to "safety" in the labeling of such paths is nothing other than a reference to the fact that such pathways are typically considered to be safer for pedestrians to use than the improved portions of road on which motor vehicles travel. 
(2)  "Sidewalk" shall mean and refer to all other constructed surfaces located in the public right-of-way dedicated primarily for pedestrian usage, not including those sidewalks being referenced above as "safety paths," and constructed primarily as dedicated pedestrian paths within subdivisions or adjacent to street lots. 
Street lots means one or more lots which are not part of a formally created subdivision, but which are part of a neighborhood where a sidewalk has been constructed to serve the lots within such neighborhood. 
Subdivision means the lots, units, and other areas which are part of a development platted under the Michigan Land Division Act (or predecessor Act) or created under the Condominium Act. 
Vegetation means trees, shrubs, bushes, flowers, weeds, or any other type of plant growth. 
(b)  Terms not expressly defined above shall have their customary dictionary meanings, taking into consideration the context and intent of this article. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 3, 2-11-2004)  
Sec. 42-104. - Safety path development. 
The township's safety path plan, as incorporated into the open space and greenway plan, shall guide the development of a system of planned safety paths in the township and shall be updated from time to time as an amendment to, or in conjunction with, the master plan, in accordance with MCL 125.321 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 4, 2-11-2004)  
Sec. 42-105. - Safety path plan implementation/developer's responsibilities. 
(a)  All developers of property along either side of a public roadway shall, upon development of their property, construct a pathway that is located within the public road right-of-way and extends the full width of their property, in accordance with the design and construction standards adopted under article IV of this chapter. 
(b)  In lieu of constructing the pathway, and only with the recommendation of the planning commission and safety path committee and approval of the township board, a developer may be allowed to pay to the township a sum of money equivalent to the actual cost of construction of the path, including permit, engineering, and inspection fees. Except as otherwise provided below, the actual cost of construction, including fees, shall be determined by the township engineer, and shall be based on recent bids received by the township for similar types of path construction, except that, in those cases where the construction of a safety path as otherwise required herein would be impracticable due to the physical nature and/or layout of the road and/or the property, the township board may waive or reduce the required payment accordingly. All funds collected under this subsection shall be deposited into the safety path fund and used for the construction of the safety path system. 
In all cases in which payment for required safety paths is allowed in lieu of construction, a written contract, drafted by the township and indicating the sum of money to be paid to the township and associated provisions, shall be executed by both the developer and the township as a condition of either final site plan or final preliminary plat approval. All provisions of said contract, including the financial contribution to the township safety path fund, shall be satisfied prior to issuance of any building permits by the township building department. 
(c)  Unless the township board has allowed a developer to pay a sum of money to the township in lieu of constructing a pathway under subsection (b), construction of the safety path shall be completed for each phase (if applicable) prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for any building structure located on the parcel adjacent to which the safety path is to be located. The developer shall be responsible for securing all necessary permits, paying all necessary fees, and obtaining necessary inspections from the township, the road commission for the county, and/or the state department of transportation. 
In order to ensure completion of the path, the developer shall deposit cash to be placed into the township's trust and agency fund, in the amount of the estimated cost of the safety path plus ten percent to guarantee the completion of such path. The cost estimate shall be approved by the township engineer. The escrow amount shall be returned to the developer upon completion of the safety pathway and approval by the township engineer and building official. 
(d)  Anyone constructing a safety path in the township shall first obtain a permit from the township building department, using forms provided by the same. A permit shall be granted by the building department only upon determining that the provisions of this article and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the township have been met. A township review escrow shall be established in accordance with the schedule of fees and escrow charges, for applicable portions of site plan review, and shall be deposited with the township, along with plan submittal. The permit fee shall be one-half of one percent of the construction cost as agreed upon by the township engineer and the developer, but not fewer than [$]100.00. Also $500.00 shall be placed in escrow, per 1,000 feet of pathway ($500.00 minimum), toward the anticipated cost of three inspections by the township. Any unused portion of such escrows shall be returned to the developer. 
(e)  In addition to the above construction, permit, and inspection fees, the developer shall place, with the township, a cash performance bond in the amount of 25 percent of the estimated cost of the safety path construction, as agreed upon by the township engineer and the developer, to be placed in the township's trust and agency fund and to be held for one year following the final inspection of such path by the township engineer. At the expiration of the one year period, the bond will be reimbursed to the developer, provided that no damage has been done to the safety path by construction activities and that the path is in essentially the same condition as it was at the time of find inspection by the township engineer. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 5, 2-11-2004)  
Sec. 42-106. - Safety path construction standards. 
Safety paths shall be constructed according to the standards and specifications adopted under article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 6, 2-11-2004)  
Sec. 42-107. - Use of safety paths. 
(a)  Safety paths shall generally be restricted to nonmotorized use, including, but not limited to, bicyclists, pedestrians, joggers, skaters, and wheelchair users. It shall be unlawful to operate or park a motor vehicle, off-road recreational vehicle, motorcycle, moped, golf cart and the like within the township's safety path system; however, the use of motorized wheelchairs and battery-powered vehicles designed for the play of young children shall be permitted. 
(b)  Seasonal use. The township, in its discretion, may decline to keep any or all safety paths clear of ice and/or snow during the periods of such accumulation. Any person who shall use a safety path during such a period shall do so at his or her own risk, and the township shall not be liable for any injury or loss incurred by such use. The township may also keep any or all portions of the safety path system closed because of such accumulation or for any other reason. No person shall use or traverse such a closed portion of any safety path, and the township shall not be liable for any injury or loss incurred by reason of such use or traversal. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or allow a horse, or other hooved mammal, upon a safety path or sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 7, 2-11-2004)  
Sec. 42-108. - Safety path maintenance. 
(a)  The developer who is responsible for the construction of any section of approved township safety path shall be responsible for the maintenance of such path for a period of one year, commencing on the date of the path's final inspection by the township engineer and expiring on the one year anniversary date of such inspection. This expiration date is intended to coincide with the bond reimbursement date, at which time the township, upon approvals from the township engineer as to the acceptable condition of such path, shall take over the maintenance of such path and the developer's responsibility shall end, excepting for subsections (c) and (d). 
(b)  The developer of real property parcel adjacent to which a safety path traverses shall be responsible for the following maintenance during the duration of the one-year period noted under subsection (a), above: 
(1)  Repair of surface cracks, upheaval, or deterioration. 
(2)  Repair of any damage caused by the elements or by any person. 
(c)  Owners of developed property abutting the pathway shall keep vegetation trimmed so that no portion of said vegetation extends over the safety path unless such vegetation is a minimum of 8.5 feet above the safety path. 
(d)  Owners of developed property shall keep the portion of the safety path that runs adjacent to their property free and clear of all debris, litter, leaves or branches, machinery, vehicles, equipment, junk, and other items which may obstruct the use of the safety path. 
(e)  Any person who negligently, intentionally, or maliciously causes damage to the safety path shall be responsible for either one of the following: 
(1)  Repair and/or replacement of the affected portion of the safety path, or 
(2)  The cost of repair to the safety path. 
Should the responsible person choose to repair and/or replace the safety path, said repair shall be made in accordance with the standards adopted under article IV of this chapter, within 90 days, weather conditions permitting, following issuance of a township construction permit. 
If the responsible person opts to pay the cost of repair, notice of the actual cost of such repair shall be sent to the responsible person by the township clerk, with a demand for payment. If said person fails to pay such costs within 30 days after notice, the township board may authorize civil action to collect such costs. Any costs incurred by the township in connection with this civil action shall be borne by the responsible person and/or party. 
(f)  Removal of animal excrement required. It shall be unlawful for an owner, or temporary custodian, of any domesticated animal to allow or permit such animal to soil, defile, defecate, or to commit any nuisance on a sidewalk or safety path unless: 
(1)  Such owner, or temporary custodian, shall immediately remove all droppings deposited by such animal by any sanitary method, and for such purposes shall possess a container of sufficient size to collect and remove the above mentioned droppings and exhibit the container, if requested by any official empowered to enforce this article; and 
(2)  Such owner, or temporary custodian, shall deposit said droppings or container of droppings in a toilet or a receptacle ordinarily used for garbage and covered by a lid or in an otherwise lawful and sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 8, 2-11-2004)  
Sec. 42-109. - Sidewalk installation and maintenance. 
(a)  The township board, pursuant to MCL 41.288a, may order the construction, maintenance, or repair of sidewalks in the township because of health, safety, or general welfare of the residents of the township. 
(b)  The following regulations shall apply to sidewalks in the township: 
(1)  In exercising its powers to compel the construction, repair or maintenance of sidewalks under MCL 41.288a, the township shall follow the procedures described below: 
a.  The township shall obtain the approval of the state department of transportation or of the road commission for the county with regard to undertaking the construction, maintenance, and/or repair of sidewalks in a right-of-way within their respective jurisdiction. 
b.  A plan and cost estimate for construction, maintenance, and/or repair shall be prepared, along with an assessment roll based upon such cost estimate, allocating the cost of the project including the cost of estimate preparation, inspection, engineering, legal, finance and administration, to the properties involved (e.g., the properties within the subdivision), and a notice of a public hearing shall be sent to owners of such lots, units and parcels. The notice shall include a basic description of the project and the cost estimate, and the tentative assessment amount, and shall be sent by first class mail to the last known address of the owner of the properties based upon the current tax assessment records in the township. 
c.  The township will also deliver the "notice of public hearing," described above under subsection b., to any affected homeowner's association registered to receive such notice. 
(2)  Following the public hearing, if the township board determines that the construction, maintenance, and/or repair of certain sidewalks is necessary due to being in a condition of disrepair, or due to one or more other identified reasons, the board may adopt a resolution confirming the assessment roll and determining to contract for such construction, maintenance, and/or repair, and assess the costs to the properties involved in proportion to the respective benefits received, payable in five annual installments, with interest; provided, however, prior to entering into such contract, the township board may, if requested in writing by persons representing a number of properties within the area to be assessed deemed sufficient by the township board, provide an opportunity within a reasonable time set by the township or the respective property owners involved to have the sidewalks constructed, maintained, and/or repaired at their own expense, according to specifications directed by the township. 
(3)  A notice of assessment shall be sent to each property involved following entry into a contract for the construction, maintenance, and/or repair. If the amount of the contract is more or less than the cost estimate, the amount of the assessment upon each property shall be adjusted accordingly, provided, however, if the cost difference is more than 20 percent higher than the estimate, the contract shall not be entered into, and the assessment shall not be finalized unless and until a new public hearing is noticed and held by the township board in the manner provided above. 
The township shall not exercise its powers under MCL 41.288a and/or subsection (a) of this section to compel, or finance, the construction of a sidewalk in such a way as to subject the owner of land containing a residential structure, such structure being over three years old, to any assessment or order of construction, unless the owner(s) of the majority of the property subject to such assessment(s) or order(s) shall have petitioned the township for such sidewalk construction. 
(c)  Assessments established under this article shall constitute a lien upon the property assessed and shall be collected, and delinquent assessment payments shall accrue interest and penalties, as provided for in Act No. 188 of the Public Acts of 1954, as amended. 
(d)  Township residents may petition the township for the establishment of a special assessment district to finance the installation of sidewalks pursuant to MCL 41.721 et seq., with such petitions governed by MCL 41.723(2) and (3). 
(Ord. No. 117, § 9, 2-11-2004)  
Sec. 42-110. - Private maintenance and/or repair of sidewalks. 
(a)  Actions or activities that cause a sidewalk to become in a condition of disrepair are prohibited. If an area of sidewalk is in a condition of disrepair resulting from the actions of one or more private property owners, such owner or owners shall repair such area of sidewalk. For purposes of this section, "actions" shall include, but shall not be limited to: surface drainage; on-site construction; vehicular traffic; and other site activities and actions resulting in a condition of disrepair. All repairs shall be made within 90 days, weather permitting, following issuance of a township construction permit, and in accordance with the standards adopted under article IV of this chapter. The following sections shall also apply if a responsible person opts to repair and/or replace a damaged section of safety path under section 42-108(e). 
(b)  If damage or injury is caused as a result of a failure to promptly repair a condition of disrepair, as stated in subsection (a) of this section, above, and if the township had previously provided notice of the condition of disrepair and allowed an opportunity for hearing before the township board, or the board's designee, the owners to whom such notice was sent shall be liable to the township for any damages, costs and expenses incurred by the township, including reasonable attorney fees expended by the township. 
(c)  In addition to the above, the township board, pursuant to MCL 41.288a, may order the repair of such sidewalk or safety paths by the persons whose actions resulted in a condition of disrepair; and, if such repair is not made within the time stated in the order of the township board, and the sidewalk or safety path is within reasonable proximity of the property owned by the breaching party, the township may proceed with the repairs and recover all costs and expenses incurred by the township, plus a reasonable administrative fee, by assessing the property of the owner or owners who failed to make the repairs required under this section. Such assessments shall be made in accordance with the procedure specified, above, in this section. If the party failing to make the required repair does not own the property within reasonable proximity of the sidewalk or safety path to be repaired, the township may seek recovery of all costs and expenses, including reasonable administrative costs and attorney fees, by any lawful means. 
(d)  As a condition to any recovery for injuries sustained by reasons of any defective sidewalk or safety path, the injured person shall serve notice upon the township within the time and in the manner prescribed by law (MCL 691.1404). 
(Ord. No. 117, § 10, 2-11-2004)  
Sec. 42-111. - Prohibition of obstruction of sidewalks and safety paths. 
(a)  No person shall obstruct or cause or permit the obstruction of any sidewalk or safety path in the township by the placement on such sidewalk or safety path of any object, debris or material of any kind or nature, or by suspending any sign, object or material within 8.5 feet above a sidewalk or safety path. This provision is not intended to create an obligation to modify natural accumulations of snow or ice. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply in circumstances in which a person is temporarily loading or unloading a vehicle adjacent to the property, if such person has, if reasonably required, secured a device reasonably calculated to warn users of the sidewalk or safety path of the obstruction so as to avoid injury and/or damage. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 11, 2-11-2004)  
Sec. 42-112. - Safety path signage. 
The safety path committee may develop, in conjunction with the safety path plan, a plan for signage along each section of pathway as it is proposed for construction. The committee may require signs under the following circumstances and for the following reasons: 
(1)  As part of a developer's responsibility in constructing the path as approved by the township engineer. 
(2)  As part of the township's responsibility when the township assumes the maintenance of any portion of each path. 
(3)  To prohibit all motorized vehicles from using the path, excepting: 
a.  Vehicles for the physically disabled designed for use by one individual at a time. 
b.  Light duty maintenance vehicles authorized by the township. 
(4)  To alert pathway traffic to hidden driveways or similar hazards. 
(5)  To alert approaching motorists to the presence of the pathway. 
The standards for signs including, but not limited to, sign size, material, location in relation to the pathway as well as the roadway, height and method of installation shall be in accordance with established county road commission sign standards. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 12, 2-11-2004)  
Sec. 42-113. - Violations. 
A person who violates any provision of this article of any of the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined by state statute, and shall be subject to a civil fine as determined by the court, along with costs which may include all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the township has been put in connection with the enforcement of this article. A person who violates any provision of this article or any of the terms or conditions of a permit shall also be subject to such additional sanctions and judicial orders as are authorized under state law. Each day that a violation of this article of a permit continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the township may pursue any injunctive or other relief, which may be available. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the township in the event of a violation by a person of this article or a permit granted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 117, § 14, 2-11-2004)  
Secs. 42-114—42-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ENGINEERING DESIGN STANDARDS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 42-131. - In general. 
(a)  These engineering design standards are intended to provide a reasonable and proper basis for the design and construction of subdivision and other project site improvements, including sanitary sewer, water main, stormwater management, and paving. Where standard codes are referenced within this article to the extent so referenced, they are adopted by reference. The standards are guidelines to assure high quality and system continuity yet deviation from the standards is at times encouraged to achieve a superior result. Deviation from the standards should be for valid reasons only and a request and justification shall be submitted to the township engineer for review and approval. The township engineer may permit the proposed deviation if the township engineer believes that the proposed deviation would result in an increase in construction safety, an increase in the safety of the final constructed improvement, a more effective operation of the final constructed improvement, minimization of potential negative impacts on one or more other parcels, and/or a more efficient operation of the review process set forth in this article. 
(b)  Extraordinary situations will arise that are not clearly defined by the standards or where the standards contained in this article set forth by their own terms requirements that are general, which may be inappropriate when applied to a particular situation. When such circumstances occur, the decision of the township engineer shall govern, based on the township engineer's appraisal of the safety of the construction and/or operation of the proposed improvement, the effectiveness of the final constructed improvement, and/or the potential negative impacts on one or more other parcels. An applicant may appeal the decision of the township engineer to the township board. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the applicant outlining the reasons why a specific requirement should be modified for a particular site or situation. 
(c)  Where standard codes, acts, and details are referenced in this article to the extent so referenced, they are adopted by reference. 
(d)  Proposed improvement plans are not solely for review and construction but are also used to keep records of utilities for maintenance and future construction. 
(e)  The current county drain commissioner standard detail sheets for water main, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer and any future updates are adopted by reference as part of this article. The township pavement and landscape detail sheets are adopted by resolution. 
(f)  In the administration of this article developers will generally be responsible for complying with the submission requirements except as otherwise intended. However, the proprietor for a project shall be responsible for any violation of this article with respect to this project. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 1.1, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-132. - Definitions. 
The following is a list of words and phrases defined for proper use in interpretation of the engineering design standards. Words and phrases not specifically defined shall rely on their definition in the township's zoning ordinance, land division control ordinance, condominium regulations or its common or standard definition. 
Contractor/developer means the contractor and/or the developer is the person, partnership, corporation responsible for performing the work required by the township in accordance with the township's engineering design standards. 
Design engineer means a professional engineer that is registered in the state responsible for the design of the project and preparation of project drawings. 
Design standards means the applicable standards relevant to the planning, design and construction of infrastructure improvements within the township as adopted and contained in the township's engineering design standards. 
Project drawings/plans include site plans, plats, condominium site plans, project drawings, and plans, detailing the construction plans, requirements, and specifications applicable to the township's engineering design standards. 
Proprietor means a person, public corporation or authority, or a government agency that holds an ownership interest in land, whether recorded or not. 
Township means the Charter Township of Oxford, Michigan. 
Township engineer means the Charter Township of Oxford's engineer, or other township officer, employee or agent acting on behalf of the township in the administration of the township's design standards. 
Township planner means the Charter Township of Oxford's planner, or other township officer, employee or agent acting on behalf of the township in the administration of the township's zoning ordinance. 
Township representative means the Charter Township of Oxford, Michigan, and its officers, employees and agents, including, but not limited to the township board, township planning commission, township staff, township attorney, township engineer, township planner, etc. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 1.2, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-133. - Insurance. 
The proprietor shall cause its contractors to furnish to the township evidence of public liability and property damage insurance coverage with a responsible insurance company which meets the approval of the township in such amounts as will be adequate to protect the public, the township, individual members of the township board, township employees, the township's professional consultants in their individual and corporate capacities, and other persons reasonably exposed, and shall not be less than the limits set forth herein: 
	Type of Insurance 	Limits 
(a) 	Workman's compensation and employers liability 	As required by laws of Michigan 
(b) 	General liability 	$1,000,000.00 per occurrence 
$2,000,000.00 general aggregate 
(c) 	Automotive liability 	$1,000,000.00 per occurrence 
$1,000,000.00 bodily injury 
$1,000,000 property damage 
(d) 	Excess/umbrella liability 	$5,000,000.00 per occurrence 
(e) 	Owners and contractors protective policy 	$1,000,000.00 per occurrence 
$2,000,000.00 general aggregate 
 
Policies shall be presented to the township for examination as to their validity and any undesirable exclusion deemed improper by legal opinion rendered to the township regarding same. The township reserves the right to reduce/increase the policy amounts based on the character of the project. Underground construction, where applicable, shall be specified in the coverage. Certificates of coverage signed by the insurance carriers shall include a guarantee that 30 days written notice shall be given by the insurance carrier to the township prior to cancellation of, or any change in, the respective policies. In the event that insurance is canceled, operations shall cease prior to the cancellation date and shall not resume until evidence is provided that the proper insurance is again in effect. 
Additional named insured under (e) above shall include the township, its township board and individual members thereof, the township engineer and members of its staff, township employees and agents for the township. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 1.3, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-134. - Performance guarantee/letter of credit. 
Either an irrevocable letter of credit in a form acceptable to the township or cash deposit shall be furnished to the township in an amount sufficient to complete the proposed project before any development is constructed, approved and accepted. The performance guarantee shall be equal to the cost to construct the approved site work, including water main, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, roadways, retaining walls, landscaping, etc as well as additional items that may be described in Article 16.8 of the township zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 1.4, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-135. - Maintenance guarantee. 
A two-year maintenance guarantee shall be furnished to the township before any development is approved and accepted. The term of the guarantee shall begin on the date of final acceptance of the work by the township. The amount of the guarantee shall be equal to 100 percent of the construction cost for the site work, including water main, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, roadways, retaining walls, landscaping, etc. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 1.5, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-136. - Permits; jurisdiction; notification. 
The proprietor shall obtain, or cause his contractor(s) to obtain all permits, post all required guarantees, and pay all required fees for each and all permitting agencies having jurisdiction over the land and rights-of-way involved in the project. Proper notification shall be given to each governmental agency and utility company prior to beginning of construction. A minimum 72-hour notice is required to the township prior to commencement of any construction. The proprietor shall refer and adhere to chapter 22, article III, for required permits. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 1.6, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-137. - Certificate of completion. 
The record drawings furnished by the design engineer shall contain a statement certifying that all surface grades, roads and structures are in conformance with the approved engineering plans. This statement shall be signed, sealed, and dated by the design engineer prior to acceptance of the improvements by the township. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 1.7, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-138. - Penalties and enforcement. 
Violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a municipal civil infraction. A person found responsible for a violation of this article shall be subject to a civil fine to be determined by the Michigan District Court with jurisdiction of this township. The person responsible shall also be subject to costs, including all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the township has been put to enforce this article in the amount of not less than $9.00 nor more than $500.00. In the event a person responsible has been issued a civil fine and costs as set out above, and in the event the person fails to pay the civil fine and costs in a timely manner as set forth under court order, the Township may obtain a lien against the land, building(s) and/or structure(s) involved in the violation and such lien may be enforced and discharged subject to the procedures and limitations cited at MCL 600.8731. The penalties set forth in this section are otherwise controlled by the requirements of Act Nos. 12 and 13 of the Public Acts of 1994. The township may further pursue injunctive remedies permitted at law to enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 9.2, 12-12-2007)  
Secs. 42-139—42-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SUBMITTAL AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 42-151. - Generally. 
All improvements to vacant land, expansions and/or modifications to existing developed parcels, and improvements or extensions to water main systems, sanitary sewers, stormwater management systems, mass grading and paving require the review and approval of detailed engineering design plans prior to the issuance of permits and start of construction. This article is intended to address substantial site improvements and is not intended to regulate minor individual lot improvements such as the construction of decks, sheds, home landscaping, and similar related items so long as they do not significantly impact the property on which the improvements are to occur and/or the property of adjacent owners. 
This standard establishes the basic submittal, review and permit processing procedures in the township. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 2.1, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-152. - Submittals for review of site plans and preliminary plats. 
All applicable materials shall be submitted to the township planning department for distribution. Article 12, Site Plan Review, of the township zoning ordinance should be adhered to. Below is a brief synopsis of the items necessary for site plan submittal in relation to the submittal for engineering/construction plans. 
(1)  The following items are common for all projects being submitted for site plan/preliminary plat review: 
a.  Quantity of signed and sealed sets of site plans or preliminary plats, as noted in the township zoning ordinance or land division ordinance. 
b.  Payment of site plan review fees. 
(2)  Depending on the scope of work, the following engineering related items are to be incorporated in the plans as applicable to the project: 
a.  Stormwater calculations for volume, outlet restrictor size, percolation rates, etc. for detention, retention, and/or infiltration stormwater management systems. 
b.  Drainage district maps showing the various areas contributing to the points of inlet and total area drained (including off-site contributions). 
c.  Other information/calculations pertinent to the project such as sanitary sewer systems and water distribution. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 2.2, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-153. - Submittals for engineering/construction plans. 
All applicable materials shall be submitted to the township building department for distribution. Division 3, Plan Requirements, of this article provides more specific engineering plan requirements that should be adhered to. The following items are common for all projects being submitted for engineering review: 
(1)  A trust and agency account as noted in Section 16.7B of the zoning ordinance shall be established by the township for the project. An amount acceptable to the township building department shall be deposited by the applicant into the account for purposes of paying for engineering reviews, construction observation, administration purposes, and other such project involvement for which the applicant will be required to pay for such services provided by the township. Where a trust and agency account has previously been established pursuant to the zoning ordinance, that same account shall be utilized as the account set forth in this section. 
(2)  A minimum of three sets of signed and sealed engineering design plans with applicable project specific details and necessary township standards detail sheets. 
(3)  A minimum of three copies of the sanitary sewer basis of design (gravity or low pressure sewer). 
(4)  Detailed storm sewer and/or open drain calculations, stormwater calculations for volume, outlet restrictor size, sediment storage, percolation rates, etc. for detention, retention, and/or infiltration stormwater management systems. 
(5)  Drainage district maps showing the various areas contributing to the points of inlet and total area drained (including off-site contributions). 
(6)  Soil boring logs and geotechnical report. 
(7)  The developer shall review chapter 22, article IV, which provides wetland regulations for the township. The township will verify all of the wetland delineations and has the authority to reject delineations if discrepancies exist. 
(8)  Delineation of floodplain boundaries. 
(9)  Potable water distribution system improvements. 
(10)  Sanitary sewer systems and calculations. 
(11)  Roadway systems indicating public/private roads and pavement cross sections. 
(12)  Other information/calculations pertinent to the project. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 2.3, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-154. - Township engineering review procedure. 
(a)  Upon receipt of all required material from the applicant, the building department shall provide three sets of the plans, a site development cost estimate, and any other applicable submitted materials, to the township engineer for review and/or approval. 
(b)  Within 30 days of receipt of the plans from the township building department the township engineer shall review the plans and related material for conformity to the standards set forth herein and to the overall utility plans of the township after which one set of plans with the appropriate comments will be returned to the applicant or applicants agent, one set shall be retained for township engineer's record, and one set sent to the township building department for township record. 
(c)  The applicant, after making any necessary revisions as required from previous reviews, shall resubmit three sets of revised plans and related material to the building department for transmission to the township engineer for additional reviews and/or approval. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 2.4, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-155. - Other agency reviews. 
(a)  With the exception of public water main and sanitary sewer plans, the applicant or his designee shall be responsible for submitting plans to any public or private utility and any state or county agency that's existing or proposed facilities or rights-of-way may be affected by or has jurisdiction over the proposed construction. A list of private utility companies that provide services within the township is available at the township building department along with their contact information. 
(b)  Refer to section 42-157(d) and (e) for public water and sanitary sewer review procedures. 
(c)  Applicant is responsible to submit the changes requested by any state or county agency back to the township for approval. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 2.5, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-156. - Final engineering/construction approvals. 
(a)  If the township engineer finds that the revised plans and related material conform to this article, the plans will be stamped "Approved" with one set being returned to the applicant, one set shall be retained for township engineer's record, and one set sent to the township building department for township record. 
(b)  If minor corrections are still required, at the discretion of the township engineer the plans may be stamped "Approved As Noted." Plans so stamped will be required to be revised prior to the pre-construction meeting. 
(c)  Applicant must submit copies of the documentation from other agencies (as applicable to the project) to the township engineer indicating that the plans have received approval for work within, and/or modifications to, their facilities prior to the township engineer granting any engineering construction plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 2.6, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-157. - Permits/construction. 
(a)  The applicant shall adhere to chapter 22, article III, for required permits and processes. Prior to the start of construction, the applicant must secure all necessary permits from other agencies as applicable to the project and provide copies of all required permits for the development as stated in chapter 22, article III, at pre-construction meeting. 
(b)  For quality purposes construction observation is required during construction. Construction observation will be required during the installation of water mains, storm sewer systems including detention/retention areas, sanitary sewers, paving, and any other site improvements that the township requests to insure installation and materials are in accordance with township specifications. Refer to specific utility sections for a more detailed description of the construction observation requirements. This service shall be performed by the township engineer or other governing agency. 
(c)  The applicant and/or his designee is responsible for coordination and costs of construction observation services during the entire construction process through the trust and agency account. Should the account become deficient, the applicant shall be responsible to bring the account current. If the applicant does not act within two weeks the project shall be delayed, all approvals shall be suspended, and further work will no be permitted until accounts are brought current. 
(d)  For projects where the water main will become part of the public system, the township engineer shall notify the applicant for additional copies of the plans, including current standard detail sheets and a completed Act No. 399 of the Public Acts of 1976 permit application, signed and sealed by a state registered professional engineer for processing and eventual issuance of a state department of environmental quality construction permit for water main systems. No construction may commence on any portion of a public water system until this permit is issued. 
(e)  For projects where the sanitary sewer will become part of the public system, the township engineer shall notify the applicant for additional copies of the plans, including current standard detail sheets and a completed Part 41 of Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1994 permit application, signed and sealed by a state registered professional engineer for processing and eventual issuance of a state department of environmental quality construction permit for sanitary sewer systems. No construction may commence on the public sanitary sewer system until this permit is issued. 
(f)  All other permits and payment of associated fees required to perform the work shall be the responsibility of the applicant and/or his designee. No construction may commence until permits, as applicable to the project, are secured from the appropriate agencies. Such permits include those identified in chapter 22, article III, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  County road commission permit for work within an existing or proposed county road right-of-way, including discharges from stormwater management systems to county road drainage facilities. 
(2)  County road commission permit for approach work and/or utility work within an existing or proposed county road right-of-way. 
(3)  County drain commissioner permit for stormwater discharge and/or taps to county controlled drainage facilities. 
(4)  County drain commissioner permit for connection(s) to existing public water mains. 
(5)  County drain commissioner permit for connection(s) to existing public sanitary sewers. 
(6)  County drain commissioner permit for soil erosion and sediment control. 
(7)  A National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit from the state department of environmental quality for stormwater discharge for areas disturbed greater than five acres. 
(8)  State department of environmental quality permit for all work and/or stormwater discharges to a regulated wetland or floodplain. 
(g)  When all approvals have been obtained and prior to starting construction, the applicant will be notified of the time and place for a pre-construction meeting. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 2.7, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-158. - Other requirements. 
(a)  Temporary construction easements from adjacent property owners and/or permanent easements for off-site facilities shall be obtained by the applicant. Documents shall be in a form acceptable to the township and the township attorney. Copies shall be submitted to the township engineer prior to construction plans being approved. 
(b)  A maintenance guarantee shall be submitted for all constructed site development improvements. Refer to section 42-135 of this article for information on the maintenance guarantee. 
(c)  A cash deposit for record utility drawings in the amount of one percent of the estimated site utilities construction cost shall be deposited in the project trust and agency account prior to any record drawing review by the township. should the account become deficient, the applicant shall be responsible to bring the account current. If the applicant does not act within two weeks the project shall be delayed until accounts are current, all approvals shall be suspended, and further work will no be permitted until accounts are brought current. 
(d)  Refer to section 42-133 of this article for information regarding insurance. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 2.8, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-159. - Acceptance of improvements. 
(a)  Final acceptance requirements for project improvements are outlined in each individual section of the standards. 
(b)  Building permits or temporary certificates of occupancy will not be issued prior to final acceptance of the site utilities unless the necessary guarantees covering the cost of installing any remaining improvements and record drawing preparation is provided to the township. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 2.9, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-160. - Record drawings. 
Record drawings for water main, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer systems, detention and retention basins, drainage ditches and swales, and pavement shall be submitted for review and approval prior to acceptance of the improvements by the township. 
Record drawing information shall be provided on the original approved construction drawings and shall contain, but not necessarily be limited to, the following items: 
(1)  General items. 
a.  Funding shall be established as discussed in section 42-158(c). 
b.  All record drawings shall contain a statement on the plans by an engineer or land surveyor, registered in the state certifying that the record drawings conform to the approved construction drawings. The statement shall be signed, sealed, and dated by the engineer or land surveyor. 
c.  All record drawing elevations shall be based on the established datum. 
d.  All record drawing information shall be clearly marked as such. 
e.  Record drawing locations shall be shown on the plans to an accuracy of one foot horizontal and 0.1 foot vertical. 
f.  All location changes of ten feet or more horizontally and 0.5 feet vertically shall be redrawn on the plan and the original location shall be crossed out (X-ed) on the plan. 
(2)  Water mains. 
a.  Location of all water mains with respect to property line, back of curb or edge of pavement. 
b.  Rim elevation of gate wells. 
c.  Fire hydrant bury line/arrow elevations. 
d.  Top of pipe elevation at gate wells. 
e.  A minimum of three witnessed dimensions to each bend, gate well, meter pit, pressure reducing valve, water main stub, etc. 
f.  A minimum of three witnessed dimensions to each connection to an existing water main or restrained joint, and at each connection point for transition from ductile iron pipe (DIP) to high-density polyethylene (HDPE). 
g.  The distance between the hydrant and water main. 
h.  Accurately locate all utilities (storm, sanitary, water main etc.) where the recommended separation horizontally or vertically is less than that required ten feet horizontal and 18 inches vertical. 
i.  The liber and page number for any easement obtained for water main as well as any existing easement involved in the project shall be noted. 
j.  Length and location, witnessed to three points of all casing pipe at each end. 
k.  Materials installed: 
1.  Size, length, type, class, joint and manufacturer of pipe. 
2.  Size, brand and manufacturer of valves and hydrants. 
3.  A total record drawing quantity list. 
(3)  Sanitary and storm sewer. 
a.  Location of all sewers with respect to property line, back of curb or edge of pavement. 
b.  Rim elevation of all structures. 
c.  Pipe invert elevations at all structures, end-sections or headwalls. 
d.  Percent grade of all pipe runs. 
e.  A minimum of three witnessed dimensions to each structure. 
f.  A minimum of three witnessed dimensions to all force main bends. 
g.  Length of pipe from center to center of manholes, and length of stubs out of manholes. 
h.  Length and location, witnessed to three points of all casing pipe at each end. 
i.  Materials installed: 
1.  Size, type, class, joint and manufacturer of pipe. 
2.  For pressure sewers, a diagram of all appurtenances in each valve structure shall be drawn with flow arrow. 
3.  A total record drawing quantity list. 
j.  The liber and page number for each easement obtained for the construction of sewer as well as any existing easement involved in the project shall be noted. 
k.  House lead locations: 
1.  Information shall be obtained from inspection records and transferred to the plans. 
2.  Location of wye measured from downstream manhole. 
3.  Length of lead. 
4.  Length of any risers, if placed. 
5.  Location of end of lead measured from downstream manhole. 
(4)  Detention/retention/infiltration basins. 
a.  Width and length of top and bottom of basin. 
b.  Elevations at sufficient intervals to verify basin side slopes and capacity. 
c.  Location, width and elevations of basin overflow facility. 
d.  Invert elevation of inlet and outlet pipes. 
e.  Basin outlet restriction size. 
f.  Calculations of the basin volume between the high water elevation and the invert of the outlet pipe for a detention basin, and the bottom of the basin for a retention basin (based on as-built elevations). 
(5)  Drainage ditches and swales. 
a.  Location of centerline of all ditches and swales with respect to property lines. 
b.  Elevations of top and bottom of ditch and swales at lot corners. 
c.  Elevations at top and bottom of ditch and swales along all road frontages. 
(6)  Paving. 
a.  Elevations shall be shown at minimum 50 feet intervals for top of curb, gutter, and top of pavement including sidewalks and bike paths, also at high and low points, beginning, middle and end points of curves, and any other critical points. 
b.  Indication of changes in road widths, cross sections, or changes in radii. 
(7)  Witnesses. Witnesses shall be from existing permanent structures excluding property lines that can be measured in the field. 
(8)  Record drawing plans in electronic form. Upon final approval of the engineering plans, the developer's engineer shall provide the township with an electronic copy (in GIS/state file format or in AutoCAD with two coordinates as specified by the township engineer) of the record drawing plans. This is required so that the record drawing improvements can be added to the township GIS database. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 2.10, 12-12-2007)  
Secs. 42-161—42-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PLAN REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 42-171. - Plans and specifications. 
The following establishes the minimum requirements for engineering plans for submittal to the township. 
Prior to starting any design, the design engineer is encouraged to make use of maps and information available at the township and county offices. It shall be the responsibility of the design engineer to verify utility locations provided by the township, the county, or other agencies. 
The plans and specifications shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a civil engineer registered in the state and the plans shall have imprinted thereon the signature and original seal of that engineer. 
Plans shall consist of a title sheet, ALTA plan or certified surveyor's plan of existing features and easements, general improvement plan, demolition plan, utility plans and profiles, soil erosion and sediment control plan, project specific notes and details, and standard detail sheets. Sheet size shall be 24 inches × 36 inches. A scale of one inch = 50 feet horizontal and one inch = five feet vertical for plan and profile sheets is preferred. Overall development/general plan and/or utility layout plan may be at one inch = 100 feet. Details specific to the project shall be drawn at scale. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 3.1, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-172. - Title sheet. 
A title sheet, or the first sheet of a set of plans, shall show the following: 
(1)  Project title. 
(2)  Name, address, and phone number of proprietor. 
(3)  Name, address, and phone number of designing engineer. 
(4)  The seal and signature of engineer responsible for the project. 
(5)  Location map drawn to an appropriate graphic scale, generally not greater than one inch = 100 feet nor smaller than one inch = 2,000 feet, with north indicator, showing location of project area with respect to the surrounding area. 
(6)  Reference bench marks, established at intervals not greater than 1,200 feet and on township Datum North American Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD 88), convenient to the proposed construction. Each benchmark shall be noted with number, location, description and established elevation. A minimum of two bench marks shall be provided. 
(7)  Legal description of the property including sidwell number and acreage. 
(8)  Listing of submittal dates and revision submittal dates. 
(9)  Sheet index. 
(10)  Quantity list of proposed public improvements. 
(11)  A statement indicating that the design engineer has reviewed the township engineering design standards and other applicable ordinances and that the prepared work is in conformance with the standards and ordinances. All exceptions must be indicated. 
(12)  The developer shall be responsible for obtaining an NPDES permit when required and ensuring compliance with all applicable permit regulations, including but not limited to, inspection, restoration and record keeping requirements. Reports from the certified stormwater operator shall be made available to the township. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 3.2, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-173. - General plan. 
A general plan sheet shall provide the overall proposed development and should show the following: 
(1)  North arrow. 
(2)  Street names, street widths, subdivision names, lot numbers and dimensions, and permanent parcel numbers and dimensions for all unplatted parcels for the site and adjacent properties. 
(3)  All proposed and existing utilities and easements. 
(4)  Zoning classification of petitioner's parcel and all abutting parcels. 
(5)  Total acreage and net acreage (minus right-of-way). 
(6)  General notes applicable to tall drawings. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 3.3, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-174. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
If conducive, the proposed soil erosion and sedimentation control plans may be incorporated with drainage area plan sheet or other appropriate construction plans, keeping in mind that a separate review is necessary for a county soil erosion control permit. As a minimum, soil erosion and sedimentation control plan sheets shall include: 
(1)  North arrow. 
(2)  Existing topography and proposed ground contours at two-foot intervals extending 100 feet past the boundary of the site. All elevations shall be on the township datum (NAVD 88). All existing ground elevations shall be shown to tenths of a foot. 
(3)  Location, types and details of perimeter and on-site sediment and erosion control methods. 
(4)  An erosion control and construction sequence schedule. 
(5)  Location and details of mud mats. 
(6)  Location, dimensions, surface material and thickness, method of containment, and restoration of construction staging and equipment and material storage areas. 
(7)  Temporary construction sediment basins (when indicated on the plans or required due to site conditions): 
a.  Location of basin. 
b.  Calculations for the size of the basin and amount of sediment loading. 
c.  Method and/or location of conveying site runoff to the basin and erosion control measures along drainage route. 
d.  Location, cross-section, and details of access route to basin for periodic dredging and maintenance. 
e.  Maintenance schedule for removing accumulated sediment and indicating method and location of disposal of sediment basin soils. 
f.  Location and elevation of sodded emergency spillway. 
g.  Cross-section of basin side slopes, top of bank/basin bottom elevations, inlet/outlet elevations, and water surface elevation/depth of storage. 
h.  Plan or description for the removal of the temporary basin and restoration of the affected area once permanent control devices and stabilization are in place. 
(8)  The following erosion control standard notes shall be placed on the soil erosion and sediment control plans: 
a.  All erosion and sedimentation control work shall conform to the current standards and specifications of the county drain commissioner and the township. 
b.  Daily inspections shall be made by the contractor for effectiveness of erosion and sedimentation control measures. Any necessary repairs shall be performed without delay. 
c.  Erosion and any sedimentation from work on this site shall be contained within the work area and not allowed to collect on any off-site areas, roadways, or in waterways. Waterways include both natural and man-made open ditches, streams, storm drains, lakes, ponds and wetlands. 
d.  The contractor shall apply temporary erosion and sedimentation control measures as directed on these plans and where otherwise required by the work. The contractor shall remove temporary measures as soon as permanent stabilization of slopes, ditches, and other stabilization improvements have been accomplished. 
e.  The contractor shall preserve natural vegetation as much as possible. All on site and off site areas disturbed by construction shall be restored to equal or better than original existing conditions. 
f.  Protect all existing trees that are to remain, including their branches and roots, from damage due to this work unless specifically identified for removal. At the discretion of the township the contractor may be required to place tree protection fencing or other protection devices to prevent unnecessary damage. 
g.  Stabilization of all disturbed areas shall be established using the appropriate vegetation within five days of completion of final grading. 
h.  The contractor shall sweep the existing streets surrounding the project site as needed. 
i.  The contractor shall be responsible for dust control created from the project and shall provide all equipment and material necessary to keep dust in check at all times. The contractor shall respond immediately to any and all complaints. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 3.4, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-175. - Grading plans. 
Scale of sheets shall be one inch = 50 feet. As a minimum, grading plan sheets shall include: 
(1)  North arrow. 
(2)  Existing topography and ground contours at two-foot intervals extending 100 feet past the boundary of the site. All elevations shall be on the township datum (NAVD 88). All existing ground elevations shall be shown to tenths of a foot. 
(3)  Centerline of street stationing with centerline or top-of-curb elevations at 50-foot intervals, all radii, high points, low points, and other critical locations. 
(4)  Existing and proposed ground elevations shall be provided at all lot corners along the boundaries of the development and 50-foot intervals along all site boundary lines. 
(5)  Floodplain contour line, where applicable. 
(6)  Wetland limits and any buffer as specified in the township zoning ordinance, and the name of the consultant that flagged the wetland limits. 
(7)  Rim elevations of all existing and proposed structure elevations to 0.01 of a foot. 
(8)  Proposed top of curb or shoulder elevation opposite each front lot corner to 0.01 of a foot. 
(9)  Proposed ground elevation at each lot corner (front and rear), side lot elevations between houses and proposed building corners indicating walkouts, swales, and finished hydrant grades to tenths of a foot. 
(10)  Provide sidewalk elevations at all lot corners to 0.01 of a foot. Slope across walk shall be one-fourth inch per foot pitched towards the curb or drainage swale. 
(11)  Provide elevations for pavement, sidewalks, parking islands and other locations as required by the township engineer. 
(12)  When swales for lot drainage are called for on the plan, swale elevations at the high point adjacent to the house, the back of the house, and the front of the house shall be provided. General flow direction of swales shall be shown with arrows. 
(13)  Drainage flow arrows shall be provided to indicate the direction of surface water drainage over the development. 
(14)  In residential developments each grading plan sheet shall show or contain a note indicating the location of footing drain/sump pump discharge if one is to be provided. 
(15)  Show any swales or ditches conveying emergency overflows or off-site pass thru drainage by arrows and a typical section of the swale or ditch with calculations as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 3.5, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-176. - Paving plans. 
Paving plans involving proposed improvements to public or private roads shall incorporate the requirements set forth by the appropriate authority having jurisdiction, that being the state department of transportation for any state highway, the county road commission for any county road or the township for any local private road. The paving plan sheet shall include, at a minimum: 
(1)  All elevations shall be on the township datum (NAVD 88). 
(2)  North arrow. 
(3)  Street names, street and easement widths, subdivision names, lot numbers and frontage dimensions, for all unplatted parcels. 
(4)  Location of existing and proposed utilities crossing or within proposed right-of-way. 
(5)  Existing and proposed easements on the site. 
(6)  Existing adjacent streets. 
(7)  Cross-section of proposed pavement section providing the following minimum information: 
a.  Paving type, thickness and specification. 
b.  Base type, thickness and specification. 
c.  Pavement width, crown and cross-slope. 
d.  Curb section (where applicable). 
e.  Subgrade treatment. 
(8)  All vertical curve data and radii of all horizontal curves. 
(9)  Construction notes. 
(10)  A tabulated list of quantities appearing on that sheet. 
(11)  Sidewalks and approaches. 
(12)  Proposed public street approaches with alignment and dimensions. 
(13)  The profile portion of the sheet, when applicable, shall appear below the companion plan portion, generally projected vertically, and shall show at least the following: 
a.  Existing and proposed centerline of road profile. 
b.  Proposed top of curb profile. 
c.  Existing and proposed storm sewer and/or ditch profiles. 
d.  Roadway stationing. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 3.6, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-177. - Plan and profile sheets (sanitary, water main and storm systems). 
The plan portion of sheet shall include, at minimum: 
(1)  Scale of plan portion of sheet shall be one inch = 50 feet. Scale of profile portion of sheet one inch = 50 feet horizontal and one inch = five feet vertical. 
(2)  All elevations shall be on the township datum (NAVD 88). 
(3)  Each plan and profile sheet shall include a tabulated list of quantities appearing on that sheet. 
(4)  Structures shall be identified by numbers assigned consecutively and increasing in direction opposite to direction of flow in each sewer. 
(5)  All existing or planned surface or underground improvements in streets or easements in which sewer construction is proposed, and in adjacent areas if pertinent to design and construction. 
(6)  Street names, street and easement widths, subdivision names, lot numbers, lot dimensions, and parcel numbers and frontage dimensions for all unplatted parcels. 
(7)  Location, length, size and direction of flow of each section of proposed sewer between manholes. Lengths for water mains should be provided between structures and fixtures such as bends, tees, etc. 
(8)  Natural or man-made features such as drainage courses, county drains, lakes, wetlands and floodplains. 
(9)  Locations of all manholes, air release valves (ARV), intermediate flushing connections (IFC), branched flushing connections (BFC), terminal flushing connections (TFC), and other sewer appurtenances and special structures. 
(10)  House leads, wye branches or tee inlets, to be constructed with the proposed sewer. 
(11)  Limits of special backfill requirements. 
(12)  A note stating that the contractor shall adjust existing manhole covers, as required. 
(13)  All proposed utilities need to be profiled with all inverts shown to the nearest on 0.01 of a foot. 
(14)  The profile portion of sheet shall appear below companion plan portion, generally projected vertically, and shall show at least the following: 
a.  Size, length, slope, type and class of pipe, and bedding for each section of proposed sewer between structures. 
b.  Limits of special backfill requirements. 
c.  Profile, over centerline of proposed sewer, of existing and proposed finished ground and pavement surfaces. 
d.  Location of existing and proposed utilities crossing the line of the sewer or otherwise affecting sewer construction, with a note of caution. 
e.  Location of all proposed structures, with structure number, invert elevation/direction of all connecting pipes, top of casting elevation, and structure type. For water main gate valves, the top of pipe elevations in addition to the rim elevation. All water main size 12 inches and greater must be profiled. 
f.  Location of all house leads and wye branches to be constructed with the proposed sewer. 
g.  Height of any proposed risers. 
h.  Invert elevation at property line or easement line for house leads to be included with sewer construction. 
i.  A note stating that the contractor shall verify the location and elevation of existing utilities prior to construction. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 3.7, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-178. - Stormwater management and pretreatment systems. 
(a)  A drainage area plan indicating the area of runoff to a particular catch basin, inlet, swale is required as part of a development plan submittal. 
(b)  Stormwater management basins and/or pretreatment systems can be placed on the storm drainage plan and profile sheets or on a separate plan sheet. 
(c)  Design calculations for detention/retention basin volumes required and provided, storm sewer systems calculations, basin outlet restriction, and a plan of the drainage area tributary to the basin shall accompany construction plans submitted for review. 
(d)  For all open detention/retention basins, indicate the top-of-bank, high water and bottom of pond elevations, any permanent water elevation or water table per soil boring, and side slopes. Provide location, elevation and details of basin outlet restriction and emergency overflow spillway or manhole for detention basins. 
(e)  For enclosed detention basins, provide high water and bottom of system elevations, any permanent water elevation or water table per soil boring, cross-section or profile of system; location, elevation and details of outlet restrictor, and method of providing for emergency overflows. 
(f)  For infiltration (recharge) systems, provide soil boring logs and soils analysis, volume requirements, percolation rate, infiltration/exfiltration design calculations, cross-section or profile of system, and method for handling emergency overflows caused by rainfall in excess of the design storm event or failure of the infiltration/exfiltration medium. Soil boring for retention basins also to show ground water level, and soil types underlying the basin. 
(g)  For open basin pretreatment systems, provide storage volume calculations, top of bank, high water and basin bottom elevations, side slopes, location of emergency overflow, and details of outlet control. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 3.8, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-179. - Detail sheets. 
(a)  The sanitary sewer, water main, soil erosion, paving, storm sewer, and landscape standard detail sheets as adopted by the township shall be included with plan submittals as applicable and are considered a part of these design standards. A reproducible mylar copy of these details may be obtained from the township building department. 
(b)  Any additional detail sheets shall include complete details for all water or sewer appurtenances and structures to be included with the plans. 
(c)  Scales for special details shall be selected to clearly portray intended construction and component or equipment arrangement. Scales used shall be clearly identified. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 3.9, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-180. - Plot plans. 
(a)  Prior to issuance of a building permit the permit holder shall submit a plot plan drawing to the building department for review and approval. All grades shown on the plot plan shall be in accordance with the approved subdivision grading plans. All plot plans shall be in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey and include the following information: 
(1)  Elevations at each lot corner and grade change points. 
(2)  Location of all the new construction on the site and distances from lot lines. 
(3)  All proposed and existing utility structures. 
(4)  Sidewalks and driveways. 
(5)  All setback and easement locations. 
(6)  Wetland boundaries, water surface and floodplain elevations. 
(b)  Prior to backfill inspection as-built brick grade elevations must be submitted for review and approval by the building official. 
(c)  Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy a final grade certificate must be submitted and approved by the building official indicating that all lot grading has been done and accomplished in accordance with the approved plot plan (within an allowable tolerance of plus or minus 0.10 feet). A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building official upon the posting by the permit holder or his authorized agent, of a cash deposit in the sum of $1,000.00, to be released upon satisfactory completion of grading and the submission and approval of a grading certificate as hereinbefore provided. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 3.10, 12-12-2007)  
Secs. 42-181—42-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - WATER MAIN 
 
Sec. 42-191. - Generally. 
This standard establishes the minimum requirements for the design of water main systems in the township. All water main systems and its appurtenances shall be designed to the current standards of the township, the county drain commissioner (OCDC), the state department of environmental quality (MDEQ), and any other agencies having jurisdiction over the water main. The design engineer shall undertake sufficient research to determine if the proposed water main has adequate pressure to handle the anticipated volumes. Such research will be provided to the township with the submission of plans for review by the township engineer. 
Prior to starting any water main design, the design engineer is encouraged to make use of maps and information available at the township offices and at the county drain commissioner's office. It shall be the responsibility of the design engineer to verify utility locations provided by the township and the OCDC. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 4.1, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-192. - Design considerations. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  Water mains shall be designed to provide adequate volumes for fire fighting purposes. Current International Organization for Standardization (ISO) standards shall be used as a minimum guideline. 
(2)  Water mains shall be looped whenever feasible in order to increase reliability. The township shall review all water main layouts for adequate looping. 
(3)  Water mains shall be extended to the property limits and valves left for future extensions when not looped. Dead end lines shall end with a hydrant followed by gate valve and well and a minimum ten-foot stub beyond the gate well. End hydrants can be relocated upon future extension, if feasible. Water main extensions shall be constructed across the property frontage unless the township water master plan conflicts. 
(4)  All water mains shall be installed with a minimum cover of five feet six inches below proposed finish grade. 
(5)  Water mains shall be designed using two 45-degree bends rather than 90 degree bends when possible. 
(6)  A five-foot-six-inch minimum horizontal clearance at all open drain crossings is required between the bottom of the drain and the top of the water main. 
(7)  Where water main is constructed in pavement areas or within a one-on-one influence of pavement, compaction of backfill to 95 percent maximum density is required and shall be tested by an independent laboratory. All structures including, but not limited to, gate wells, hydrants, stop boxes must be outside any pavement. 
(8)  All water main material shall be in accordance with the most current county drain commissioner standard water main detail sheets which must be included with the plan set. 
(9)  All water mains shall be designed for 150 psi working pressure. 
(10)  Concrete thrust blocks or other approved restraint systems shall be provided at all bends, tees, hydrant shoes, at plugs and caps and at any crosses where necessary to prevent lateral movement of the pipe. Thrust blocks shall bear against undisturbed earth and shall have sufficient bearing area to develop the full resultant axial thrust of the pipe at test pressure. 
(11)  All water mains 12 inches in diameter and larger must be profiled. 
(b)  Service leads. 
(1)  Service leads shall be type "K" copper or HDPE pipe with a minimum of one inch in diameter. Service leads shall be sized according to volume and pressure requirements of the development structure. 
(2)  Service leads must be a separate/individual connection to the water main. 
(3)  All leads for irrigation purposes must tap and branch from the existing domestic lead with a separate meter and back flow preventer. A tap to the fire service lead is not acceptable. 
(4)  All services shall include a corporation valve at the main and a curb stop valve and box inside of right-of-way, or easement. 
(5)  No house leads shall be made to a transmission main 16 inches in diameter or larger without approval from the township, its engineer, and any other agencies having authority over the water main. 
(6)  All water service connections two inches and smaller shall be made by the county drain commissioner. 
(7)  All water taps greater than two inches require a gate valve and well (i.e. no valve boxes). 
(8)  A separate fire service tap is required for buildings with fire protection. Domestic service cannot come off the fire lane. 
(c)  Design flows. The design engineer shall arrange a meeting with the township engineer and the fire chief to discuss specific fire protection needs. design calculations shall be furnished upon request to the engineer. 
Minimum fire demands: 
Zoning 	Fire Demand 
Single-family residential 	Minimum of 1,200 gallons per minute 
Multiple-family and institutional 	Minimum of 2,000 gallons per minute 
Commercial and industrial 	Minimum of 3,000 gallons per minute 
 
(d)  Minimum size. 
Minimum water main size is as follows unless design dictates otherwise: 
Zoning 	Minimum Size Requirements 
Single-family residential 	8" in diameter or larger 
Multiple-family and institutional 	12" in diameter or as indicated on the township's water main master plan 
Commercial and industrial 	*12" in diameter 
Major roads 	12" in diameter or as indicated on the township's water main master plan 
 
* Except in a looped system of 1,500 feet or less where eight-inch diameter mains may be permitted. 
(e)  Location of water mains. 
(1)  Water mains shall generally be located on opposite sides of streets from sanitary and storm sewers. Water mains shall be located a minimum of eight feet inside the public right-of-way line or permanent easement, and shall have 20 feet available for operations and maintenance. 
(2)  Water mains shall be constructed on both sides of highways and other major thoroughfares in order to minimize the number of crossings under a major thoroughfare. 
(3)  All water main, fire hydrants, valves, service valve boxes and other appurtenances not within a public right-of-way shall be located in a minimum 20-foot wide permanent easement, centered on the water main. The easement shall extend ten feet beyond a hydrant or valve. Such easement shall be dedicated to the township, with restriction against use or occupation of easements by the property owners and/or by other utilities in any manner which would restrict water main maintenance or repair operations. 
a.  A written description and drawing of the easement shall be prepared by the design engineer and be presented to the county drain commissioner's office, and the township for examination before recording. 
b.  Easements for possible extensions shall be provided to the property lines at locations designated by the township and its engineer. 
(4)  Water mains shall preferably be constructed outside of paved parking areas, streets, drives, and rear-yards. 
(5)  Within unplatted projects, water mains shall be installed parallel to the property lines or building lines. 
(6)  The minimum separation from outside of water main to outside of any sewer shall be ten feet horizontal and 18 inches vertical. 
(f)  Valves and gate wells. 
(1)  When connecting to an existing water main, a tapping sleeve, gate valve and well will be required unless connection to the existing water main can be made without interrupting service. Only mechanical joint tapping sleeves shall be used. 
(2)  All gate valves four inches and greater shall be installed in an appropriate sized gate well, except hydrant shut-off valves. 
(3)  Minimum valve locations: 
a.  Single-family residential: Valves shall be arranged so that no single water main failure will require more than 1,000 feet of water main, not more than 26 homes and not more than two hydrants to be out of service. 
b.  All other zoning classifications: Valves shall be so arranged that no single water main failure will require more than 800 feet of water main or more than one hydrant to be out of service. 
(4)  Valves shall be arranged such that any section of water main can be isolated by closing not more than four valves. 
(5)  Gate valves and wells are also required on both sides of a major thoroughfare when the water main crosses said thoroughfare. Valves shall generally be located at street intersections, and in a matter that the gate well structure will clear sidewalks, five feet from the intersecting street right-of-way line. 
(6)  Valves shall open as specified in the OCDC water main detail sheets. 
(g)  Hydrants. 
(1)  Spacing of hydrants shall be considered as individual cases and the design engineer is encouraged to arrange a meeting with the township engineer and fire chief to review specific fire protection requirements. The fire chief shall have final approval for number and arrangement of hydrants. Typical minimum hydrant spacing is as follows: 
Zoning 	Minimum Hydrant Spacing Requirements 
Single-family residential 	Within 250' of dwelling units 
All other zoning classifications 	250' from any exterior portion of building "as the hose lies" 
 
(2)  Generally hydrant location in single family residential areas shall be ten feet inside the street right-of-way line and located at lot lines. 
(3)  Hydrant nozzles shall face the road unless otherwise directed by the fire chief. 
(4)  Hydrant leads shall be six-inch diameter minimum with a maximum length of 20 feet. Hydrant leads longer than 20 feet must be eight-inch diameter and have an eight-inch gate valve and well installed at the tee. 
(5)  Hydrants shall be plumb and set to grade before final acceptance. 
(6)  Hydrants shall be factory painted red in accordance with AWWA C502. 
(7)  Hydrants types shall be in accordance with the county drain commissioner standard water main detail sheets. 
(8)  Hydrant's thread shall be National Standard Thread unless otherwise approved and specified by the local fire authority. 
(9)  Hydrants installed as yard hydrants must be compatible with the rest of the system. 
(10)  No fire suppression or domestic service leads are allowed to extend or be branched off from a six-inch hydrant lead. 
(11)  When near a street intersection, hydrants shall be located 15 feet from the intersecting street right-of-way. 
(12)  Hydrants shall be located at least 25 feet from any exterior wall of a masonry building and at least 50 feet from any exterior wall of frame or equivalent construction including brick and stone veneer. 
(13)  Hydrants located in parking areas shall be protected with a six-inch concrete curb or standard guard posts. 
(14)  All dead end water mains shall end with a hydrant blow-off, gate valve and minimum ten feet of stub and cap for future extensions. A temporary blow-off in lieu of a hydrant will be considered based on hydrant spacing and future extension of the water main. 
(h)  Pressure reducing valves. 
(1)  In systems where two or more pressure districts are to be interconnected, the plans shall include a pressure reducing valve near the point of connection to the higher pressure district to balance pressures across the new water system. The PRV shall conform to the township's standards for such facilities. The PRV design must be approved by OCDC and drawn on the plans. 
(2)  Gate valves shall be installed both upstream and downstream of each pressure reducing valve to permit isolation of the pressure reducing valve for maintenance and repair. 
(3)  A bypass line that is equivalent in pipe size to the water main and an additional bypass gate valve and well shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 4.2, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-193. - Final acceptance. 
(a)  Construction observation shall be required as described in section 42-157. This includes construction of all water main structures, pipe installation, and testing. 
(b)  Water mains shall be flushed and cleaned, and followed by chlorination and bacterial testing. Water main sterilization shall be in accordance with all local, state and federal regulations. 
(c)  Water main connections to the existing system will not be allowed until written verification of the approved tests is received by the township and its engineer. 
(d)  A set of approved record drawings, an approved bill of sale, and a copy of any recorded easements that were required for construction, shall be submitted to the township and county drain commissioner's office prior to final acceptance of the water main. 
(e)  No new water taps will be allowed until final acceptance of the water main. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 4.312-12-2007)  
Secs. 42-194—42-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - SANITARY SEWER 
 
Sec. 42-201. - Generally. 
This standard establishes the minimum requirements for the design of sanitary sewer systems in the township. All sanitary sewer systems and its appurtenances shall be designed to the current standards of the township, the county drain commissioner (OCDC), the state department of environmental quality (MDEQ), Ten State Standards, and any other agencies and standards having jurisdiction over the sanitary sewer. The design engineer shall undertake sufficient research to determine if the proposed sanitary sewer and the existing outlet sewer have adequate capacity to handle the anticipated volumes. Such research will be provided to the township with the submission of plans for review by the township engineer. 
Sanitary sewers are also subject to the township water ordinance and sewage ordinance. 
Prior to starting any sanitary sewer design, the design engineer is encouraged to make use of maps and information available at the township offices and at the county drain commissioner's office. It shall be the responsibility of the design engineer to verify utility locations provided by the township and the county drain commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 5.1, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-202. - Design considerations. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  No connection receiving stormwater, surface water, water softener backwash discharge, or ground water shall be made to sanitary sewers. 
(2)  A minimum vertical clearance of 18 inches shall be provided at all crossings with other utilities. A minimum horizontal separation of ten feet shall be provided between the outside of the sanitary sewer pipe and the outside of any water main or storm sewer pipe. 
(3)  Sanitary sewers shall be located so as to provide unrestricted access for maintenance and inspection purposes. When located parallel to the roadway the sanitary sewer shall be constructed in the opposite side of the right-of-way as the water main when possible. 
(4)  A grease interceptor will be required for all food service operations. No connections for domestic waste will be allowed to the interceptor. 
(5)  The current county drain commissioners sanitary sewer standard detail sheets must be included with the plan set. 
(6)  The proprietor must demonstrate that any wastewater resulting from grocery stores and car washes are similar in quality to domestic wastewater as stated in the township utility ordinance. 
(7)  Design shall incorporate the use of materials and sizes as specified in the county drain commissioners sanitary sewer standard details and specifications. 
(b)  Location of gravity, force main and low pressure sanitary sewers. 
(1)  Sanitary sewers for existing subdivisions and other establishments shall generally be located on opposite sides of streets from water mains, ten feet inside the public right-of-way line. Locations less than ten feet shall require a permanent easement parallel to the right-of-way necessary for future maintenance. 
(2)  All sanitary sewers outside of the right-of-way shall be located within a minimum 20-foot wide easement, centered upon the sewer. Such easement shall be dedicated to the township, with restrictions against use or occupation of easements, by the property owners and/or by other utilities, in any manner that would restrict sewer maintenance or repair operations. 
a.  A written description and drawing of the easement shall be prepared by the design engineer and be presented to the township for review by the township engineer for acceptance before recording. 
b.  Easements for possible extensions shall be provided to the property lines at locations designated by the township engineer. 
c.  Sewers and their appurtenances shall preferably be constructed outside of paved parking areas, streets, drives, sidewalks, and rear-yard areas. 
d.  Within unplatted projects, sewers shall be installed parallel to the property lines, or building lines, with clearance distances to accommodate the full width of the proposed easement or the distance necessary to accommodate a slope of one foot horizontal to one foot vertical from invert of sewer to ground surface, whichever is greater (20-foot minimum). 
(c)  Sewer capacity. 
(1)  Sanitary sewers shall be designed to serve all areas as set forth in chapter 62, article III. Sanitary sewers serving a tributary area beyond the project limits shall extend to the boundary of the project site to provide for future extension, unless the adjacent property is part of another sewer district. 
(2)  For design purposes, population shall be based on the current accepted MDEQ minimum persons per detached single-family home site. Population figures for all other dwelling units and buildings shall be based upon the current township schedule of unit assignment factors. The adopted unit factors shall be used to convert the different occupancy types to equivalent single-family units. 
(3)  Submission for review shall include a tabulation of occupancy (usage) types and the conversion of these into terms of equivalent single-family units. The tributary area, in acres, may be used to calculate dwelling units based on density allowed in the zoning ordinance. 
(4)  Sewage quantities for pipe design. For service areas with design populations greater than 500 but less than 28,400, sewer design capacity per household shall be based on the following formula: 
Q = (100) 18 + v P 
4 + v P 
Q = Design capacity in gallons per household per day 
P = Design population expressed in thousands 
For service areas with design populations exceeding 28,400, sewer design capacity shall be 250 gallons per household per day. 
(d)  Pipe size and material. 
(1)  Size. 
Type of Sewer 	Minimum Pipe Size 
Gravity sanitary sewer 	8" diameter 
Low pressure sanitary sewer 	2" diameter 
 
(2)  Material. 
a.  Gravity sewer pipe material shall be truss, reinforced concrete, HDPE, or SDR 23.5 PVC. 
b.  Pressure sewer pipe material shall be HDPE or ductile iron pipe. 
(e)  Hydraulics. 
(1)  The sewer constants for design calculations are as follows: 
Type of Sewer 	Formula 	Constants 
Gravity sanitary sewer 	Mannings Formula 	n=0.013 
Low pressure sanitary sewer 	Hazen-Williams 	C=120 
Force main 	Hazen-Williams 	C=130 
 
(2)  Minimum design velocity for gravity and low pressure sanitary sewers shall be two feet per second, and maximum design velocity shall be ten feet per second, with pipe flowing full. The slope of the sewer between the last two manholes at the upper end of any gravity lateral shall be increased above the minimum permissible pipe slope, wherever possible, to obtain a more rapid cleansing velocity. 
(3)  Minimum allowable pipe slopes for gravity sewers (Ten State Standards). 
Pipe Diameter 
(inches) 	Minimum Slope 
(feet per 100 feet) 
8 	0.40 
10 	0.28 
12 	0.22 
14 	0.17 
15 	0.15 
16 	0.14 
18 	0.12 
21 	0.10 
24 	0.080 
27 	0.067 
30 	0.058 
36 	0.046 
 
(4)  Allowances for changes in pipe size in gravity sewers. Maximum flow velocity for pipe flowing full shall be maintained by matching 0.80 of the diameter depth above invert for pipe size increases. 
(5)  Allowances for direction change in gravity sewers. Provide a drop of 0.10 feet in the downstream sewer invert for a direction change of 30 degrees or greater to compensate for velocity head loss of the incoming flow. 
(f)  Basis of design-low pressure sanitary sewer. 
(1)  A low pressure sanitary sewer system consists of individual grinder pump stations at each building site, connecting to a common pressurized sewer to convey domestic waste to an acceptable outlet. 
(2)  Delineation shall be shown between the proposed pressure sewer system and any other sanitary sewer system within or in relation to the development. 
(3)  Submissions for review shall include a tabulation of occupancy (usage) types and the conversion of these into terms of equivalent single-family units. The tributary area, in acres, may be used to calculate dwelling units based on density allowed in the zoning ordinance. The adopted "schedule of unit assignment factors" shall be used to convert the different occupancy types to equivalent single-family units. 
(4)  Property owners will be required to use a contractor approved by the township to connect to the low pressure sewer, grinder pump installation, and the installation of the sewer lead. 
(5)  Connections to the low pressure sewer shall be initiated through the township building department. 
(6)  Property owners shall be required to use the approved township grinder pumps when connecting to the low pressure sewer. 
(g)  Depth of sewers. 
(1)  No sanitary sewer shall have less than five feet of cover. 
(2)  In general, gravity sanitary sewers shall have a minimum depth of ten feet from top of curb (or centerline if uncurbed) to the invert of sewer. The sewer shall have sufficient depth to serve a standard depth basement by gravity. 
(h)  Special backfill requirements. 
(1)  Granular material meeting the requirements for MDOT granular material, Class II, shall be required for full depth backfill of trenches, above a horizontal line one foot above the pipe, under existing or planned road surfaces, pavements, curbs, driveways, parking areas and sidewalks, and where the trench edge is within three feet of the edge of existing or planned pavements. 
(2)  Backfill shall be compacted to a minimum of 90 percent maximum dry density from above the pipe to 18 inches below grade installed in six-inch layers. Compaction shall be 95 percent of maximum dry density for top 18 inches of trench. The compaction results will be determined by a Modified Proctor Test, ASTM Designation D-1557. Frozen material is prohibited. These requirements should be observed for areas that are within a one-on-one influence of roadway. 
(3)  Building lead trenches shall have compacted granular backfill within the entire street right-of-way where sidewalks are required. Compacted granular backfill shall be provided between all utility crossings. 
(i)  Building leads. 
(1)  Unless otherwise approved, construction of building leads from a gravity sanitary sewer to the easement, right-of-way, and/or property line, for each fronting parcel in which the sewer is designed to serve, shall be included with the construction of the sanitary sewer. 
(2)  Where construction of building leads to the property line is not required concurrently with gravity sanitary sewer construction, a wye branch with riser, and water-tight stopper or plug, shall be installed for every lot or building site which the sewer is designed to serve. 
(3)  For service leads beyond the right-of-way, cleanouts shall be installed in accordance with the local plumbing codes and in no case greater than 100 feet measured from the main line public sanitary sewer or at any bend 45 degrees or greater. 
(4)  Minimum size for building leads shall be six inches in diameter, SDR 23.5. 
(5)  Minimum slope for building leads shall be one-eighth inches per foot (1.00 percent). 
(j)  Manholes—Gravity sewer. 
(1)  Location. Manholes shall be constructed at every change in sewer grade, alignment, or pipe size, and at the end of each sewer line. Generally maximum distance between manholes shall be as follows: 
Diameter of Sewer 
(inches) 	Maximum Manhole Spacing 
(feet) 
8—21 	400 
24—30 	450 
36—42 	500 
 
(2)  Monitoring manholes are required for all nonresidential connections to the sanitary sewer system. 
(3)  Drop connections. 
a.  Internal drop connections are required at manholes where the outlet pipe is 18 inches or more below the inlet pipe. Inverts shall be matched at the flow line whenever possible if 18 inches or less. 
b.  Generally, drop connections are discouraged and will be considered only if other alternatives are not acceptable. External drop connections are not permitted. 
(k)  Air release valves (ARV), intermediate flushing connections (IFC), branched flushing connections (BFC) and terminal flushing connections (TFC)—Low pressure and forcemain sewer. 
(1)  Air release valves shall be located at all high points in low pressure and force main sewers. 
(2)  Intermediate flushing connections in low pressure and force main sewers shall be located so as not to allow more than 1,000 feet between structures. Intermediate flushing connections may also be required at significant low points. 
(3)  Branched flushing connections shall be located at places where the low pressure sewer branches off. 
(4)  Terminal flushing connections shall be located at the ends of the low pressure and force main sewer systems. 
(l)  Stubs. Where future connections to a manhole are anticipated, stubs or blind drop connections, with watertight bulkheads, shall be provided. Stubs shall be ten feet minimum in length. Deeper sewers should allow for one-on-one excavation for future connections (20-foot sewer — 20-foot stub). 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 5.2, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-203. - Final acceptance. 
(a)  Construction observation shall be required as described in section 42-157. This includes construction of all sanitary structures, pipe installation, pumps, and testing. 
(b)  All sewers shall be flushed and cleaned followed by air testing in accordance with all local, state and federal regulations. Videotaping of the sewer shall be conducted and reviewed to assure the sewer is acceptable. 
(c)  A set of approved record drawings, an approved bill of sale, and a copy of any recorded easement that was required for construction, shall be submitted to the township prior to final acceptance of the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 5.3, 12-12-2007)  
Secs. 42-204—42-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 42-211. - Generally. 
The management of increased stormwater which results from the development of vacant land or expansions to existing facilities will be considered as a critical component of all development plans which are submitted to the township for approval. The intent of this standard is to provide guidelines for the sound management of stormwater runoff and to provide sufficient flexibility for design professionals to develop innovative solutions that protect the resources of the township while meeting the objectives of water quality preservation and flood control. 
All storm sewer systems and its appurtenances shall be designed to the current standards of the township, the county drain commissioner, the county road commission, the state department of transportation, and other agencies having jurisdiction over the storm sewer. Additionally, the standards set forth in chapter 22, articles III and IV, shall be adhered to. 
The use of natural drainage features, shallow swales and landscape areas shall be incorporated into the drainage planning for a site whenever possible. The objective is to achieve a functional and aesthetically pleasing development that minimizes the use of extensive enclosed storm drains and large obtrusive stormwater detention or retention basins while providing for the proper management of stormwater runoff. 
Development plans must present a unified design that, as a minimum, provides the following protections: 
(1)  The design must show that the development will not cause any impact to downstream properties or upstream properties. Both the rate of stormwater discharge, and the volume of stormwater discharge must be considered. 
(2)  The development plan shall be fitted to the topography and soil to create the least erosion potential and to effectively accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. 
(3)  The design must demonstrate the use of best management practices for minimizing erosion and controlling sedimentation and other pollutants through all phases of construction. 
(4)  The design must demonstrate that proposed buildings or other permanent structures on and adjacent to, a proposed development are and will remain safe from flooding. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 6.1, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-212. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
Under the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Act No. 451, Part 91, of the Public Acts of 1994, the developer shall submit an erosion control plan to the county drain commissioner, soil erosion control division. The soil erosion and sedimentation control permit must be issued by the OCDC prior to any earth moving operations. The methods used for soil erosion control must be in accordance with the current Oakland County Erosion Control Manual and Specifications. 
An approved National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit where applicable, will be required prior to the commencement of any earth moving operations. 
To provide effective erosion and sedimentation control, practical combinations of the following technical principles shall be applied to the erosion control aspects of the plan: 
(1)  Under Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Act No. 451, Part 91, of the Public Acts of 1994, the developer shall submit an erosion control plan to the county drain commissioner for permit issuance. An approved soil erosion permit from the county drain commissioner, as well as the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit where applicable, shall be required prior to the commencement of any earthmoving operations. 
(2)  The permittee shall be responsible for maintaining temporary erosion control devices during all phases of construction. 
(3)  The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at one time during development. 
(4)  When land is exposed during development, the exposure shall be kept to the shortest possible period of time. 
(5)  Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect critical areas exposed during development. 
(6)  Temporary sedimentation basins (debris basins or silt traps) shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters from land undergoing development. 
(7)  Mud mats shall be installed at construction access points to provide a buffer area where vehicles can deposit mud and sediment prior to leaving the site, to control erosion from surface runoff, and to help control dust. 
a.  Sediment basins for construction purposes shall be separated from permanent stormwater detention or retention basins. 
b.  Basins shall be designed in accordance with the current county drain commissioner's standards for sedimentation basin design. 
c.  Construction runoff shall be directed to the basin in a controlled manner through mass grading techniques, diversion berms/swales, enclosed storm sewers or any combination thereof that would limit runoff velocities and provide for the least potential for erosion of the site. 
(8)  Areas set aside on the site for equipment storage, laydown, fuel, lubricants, chemical compounds and material stockpiles shall be contained in such a manner as to prevent any leakage or spillage from contaminating the surrounding soils and groundwater, and from entering any stormwater management system or existing surface waters. 
(9)  Filters shall be provided at catch basins and culvert inlet points to prevent the accumulation of sedimentation into storm sewers for both new and existing systems. 
(10)  Adequate dust control shall be maintained at all times. Surface streets adjacent to the site must be cleaned of any deposits on a daily basis. 
(11)  On larger projects or when phasing is involved, the developer may be required to provide alternate construction drives to the site to avoid damage to newly constructed streets. All construction drives shall be approved by the township. 
(12)  Permanent vegetation and stormwater structures shall be installed as soon as practical in the development. 
(13)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected. 
(14)  Riprap shall be required at all storm sewer outlet points and prior to entering pipe entrances to detention or retention basins. The minimum width of the riprap shall be a minimum two times the outside diameter of the pipe. The riprap shall extend from the bottom of the basin around to the top of the pipe. Two types of materials to be used may include: 
a.  Eight-inch diameter to 15-inch diameter fragmented limestone or other suitable rock underlain with geotextile fabric. Cobblestone, broken concrete or grouted rip rap is not preferred. Larger diameter outlets may require larger riprap as velocity and flow condition dictate. 
b.  Gabions installed per the manufacturer's specifications. 
(15)  A bar screen is required for all pipe outlets and inlets eight-inch diameter and larger. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 6.2, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-213. - Stormwater management basins and pretreatment systems. 
On-site stormwater detention or retention is necessary for all developments in the township (including private roads) whenever runoff is increased. Waiver of this requirement may be considered by the planning commission upon submittal of a request for waiver, and report stating the reasons why detention or retention should not be necessary. Such report shall include maps, charts, and calculations prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state. The report and the request shall be subject to review and recommendation by the township engineer. 
Generally speaking, detention basins temporarily store storm runoff for a period of time in which the runoff is released through a positive outlet, at a controlled rate. Retention basins do not have a positive outlet, so that the stored runoff will percolate into the existing soils. 
Infiltration (recharge) systems that store and release runoff through permeable soils to the groundwater may be allowed under specific circumstances and with the review and approval of the township engineer. 
In cases where the requirements for detention/retention basins have been waived, stormwater pretreatment (in the form of permanent debris and sedimentation control systems) will be required. 
(1)  Detention basins. 
a.  Detention basins may only be used when the design shows that there is an adequate positive outlet for the stormwater, and where the increased volume of stormwater will not damage downstream property owners. Construction drawings must include sufficient off-site information to demonstrate the existence of an adequate outlet. 
b.  Water originating from off-site is not required to be detained in the on-site detention basin. Stormwater originating from off-site should be diverted around the detention basin whenever practical, and where the diversion will not increase the erosion of soils. 
c.  Detention basins shall be designed so that the resulting stormwater discharge from the developed site does not exceed the agricultural rate of discharge from the site. The township has defined an agricultural rate of stormwater runoff as 0.20 cubic feet per second per acre; or the capacity of the existing storm drainage facilities downstream of the detention basin outlet, whichever is less. 
d.  The volume of detention provided must be equal to or in excess of that calculated by the county drain commissioner's Simplified Detention Basin Design Procedure for a 100-year frequency storm. The volume of sediment storage is in addition to the volume required for detention. 
e.  The maximum water level shall be controlled by gravity outlets. The use of pumps for dewatering is not allowed. 
f.  Detention basin volumes shall not include volumes below the invert of outlet pipe(s). An additional one foot of volume below the outlet pipe invert is required to be incorporated into the design for sediment storage. 
g.  Detention basins shall be provided with an overflow spillway or storm sewer structure set at the high water levels capable of passing a 100-year frequency storm. The overflow spillway shall be located so not to cause potential damage to adjacent properties. To protect the surface from eroding overflow spillways shall be constructed with natural materials such as mesh or other approved materials. The edges of the surface shall have headers of the same or similar materials to prevent undercutting by the stormwater overflow. 
h.  A minimum of one foot of freeboard around the entire basin shall be provided above the design high water elevation. 
i.  All open detention basis having side slopes steeper than one foot vertical on four feet horizontal shall be fenced, except where their design is an integral part of the landscape, and where the township determines that depth and location are not hazardous. Fences shall be four feet high ornamental, vinyl coated chain link or approved equal fencing. Gates shall be 12 feet wide with double opening. The maximum side slopes of the basins shall be one foot vertical on four feet horizontal, with a four-foot minimum shoulder inside the fence. Refer to subsection q. for wet pond slope requirements. 
j.  Detention basins specifically designed for a location within yard setback areas shall be approved as to their concept and location by the planning commission. 
k.  The bottom of detention basins shall have a minimum slope of one percent (1.0%) to the outlet for dewatering purposes unless designed as a wet basin. 
l.  Detention basins are prohibited within a floodplain, defined as the area of land adjoining a river, stream, watercourse, lake or other body of water which will be inundated by a 100-year frequency flood event and where evidence exists that such flood has occurred, or would have occurred in the past given the land configuration. 
m.  Stormwater detention in paved parking lots is strictly prohibited. 
n.  Underground detention will be considered on a case-by-case basis with the following conditions: 
1.  Provisions must be made in the design for the collection and removal of sediment and debris accumulated in the system. All applicable health and safety requirements shall also be incorporated in the design of systems that require access by inspection or maintenance personnel. 
2.  Detailed shop drawings are required for underground detention systems, including pertinent engineering calculations and soils information. 
o.  Detention in wetland areas will be considered with the following conditions: 
1.  If in a regulated wetland, an MDEQ permit is required. 
2.  A permanent pretreatment system for the removal of sediment is required prior to outletting to the wetland. 
3.  Calculations indicating what the water elevation will rise to during the design storm event will be required. The design must show that properties adjacent to the wetland area will not be negatively impacted by the increase in stormwater runoff. Consideration must be given to future developments in the immediate area that could also use the wetland for stormwater management purposes. 
p.  The entire detention basin must be seeded or sodded. 
q.  Detention basins designed as a wet pond: 
1.  Shall have lowest overflow outlet elevation a minimum of eight feet above the pond bottom. 
2.  Side slopes higher than four feet below outlet shall be no steeper than one foot vertical to four feet horizontal. 
3.  Side slopes lower than four feet below the outlet shall be no steeper than one foot vertical to three feet horizontal. 
4.  All slopes above water surface shall be topsoiled seeded, and repeated as necessary until permanent vegetation is established or as requested. 
(2)  Retention basins. 
a.  If a gravity outlet cannot be provided, then the stormwater holding facility shall be designed as a retention basin with a volume equal to or in excess of the volume of stormwater runoff from two consecutive 100-year frequency storms including the volume of sediment storage. The stormwater storage volume shall be calculated by: 
Volume = 16,500 × 2 × total tributary acres × weighted runoff coefficient. 
b.  Off-site tributary areas: Retention basins must be sized for stormwater that originates off-site and which cannot be bypassed around the proposed retention basin to a site where the stormwater originally flowed to. In such cases, the retention basin must be sized using the following design parameters: 
Tributary acres: On-site area plus the off-site area. 
Runoff coefficient: Weighted C factor of the entire tributary area that considers the existing off-site conditions, and the proposed on-site improvements. 
c.  One foot of freeboard shall be provided around the entire basin above the design high water elevation. 
d.  All open retention basins having side slopes steeper than one foot vertical on four feet horizontal shall be fenced, except where their design is an integral part of the landscape, and where the township determines that depth and location are not hazardous. Fences shall be six feet high ornamental, plastic coated chain link or approved equal fencing. Gates shall be 12 feet wide with double opening. The maximum side slopes of the basins shall be one foot vertical on four feet horizontal, with a four-foot minimum shoulder inside the fence. 
e.  Retention basins are prohibited within a floodplain. 
f.  Retention of stormwater in parking lots is strictly prohibited. 
g.  The retention basin volume shall not include volumes below existing groundwater table or permanent water elevation. The retention basin design must demonstrate that the soils are capable of providing necessary infiltration. A soils report shall be submitted. 
(3)  Infiltration (recharge) systems. 
a.  An infiltration system will be considered if the design engineer can demonstrate that all of the following conditions exist: 
1.  An adequate positive outlet is not available or it is not possible to construct an off-site drainage system to convey basin discharge to the nearest outlet, and the installation of a retention basin is not feasible or practical. 
2.  The natural underlying soils are well-drained (hydrologic groups A or B) and the ground is suitable for percolation. 
3.  The underlying soils and ground water table have the ability to move water away from the site for the area and volume being drained. 
4.  Permanent pretreatment system upstream of inlet point to prevent any material from potentially clogging the infiltration medium (both surface and subsurface). 
5.  An overflow for a 100-year storm must be provided. 
6.  Infiltration system can be easily accessed for maintenance and replacement if necessary. The use of perforated storm pipe under pavements is discouraged. 
7.  There must be a method for determining a failure in the infiltration system. The system cannot be designed such that a failure in the infiltration system results in short circuit to the emergency overflow without on-site ponding. 
b.  The following information shall be supplied and/or incorporated in the design of infiltration systems: 
1.  Soil boring logs/sieve analysis/geotechnical report indicating type and properties of both surface and subsurface soils, suitability of surface soils for infiltration, capability of subsurface soils to conduct seepage to the underlying groundwater table, and flow from the system under mounding conditions at the maximum infiltration rate. Conditions greater than six inches/hour percolation rate will not be allowed. 
2.  Computed percolation rate and infiltration/exfiltration calculations. 
3.  Drainage area map, including any off-site contributing areas and emergency overflow route in the event of system failure. 
4.  Construction methods to prevent compacting the surface soils which may reduce the infiltration capacity of the soils. 
(4)  Permanent pretreatment systems. 
a.  Permanent pretreatment systems shall be sized for a "first flush" depth of 0.5 inches of runoff from the entire drainage basin area of the project. Permanent systems are required when discharging to an existing lake, stream, waterway or wetland. 
b.  Pretreatment can be in the form of open basins or engineered treatment systems. 
1.  Open basins shall be designed with minimum side slopes of one vertical to four horizontal, one foot of freeboard above design stormwater elevation, emergency sodded overflow, and outlet control devices. 
2.  Design calculations, plans and shop drawings for pre-fabricated engineered treatment systems shall be certified by a professional engineer licensed in the state. 
3.  Horizontal velocities through the system shall be minimized to prevent turbid flows and allow particles to settle in the pretreatment system. 
c.  Permanent pretreatment facilities will not be allowed within a floodplain. 
(5)  Maintenance of stormwater management basins and pretreatment facilities commercial, industrial and office sites. The proprietor shall maintain the stormwater management basins and permanent pretreatment facilities in proper working order at all times. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 6.3, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-214. - Grading and surface drainage. 
For all new subdivisions, site plans, private roads, and other development proposals within the township, a grading plan shall be submitted for review and approval. This standard establishes the minimum requirements for the design of grading and surface drainage in the township. 
(1)  Design considerations. 
a.  The grading plan shall be designed to insure that if a failure occurs in any storm drainage system, stormwaters will drain to an approved outlet thru overland swales without flooding buildings or adjacent properties. 
b.  Positive drainage of all yard areas is required for all residential developments. In special cases involving extreme vertical relief and wooded areas, isolated undrained potholes will be considered. These undrained areas must be provided with an easement for surface drainage and retention which will encompass the stormwater storage level for two 100-year frequency storms plus one foot of freeboard. 
c.  Generally, residential lot drainage shall be split at the building; drainage from the front of the building shall drain to the road and drainage from the rear of the building shall drain to the rear lot line. Rear to front surface drainage shall be avoided and will only be permitted under extreme topographic conditions. If rear to front drainage is permitted, only the drainage from the rear of the specific lot is allowed. 
d.  Rear to front lot drainage shall have protective drainage swales around the building. The high point of the swale shall generally be located a minimum distance of 20 feet off the rear of the building and one foot below the building brick ledge grade. 
e.  Side yard swales shall be a minimum of 0.5 feet below the building brick ledge grade of the building and located a minimum of ten feet away from the building. 
f.  Rear-yards shall be drained with swales and shallow ditches unless topographic features prevent surface drainage. 
g.  Meet existing ground at the exterior property boundaries. Construct an intercepting swale to prevent drainage onto adjacent property or lots. 
h.  All building footing drains and sump pumps shall discharge into enclosed storm systems outside of the road right-of-way if available. When footing drains or sump pumps are discharged onto the ground surface, the point of discharge shall generally be directed away from side lot lines and road right-of-way and not intensify stormwater to adjacent property. 
i.  In residential development with poor draining soils or high groundwater table, an enclosed drainage system for footing drains/sump pumps discharge is required. (See underdrain/sump pump collection systems). 
(2)  Slope requirements. 
a.  Protective perimeter slope: A minimum slope of five percent is required for areas within ten feet of building perimeter. 
b.  Minimum ground slope for any portion of the site shall be two percent. 
c.  Drainage swales along side and rear property lines, and the protective swale around buildings shall have a two percent slope. Rear yard swales shorter than 300 feet may have a minimum slope of one percent. 
d.  Maximum ground slope for any graded portion of the site shall be one foot vertical to four horizontal. Refer to Section 7.4C of the zoning ordinance for berm requirements. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 6.4, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-215. - Storm sewers and open drains. 
The following details and specifications shall be required for developments utilizing storm sewers and/or open drains to convey runoff from the site. All such storm drainage systems must outlet to either a detention basin, retention basin, infiltration system, or pretreatment facility as outlined in section 42-213 of this article prior to discharging to any natural or man-made water course, wetland, drain or other body of water. 
This section of the design standards establishes the minimum requirements for the design of storm drainage systems in the township. In general, the design engineer shall follow the storm drainage standards set forth from the OCDC. 
(1)  Storm sewer capacity. Sufficient capacity shall be provided in the storm sewer system to allow existing runoff from upstream drainage to "pass through" the proposed storm sewer system. 
a.  When a storm sewer is designed to provide capacity for upstream areas, the hydraulic gradient shall remain in the pipe. For storm sewer designed to take on-site drainage only, the hydraulic gradient must be no higher than one foot below storm structure rim elevations. 
b.  When the hydraulic gradient is above the top of the sewer pipe the design elevation of the hydraulic gradient shall be indicated on the profile at each manhole. 
c.  If the heights of the hydraulic gradient exceed two feet above the top of pipe, rubber gaskets at pipe joints shall be used. 
(2)  Hydraulics and hydrology. 
a.  Storm drainage systems shall be designed for a minimum of a ten-year storm. To determine the stormwater runoff, the rational method shall be used (Q = CIA). Where: 
Q = peak rate of runoff in cubic feet per second 
A = area in acres 
C = runoff coefficient for drainage area 
I = average rainfall intensity in inches per hour for a given time of concentration 
b.  The formula for rainfall intensity (I) shall be determined by using the formula: 
I = 175/(T + 25), where T is the time of concentration in minutes. For residential areas, the initial T shall usually be 20 minutes; for commercial and office areas, the initial T shall be 15 minutes or less. 
c.  Runoff coefficients shall be determined for each individual drainage area. Drainage area coefficient determination shall generally be based on the following: 
	Surface 	C 
BY TYPE 	Agricultural/grass 	0.15 
	Impermeable 	0.85 
	Basins and wetland 	1.00 
BY USE 	Residential 	0.35 
	Multiple housing 	0.55 
	Commercial/industrial 	0.75 
 
The above runoff coefficients are minimum. Actual site design may require an increase in runoff coefficient. A weighted runoff coefficient can be used (provide calculations). Coefficients proposed for a project are subject to review and approval by the township engineer. 
d.  An overland flood route for a 100-year storm frequency shall be provided and shown on the plans. A minimum freeboard of one foot shall be provided from any building's exterior finished grade (brick ledge) to the 100-year flood elevation. 
e.  In Manning's formula, n = 0.013, shall typically be used for hydraulic calculations. 
f.  Minimum design velocity shall be 2.5 feet per second and maximum design velocity shall be ten feet per second, with the pipe flowing full. 
g.  Allowable pipe slopes: 
Pipe Diameter 
(inches) 	Minimum Slope 
(feet per 100 feet) 
12 	0.32 
15 	0.24 
18 	0.18 
21 	0.14 
24 	0.12 
27 	0.10 
30 	0.09 
36 	0.08 
42 	0.06 
48 	0.05 
54 	0.04 
60 	0.04 
 
h.  For changes in pipe size, the maximum flow velocity for full pipe flow shall be maintained by continuity of the 0.80 diameter depth above invert. 
i.  A drop of 0.10 feet in the downstream sewer invert shall be provided for direction changes of 30 degrees or greater to compensate for velocity head loss of the incoming flow. 
j.  All road catch basin and inlet leads shall be laid on a minimum slope of one percent. 
k.  Wherever differences in manhole pipe invert elevations exceed two feet, a two-foot sump shall be provided to prevent channel erosion. 
(3)  Sewer pipe. 
a.  The minimum pipe size for storm sewers, catch basin leads and inlet leads shall be 12 inches in diameter. 
b.  Rear yard under drain system with no inlets: eight-inch perforated plastic pipe. 
c.  All storm sewer shall have a minimum of four feet of cover. 
d.  Storm sewers shall generally be located on the opposite sides of streets from water mains. Storm sewers shall be located ten feet from the right-of-way line in the public right-of-way. 
e.  A minimum ten feet horizontal separation from outside of pipes is required between storm sewer and water mains. 
f.  Granular material meeting the requirements for MDOT granular material, Class II, compacted to 95 percent maximum density, shall be required for full depth backfill of trenches under existing or proposed road surfaces, pavements, curbs, driveways, parking areas, and sidewalks, and where the storm sewer is within a one-on-one influence of the edge of existing or proposed pavements. Compaction testing shall be performed by an independent laboratory. 
g.  Storm sewer leads shall have compacted granular backfill within the entire street right-of-way beneath all existing and proposed pavement, and between all utility crossings. 
(4)  Manholes. 
a.  Manholes shall be located at: 
1.  Points where the sewer changes direction. 
2.  Points where the size of the sewer changes. 
3.  Points where the slope of the sewer changes. 
4.  The junction of sewer lines. 
5.  Street intersections or other points where catch basins or inlets are to be connected. 
6.  The end of the sewer line. 
b.  Maximum distance between manholes shall be as follows: 
Diameter of Sewer 
(inches) 	Maximum Manhole Spacing 
(feet) 
8—15 	350 
18—30 	400 
36—48 	500 
54—60 	550 
66—72 	650 
78 and larger 	1,000 
 
(5)  Catch basins, inlets, and end-sections. 
a.  Size. All inlet/rear-yard catch basins are to be four feet in diameter. 
b.  Catch basins shall be located: 
1.  At the radius returns of street intersections. A maximum distance of 150 feet is allowed when drainage is required to go around a corner between a high point and a corner catch basin. 
2.  At maximum intervals of 400 feet along a continuous slope. 
3.  At all low points in streets, swales and ditches, where applicable. 
4.  At a location to provide a maximum of 800 feet of drainage from two directions. 
c.  Standard rear yard basins shall be provided at all low points in easements. All catch basins shall be located within four feet of lot corners. A minimum of 12-foot side yard easements to the street shall be included at all rear yard basins. 
d.  All catch basins and inlets located at low points in poor draining soils shall have a minimum of two ten-foot runs of six inches perforated pipe with pea gravel bedding and backfill. Other trench collecting underdrains may be required, as required by the township engineer. 
e.  Catch basin leads may tap directly into sewers 48 inches in diameter and larger. 
f.  End-sections or headwalls shall be placed at all culverts and pipe inlets or outlets. 
g.  A prefabricated bar screen shall be used on all storm sewer openings 18 inches in diameter and larger. The bar screens shall be constructed according to an approved separate enlarged detail in the drawings and shall be designed to be sturdy, permanent easily maintained, non-clogging and shall have clear openings of no more than six inches. 
(6)  Underdrain/sump pump systems. 
a.  Where the proposed ground surface slope is less than two percent), supplementary drainage shall be provided by an underdrainage system. 
b.  Place underdrain at a minimum grade of 0.50 percent. 
c.  Trench for underdrain shall have adequate depth to provide gravity flow of sump pump discharge lines to underdrain, and shall have a minimum depth of three feet from the property line. 
d.  Install four-foot diameter inlets at 400-foot maximum intervals along the underdrain and located three feet from side lot lines. 
e.  Install a two-inch PVC capped tee at each lot for the sump pump with overflow device. 
f.  Show the underdrain system with sump pump on the storm sewer plan, with a dimension to the nearest lot line for each sump pump tee. 
g.  The sump pump collector system may be combined with the underdrain system, as noted above. 
h.  Minimum pipe material shall be eight-inch PVC constructed with a minimum of 3.0 feet of cover and 0.50 percent. 
i.  Eight-inch lines must not be used for the collection of surface runoff and therefore structures on these size lines must have solid covers. 
(7)  Open drain requirements. 
a.  Open drains shall have slope protection (rip-rap) at bends with radius of 500 feet or less and other points as designated by the township engineer. 
b.  The drain bottom and slopes, to the hydraulic gradient line, shall be sodded. The remainder of the drain shall be seeded. The township will not approve the work until all turf is established. 
c.  Specific drain cross-section and velocity control measures will be approved by the township engineer on an individual basis. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 6.5, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-216. - Easements. 
(a)  All easements shall be for access for maintenance and/or inspection of stormwater management facilities. 
(b)  Easements for storm sewers and open ditches shall be as specified in chapter 22, article III. The easement must be large enough to accommodate a slope of one horizontal to one vertical from the sewer invert to the edge of easement, but shall have a minimum width of 12 feet, centered upon the sewer or ditch. 
(c)  An easement shall be provided for the pretreatment system to allow access for maintenance and/or inspection. 
(d)  When drainage is required to flow across an adjacent lot, a 12-foot wide stormwater easement, centered on the drain, must be provided. This easement shall be dedicated to the homeowners association with restriction against use or occupation of easements by the property owners and/or by other utilities in any manner that would restrict storm system maintenance or repair operations. 
(e)  A written description and drawing of the easement(s) in a clear manner shall be prepared by the designing engineer and be presented to the township. The township engineer shall review the easement documents for compliance with all township standards and ordinances and provide approval or disapproval. 
(f)  Easements for possible extensions shall be provided to the property lines at locations designated by the township engineer. 
(g)  The horizontal alignment of sewers that are not proposed to generally follow street, drive, or parking area pavements, shall parallel property lines or building lines. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 6.6, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-217. - Maintenance. 
(a)  A maintenance agreement per chapter 22, article III, to provide the means and assurance that maintenance of stormwater management facilities, is required for all projects. 
(b)  In no instance shall any property owner, block, redirect, impede, or alter any existing or proposed stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 6.7, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-218. - Final acceptance. 
(a)  All sewer systems shall be subject to a final inspection prior to acceptance of the system by the township engineer. 
(b)  A set of approved record drawings and a copy of all recorded easements that were required for and following construction are required for final acceptance of the storm sewer. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 6.8, 12-12-2007)  
Secs. 42-219—42-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - PAVEMENTS AND WALKWAYS 
 
Sec. 42-231. - Generally. 
This standard establishes the minimum requirements for pavement and pedestrian walkways installed within the township to provide public health, safety, and general welfare of the township. The most current township zoning ordinance shall be adhered, in particular Article 8, Access, Circulation, Parking, and Loading and Article 11, Private Roads, and article III of this chapter. All pavements that are within an additional jurisdiction shall meet the requirements established by said governing agency, such as, but not limited to the road commission for the county (RCOC), the state department of transportation (MDOT), and federal regulations for ADA requirements. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 7.1, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-232. - Private roads. 
The design of private roads shall conform to the township zoning ordinance, Article 11, Private Roads, and the following standards: 
Design requirements: 
(1)  Soil borings are required to be taken near the beginning and terminus of the proposed private road and at intervals not to exceed 500 feet in between. 
(2)  A soils report prepared by a qualified soils consultant shall be provided along with the private road plans. 
(3)  The applicant shall remove all unsuitable soil including muck, peat and marl, as well as brush, trees, tree stumps, and similar materials from the full width of the roadway, including the shoulders and ditches. 
(4)  The maximum grade allowed on any surface type is six percent. 
(5)  The minimum longitudinal grade on any roadway, except parking areas, shall be: 
a.  Six-tenths of a percent for concrete pavement. 
b.  One percent for hot mix asphalt pavement. 
(6)  Road grades in excess of six percent shall be approved by the township planning commission upon the recommendation of the township's consultants. At the intersection of two roadways, however, the maximum grade shall be three percent for a distance of 100 feet from the point of intersection. 
(7)  The intersection radii in residential developments shall be a minimum 25 feet. 
(8)  The intersection radii in industrial developments shall be minimum 35 feet. Radii for commercial developments will be evaluated on a case-to-case basis. 
(9)  The minimum length of vertical curves shall be 100 feet for grade changes greater than two percent. 
(10)  The minimum radius in horizontal alignment is 250 feet. When reverse curves are used provide a minimum 100 feet tangent. 
(11)  All dead-end roads shall terminate in a cul-de-sac turn-around with a minimum radius of 60 feet. This requirement may be waived or modified by the planning commission in the case of private roads having a boulevard cross section and/or more than one travel lane in each direction, and where it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the township engineer and fire chief that safe and efficient circulation will be maintained. 
(12)  Sight distances on horizontal and vertical curves and at intersections shall be a minimum of 260 feet measured at a point ten feet from the edge of the traveled way at a height of 42 inches to an object height of 42 inches. RCOC specifications shall be applied. 
(13)  Road and sidewalk cross sections, materials, and dimensioning shall meet the minimum requirements of the most current township pavement detail sheet. 
(14)  Approaches to any sites from roads under the jurisdiction of the RCOC or the MDOT shall be designed according to their criteria. Approval of these improvements by the above agencies must be obtained and furnished to the township engineer prior to township approval of the paving plans. Passing lanes and acceleration/deceleration lanes are required by the township on connections to all paved roads under RCOC or MDOT standards. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 7.2, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-233. - Public streets. 
All streets within public right-of-way shall be designed according to the criteria and specifications of the RCOC or MDOT. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 7.3, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-234. - Parking lots. 
The design of parking lots shall conform to the township zoning ordinance, Article 8, Access, Circulation, Parking, and Loading, and the following standards: 
(1)  Design requirements. 
a.  Soil borings are required to be taken at intermittent intervals of the proposed private parking lot and not to exceed 100 feet in between. 
b.  A soils report prepared by a qualified soils consultant shall be provided along with the paving plans. 
c.  The applicant shall remove all unsuitable soil including muck, peat and marl, as well as brush, trees, tree stumps, and similar materials from the full width of the parking lot, including the curbs and approaches. 
(2)  Parking lot classifications. 
a.  Class A: Light duty driveways and small parking lots with less than 40 stalls. This cross section is not suitable for heavy refuse truck pick-up or delivery services. In areas where this service is used, the Class B cross section should be used for routing to and from the service area. 
b.  Class B: Parking lots containing more than 40 stalls, light to medium truck traffic, typical for commercial lots. 
c.  Class C: Industrial lots, heavy truck uses, some commercial lots, bus routes. 
d.  Class D: Parking areas where extremely heavy truck traffic is encountered should be designed on a per case basis by a qualified professional engineer. 
(3)  Parking lot design requirements. 
a.  In parking areas the minimum grade allowed on any surface is one percent. 
b.  Parking lots shall be of the size, configuration, stripping, and space size as required by Article 8 of the township zoning ordinance. 
c.  Parking lot pavement cross sections, materials, and dimensioning shall meet the minimum requirements of the most current township pavement detail sheet. 
d.  Curbing is required around all parking lot perimeters and internal parking lot islands per the Section 8.7.D of the zoning ordinance. 
e.  HMA curbs will not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 7.4, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-235. - Approaches. 
All drives and approaches within public right-of-way shall be designed according to the criteria and specifications of the RCOC or MDOT. The design of drives and approaches shall conform to Article 8, Access, Circulation, Parking, and Loading, of the township zoning ordinance and the following standards: 
Approach design requirements: 
(1)  Approach cross sections, materials, and dimensioning shall meet the minimum requirements of the most current township pavement detail sheet. 
(2)  Approaches shall have adequate flares to provide a safe turning radius. 
(3)  Heavily traveled industrial drives shall be designed by a qualified professional engineer. 
(4)  For residential approaches constructed on an existing curbed street, the curb and gutter shall be entirely removed or cut horizontally. 
(5)  When an MDOT Type "M" approach is constructed on an existing curbed street, the curb and gutter must be entirely removed. The extent of the removal shall extend to the nearest joint past the spring line of the new curb. 
(6)  Commercial and industrial approaches shall meet MDOT standards. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 7.5, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-236. - Sidewalks and safety pathways. 
This standard establishes the minimum requirements for pathways, sidewalks and sidewalk repair in the township. Sidewalks and/or safety pathways shall be required as set forth in Ordinance No. 67A, article III of chapter 46, and article III of this chapter. As used in this section, the terms sidewalk and safety path shall be used according to the "subclassifications" set forth in article III of this chapter. 
(1)  Sidewalk design requirements. 
a.  Where sidewalks/safety paths are proposed, they shall be indicated on the site plan as set forth in Ordinance No. 67A. 
b.  Sidewalk shall be five feet wide and generally located one foot inside the existing or proposed right-of-way line of public streets. A width of eight feet is required in areas with above average pedestrian traffic and along major streets. 
c.  Sidewalk transverse slopes shall meet the requirements of the township pavement standard detail sheet. Longitudinal grades shall not exceed one inch per foot. 
d.  ADA barrier free access ramps are required at all crossings. 
e.  Sidewalk alignment shall match adjoining or existing sidewalk where possible. The alignment shall integrate the natural features, yet maintain safety. 
f.  Sidewalk cross sections, materials, and dimensioning shall meet the minimum requirements of the most current township pavement detail sheet. 
(2)  Safety pathway design requirements. The inclusion of a safety path may be required as part of proposed development. The developer shall review article III of this chapter which regulates the development, construction, maintenance, and signage of safety paths. 
(3)  Repair requirements. 
a.  Sidewalk flags shall be replaced when one or more of the following conditions exist: stubber, crack, drainage problem, holes, scaling, slope, reverse pitch, and thin walk. 
b.  Replacement shall correct the problem and installation requirement shall be per design requirements. 
(4)  Performance guarantee. A performance guarantee for safety paths and sidewalks shall be as set forth in article III. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 7.6, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-237. - Inspection and final acceptance. 
(a)  The contractor shall notify the township engineer 48 hours before the conclusion of each step in the pavement construction. Inspections will be made at a minimum: 
(1)  Prior to the installation of the subbase. 
(2)  After the installation of the subbase. 
(3)  After final grading and drainage is complete of the subbase. 
(4)  During pavement installation. 
(b)  Testing will be required on materials used and installed for quality assurance as noted in the specifications. 
(c)  The applicant shall provide weigh slips which certify the quantity and class of material used for subbase and aggregate used for the road and shoulder surfaces. 
(d)  All public road systems shall be subject to a final inspection and approval by the road commission for the county prior to acceptance of the system by the township or issuance of any certificate of occupancy. 
(e)  A set of approved record drawings, together with copies of all material certifications, density testing reports, concrete cylinder test reports and any recorded easement shall be submitted to the township prior to final acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 7.7, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-238—42-250. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - RESTORATION AND LANDSCAPING 
 
Sec. 42-251. - Generally. 
Article 7, Landscaping, Screening, Fences, and Walls, in the township zoning ordinance provides minimum standards for the design and use of landscaping, greenbelts, and screening, and for the protection and enhancement of the township's environment. The restoration and landscaping standards elaborate on the ordinance providing minimum safety and design criteria for restoration and landscaping to assure resident wellbeing and longevity of the installed landscaping and restoration. These landscape provisions are intended to apply to landscaping as required by Ordinance No. 67A. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 8.1, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-252. - Planting. 
(a)  Design requirements. 
(1)  Tree quantities, placement, and type shall meet the township zoning ordinance requirements and shall be approved by the township planning commission. 
(2)  The township zoning ordinance shall govern any deviations from the landscape plans. 
(b)  Installation. 
(1)  All plant material shall be installed in a sound workman like manner in accordance with ANLA guidelines and shall conform to the American Standard for Nursery Stock ANSIZ60.1 and be: 
a.  Nursery grown under climatic and in soil conditions similar to those in the locality of the project. 
b.  State department of agricultural inspected and approved. 
c.  No. 1 grade with straight, unscarred trunks, and well developed uniform crowns on trees. 
d.  The minimum acceptable sizes of plants measured before pruning with branches in normal position shall conform to measurements specified. 
(2)  Tree stakes, guy wires, and tree wrap if necessary are to be removed by the developer after two-year guarantee period. 
(3)  All landscaping costs shall be included as a part of the performance guarantee for the project. 
(4)  All plant material shall be subject to inspection and approval by the township planner. 
(5)  All plant tags shall remain until inspection and approval. 
(6)  All landscape areas shall have proper drainage that prevents excess water from standing on lawn areas or around trees and shrubs. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 8.2, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-253. - Lawn restoration. 
Disturbed areas shall be restored to original or better condition and per Section 7.5(C)(7) of the zoning ordinance. In addition, slope conditions will also determine the method of restoration. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 8.3, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-254. - Completion and maintenance. 
(a)  Upon completion and installation of the landscaping, the developer shall request final landscape inspection from the township. 
(b)  A certificate of occupancy will be issued only after completion of the landscape plan or the developer provides a cash deposit, letter of credit, or certified check to ensure installation of required landscaping. 
(c)  Planting materials shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance for a period of two years following acceptance by township. Developer shall replace without cost to the township, any dead or unacceptable plants as determined by the township planner at any time during the guarantee period. 
(d)  If any plant material dies or becomes diseased, it shall be replaced within 30 days of written notice from the township or within an approved extended time period. 
(e)  All required irrigation systems must be maintained in working order and operated to ensure growth of the lawn and landscape areas. 
(f)  Overspray from irrigation on walkways and roadways shall not occur. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 8.4, 12-12-2007)  
Sec. 42-255. - Walls. 
Article 7, Landscaping, Screening, Fences, and Walls, of the township zoning ordinance should be met. 
(1)  Walls a total height of four feet or higher shall require a seal of a registered engineer. 
(2)  Boulder walls shall have a maximum three feet vertical to one foot horizontal side slopes. 
(3)  Drawings shall show cross sections, heights, foundations, drainage, and proposed materials. 
(4)  It shall be the full responsibility of the design engineer to ensure that the retaining wall system selected for a given location is appropriate and assure stability. 
(5)  At the discretion of the township or township engineer soil bores and a geotechnical report with a detailed slope stability analysis may be requested for proposed retaining walls. 
(6)  Proper drainage shall be implemented in the retaining wall system. 
(7)  Living walls i.e. walls consisting of plant material, shall be reviewed on a site specific basis. 
(Ord. No. 106A, § 8.5, 12-12-2007)  
Chapter 46 - SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER DIVISIONS OF LAND[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision saved from repeal, § 1-11(12); buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42; utilities, ch. 62; waterways, ch. 66; zoning, app. B. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 46-1—46-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ACREAGE DIVISIONS 
 
Sec. 46-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Terms not defined in this article shall have the meaning as set forth in the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
Accessible, in reference to a parcel, means that the parcel meets one or both of the following requirements: 
(1)  Has an area where a private driveway provides vehicular access to an existing private road or public road and meets all applicable location standards of the state transportation department or county road commission under Public Act No. 200 of 1969 (MCL 247.321 et seq.), or has an area where a private driveway can provide vehicular access to an existing private road or public road and meet all such applicable location standards. 
(2)  Is served by an existing easement that provides vehicular access to an existing private road or public road and that meets all applicable location standards of the state transportation department or county road commission under Public Act No. 200 of 1969 (MCL 247.321 et seq.), or can be served by a proposed easement that will provide vehicular access to an existing private road or public road and that will meet all such applicable location standards. 
Acreage division means the splitting, dividing, or separating of a parcel or tract of land into parts, by or for the purpose of selling or leasing that land for more than one year, or for building or development upon that land, where the resulting parcels are not, or will not, be owned by the same persons, or where the applicant seeks from the township a separate tax identification number for a resulting parcel of land, and the splitting or separation of that land is not pursuant to a procedure regulated under either article III of this chapter or the site condominium regulations of section 2227 of the zoning ordinance. 
Acreage split committee means a committee composed of the township zoning compliance official and three members of the township planning commission. 
Applicant means a person who may hold any divisible interest in land, whether recorded or not, and who is seeking approval for a division or partition pursuant to this article. 
Conceptual plan means the conceptual plan drawing or amended plan drawing required for lot division. 
Conceptual plan meeting means the consideration of a conceptual plan drawing or amended plan drawing at a regular or special meeting of the township acreage split committee. 
County thoroughfare road means a county road which is under the maintenance and supervision of the county road commission and serves as a thoroughfare for access to other private and public roads. 
Development site means any parcel or lot on which exists or which is intended for building development other than the following: agricultural use involving the production of plants and animals useful to humans, including forages and sod crops, grains, feed crops, and field crops, dairies and dairy products, poultry and poultry products, livestock, including breeding and grazing of cattle, swine, and similar animals, berries, herbs, flowers, seeds, grasses, nursery stock, fruits, vegetables, Christmas trees, and other similar uses and activities, and forestry use involving the planting, management, or harvesting of timber. 
Exempt split and exempt division mean the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof, or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, that does not result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent. For purposes of this definition, the term "40 acres or the equivalent" means either 40 acres, a quarter-quarter section containing not less than 30 acres, or a government lot containing not less than 30 acres. 
Existing easement means a dedicated easement or fee interest recorded with the county register of deeds which grants to a parcel, resulting from an acreage division, the right to cross an adjacent parcel or property in order to provide ingress and egress to a private road or public road. The easement shall have a minimum width of 66 feet as required for a public road right-of-way or as required for a private road right-of-way by the zoning ordinance. 
Private driveway means any piece of privately owned and maintained property which is used for access by vehicular traffic to a single parcel of private property and is not open to or normally used by the public. 
Private road means the improved area of a private road right-of-way designed and constructed pursuant to township requirements for private roads and providing the principal means of vehicular access to the abutting properties. 
Private road right-of-way means an area consisting of a minimum width of 66 feet, or a width otherwise approved by the township as provided for in this article or in the zoning ordinance, in which there is presently a private road, or where a private road is planned for construction in the future, as required by the township's ordinances. 
Proposed easement means a document, meeting all the recording requirements of the county register of deeds, for the purpose of conveying a dedicated easement or fee interest which grants to a parcel, resulting from an acreage division, the right to cross an adjacent parcel or property in order to provide ingress and egress to a private road or public road. The easement shall have a minimum width of 66 feet as required for a public road right-of-way or as required for a private road right-of-way by the zoning ordinance. 
Public road means the improved area of a public road right-of-way under the jurisdiction of the county road commission or state department of transportation. 
Public road right-of-way means an area consisting of a minimum width of 66 feet, or a width otherwise under the jurisdiction of the county road commission or state department of transportation, in which there is presently a public road or where a public road is planned for the future. 
Resulting parcels means parcels of land created as a result of the land division accomplished by this article. 
Road frontage means the minimum dimension as designated by the zoning ordinance. 
Zoning ordinance means the township zoning ordinance, Ordinance No. 67. 
(Ord. No. 104A, art. III, 11-10-1999) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-32. - Intent of article. 
This article is intended to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents and the property owners of the township by regulating the division and parceling of land within the township which is not otherwise subject to the platting procedures or requirements of article III of this chapter or other ordinances. It is apparent that adequate public or private roads are essential to ensure adequate access to individual parcels of real property by both the purchasers of those parcels and by emergency service vehicles. Requiring the construction of adequate private roads as part of the acreage division process is essential to the public health, safety, and welfare. The purpose of this article is to ensure adequate provision for ingress and egress to individual parcels of real property and structures thereon for vehicular traffic and utilities, to provide adequate access for emergency services and emergency service vehicles, and to provide rules and regulations for the orderly development of land as provided for in the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). This article is further intended to ensure that parcels resulting from a division of land have sufficient area to conform with public health requirements for septic or other on-site waste treatment systems where the parcels are not served by a public sanitary sewer system. Further, this article is intended to ensure that parcels resulting from a division of land have sufficient area to accommodate a residential structure of a size conforming with the setback and minimum floor area requirements of the zoning ordinance for the zoning district where the parcel resulting from a division is located. 
(Ord. No. 104A, art. II, 11-10-1999; Ord. No. 104A.001, art. I, 10-11-2000)  
Sec. 46-33. - Compliance with article; exemptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to subdivide or partition any parcel of land (acreage division) except in accordance with this article. The following, however, shall be exempted from approval and review pursuant to this article: 
(1)  A parcel proposed for subdivision through a recorded plat pursuant to the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(2)  A lot in a recorded plat proposed to be divided in accordance with the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(3)  An exempt split as defined in this article, as long as it is accessible. 
(4)  Other partitioning or splitting that results in parcels of 20 acres or more if each is not accessible and the parcel was in existence on March 31, 1997, or resulted from exempt splitting under the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(5)  A split accomplished pursuant to the site condominium regulations of section 2227 of the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Any real property division which has not been approved by the township under the terms of this article and is not otherwise exempted or set forth in subsection (a) of this section will not be considered a valid division of such property, and any parcel of real property which has not received approval by the township pursuant to the provisions of this article will not be placed on the township tax rolls as a separate and individual parcel of property, nor shall building permits be issued for construction upon parcels resulting from a division not approved under this article. 
(Ord. No. 104A, art. IV, § 1, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 46-34. - Land division authorization requirements. 
Under this article, a parcel of real property shall be partitioned or divided if it complies with or otherwise does not violate the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and article III of this chapter and also meets the following criteria: 
(1)  Approval by the acreage split committee pursuant to this article and compliance with all application and procedural requirements of this article are required. 
(2)  The resulting parcel shall have a width not less than that required by the zoning ordinance for the applicable zoning district. However, a resulting parcel intended for utility uses as defined under the zoning ordinance need not comply with the minimal width required for the applicable zoning district. 
(3)  The resulting parcel shall have an area not less than that required by the zoning ordinance for the applicable zoning district, except that the minimum resulting parcel area shall be no less than one acre in all zoning districts unless the resulting parcel shall have immediate access to a public sanitary sewer system. In addition, if the parcel is located in a residential district, the resulting parcel shall have sufficient area to conform with the building setback and the minimum floor area requirements of the zoning ordinance. However, a resulting parcel intended for utility uses as defined in the zoning ordinance need not comply with the minimal area required for the applicable zoning district. 
(4)  The resulting parcel shall have a depth-to-width ratio in conformance with the zoning ordinance for the applicable zoning district. However, a resulting parcel intended for utility uses as defined in the zoning ordinance need not comply with the depth-to-width ratio for the applicable zoning district. 
(5)  Every resulting parcel shall be accessible as defined under this article. 
(6)  For any parcel that does not meet the requirement of subsection (5) of this section for accessibility, and/or that does not meet the requirements of section 2207 and section 2217C2 of the zoning ordinance, the parcel may be split if it meets all of the other requirements of state law and of this article and other ordinances of the township, if the person seeking the split records a notice on the title at the office of the county register of deeds, which notice shall contain the written statement set forth below in this subsection, and the person seeking the split furnishes a copy of the recorded notice to the township, with proof of payment of the recording fee therefor. The notice shall state: "Notice is hereby given that the real property herein described is not a buildable parcel, and is not accessible as required in Charter Township of Oxford Ordinance No. 104A, Ordinance 67, and/or as defined in the Land Division Act, 1967 PA 288, MCL 560.101 to 560.293, until such time as the lot abuts a public road or an approved private road as required by Oxford Township Ordinances." This subsection shall not be interpreted as granting or creating a right to a variance from the requirements of the zoning ordinance or any other township ordinance. 
(7)  Any resulting parcel that is a development site shall have adequate easements for public utilities from the parcel to existing public utilities. 
(Ord. No. 104A, art. IV, § 2, 11-10-1999; Ord. No. 104A.001, art. II, 10-25-2000; Ord. No. 104A.002, art. I, 3-14-2001; Ord. No. 104A.003, arts. I, II, 1-23-2002)  
Sec. 46-35. - Initial review of application by zoning compliance official. 
(a)  Application materials. An applicant for an acreage division regulated by this section must submit to the township zoning compliance official a completed application form provided by the township. The applicant shall submit a base application fee that has been set by resolution of the Charter Township of Oxford Board of Trustees, which fee is nonrefundable. The applicant may also be required to deposit an amount into an escrow account to be drawn upon in the event review is required by the township planner, township attorney and/or township engineer. An additional deposit may further be required to be paid into escrow in the event the initial set escrow is exhausted. Any unused amount paid into escrow shall be returned to the applicant following final action on the acreage division application by the acreage split committee. The completed application must contain the following materials and information, along with such other information determined necessary by township board resolution. 
(1)  Proof of ownership. Written verification and proof of ownership of the parcel in question in the form of a policy of title insurance or a commitment for such policy, or by a warranty deed, quit claim deed and its associated warranty deed, land contract, or other legal document of conveyance, which identifies the owners of both the parcel of property proposed for division and the parent parcel of property. If the applicant is not the owner of the property or does not own full title to the property, the applicant must also submit documentation indicating all owners of the property in question along with written verification and proof of their ownership, and written authorization from those owners seeking the acreage division. 
(2)  Conceptual plan drawing. A drawing of the proposed acreage division, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet where the original unsplit parcel is ten acres or less, and one inch equals 100 feet for original parcels exceeding ten acres, which shall include the following information: 
a.  Dimensions of the existing parcel and proposed resulting parcels. 
b.  Location of the existing buildings and structures, including setbacks from all existing and proposed lot lines. 
c.  Location of existing public and private easements. 
d.  Location of existing and proposed easements and rights-of-way for public and private roads and utilities. 
e.  Location of proposed home or building sites, including all setbacks. 
f.  The proposed utilities and existing layout for water, sewer, gas and electrical utilities as applicable. 
g.  A location map drawn to a scale of at least one inch equals 2,000 feet, showing the location of the proposed acreage division in relation to the surrounding properties and land uses in the township. 
In regard to subsections (a)(2)b through e of this section, the conceptual plan drawing shall either show the required items or, if the items are not present, include an affirmative statement that the items do not exist and/or are not proposed. 
(b)  Application review and meeting. Upon receipt of the applicant's application and materials, the zoning compliance official may submit one copy of the application and plan to the township's planning consultant, attorney and engineer for their review. An initial meeting may be arranged by the zoning compliance official with the applicant, and may include the township planning consultant, township engineer, and township attorney for the purpose of reviewing the proposed acreage division and roads, rights-of-way, easements, and all information required for the application and conceptual plan drawing. If the township planning consultant, engineer or attorney is used, the applicant shall pay into an escrow account an amount to cover their cost as provided by this section. This discretionary meeting may be held for the purpose of providing recommendations to the applicant prior to submission of the proposed acreage division plan to the acreage split committee for its review and decision. 
(c)  Amendment of plan drawing. The applicant may amend the plan drawing to reflect the recommendations of the zoning compliance official and resubmit the application in compliance with this article. 
(d)  Determination of exclusion from platting provisions. The zoning compliance official shall determine whether the proposed acreage division is excluded from the platting provisions of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and article III of this chapter. The application for acreage division cannot proceed under this article unless the division is excluded from the platting procedures of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and article III of this chapter. The zoning compliance official may consult with other officials, including county officials, to make this determination. 
(Ord. No. 104A, art. V, 11-10-1999; Ord. No. 104A.004, art. 1, 5-14-2008)  
Sec. 46-36. - Preliminary approval. 
As soon as the zoning compliance official has completed initial review of the application and made other determinations as required by section 46-35, the official shall submit the application to the acreage split committee for its review for preliminary approval under this article. The acreage split committee shall grant or deny preliminary approval in writing. If preliminary approval is denied, the applicant must be provided reasons in writing for the denial. 
(Ord. No. 104A, art. VI, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 46-37. - Surveyed site plan submission. 
Once preliminary approval has been granted, the applicant shall provide the acreage split committee with four copies of a surveyed site plan prepared by a registered surveyor or civil engineer which contains a minimum of the following survey information: 
(1)  The legal description and illustration of each existing easement or proposed easement for vehicular access and utility easements, if any. 
(2)  The legal description and illustration of the outside boundaries of the land being divided, including gross and net acreage. 
(3)  The legal description and illustration of each resulting parcel following division, including gross and net acreage. 
(4)  Proposed names for all private roads. 
(5)  If the township's wetland inventory map indicates the presence of wetlands on any resulting parcel, then a wetland consultant's report delineating such wetlands shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 104A, art. VII, 11-10-1999; Ord. No. 104A.005, art. I, 6-9-2010)  
Sec. 46-38. - Acreage split committee substantive review. 
The acreage split committee shall review the application, the conceptual plan drawing and the surveyed site plan at a regular or special meeting of the acreage split committee. The acreage split committee may seek the assistance of the township planner, engineer, or attorney if necessary during review of the application. If such assistance is obtained, the applicant shall pay into an escrow account an amount to cover the cost of review by the township's planner, engineer or attorney as provided in section 46-35(a). The acreage split committee's review of the application, conceptual plan, and surveyed site plan drawing shall be based upon the following standards: 
(1)  Compliance with article. The proposed acreage division shall comply with the requirements of this article concerning road access, lot width, lot width/depth ratios, and area. 
(2)  Calculation of dimensions and area. In determining whether the surveyed site plan complies with the requirements of this article, all dimensions in the plan shall be exclusive of any public or private road rights-of-way or of existing easements or proposed easements. Utility easements for gas, electric, and telephone service intended to serve the individual parcel under consideration should not be excluded from the minimum parcel area. 
(2A)  Wetlands as defined in chapter 22, article IV, shall be excluded from calculation of a proposed resulting parcel's area for the purposes of determining whether the proposed resulting parcel complies with the minimum parcel area requirement; provided, however, that a proposed acreage division in which one or more proposed resulting parcel(s) lack sufficient parcel area solely because of the presence of wetlands may be approved if it meets all other requirements of Michigan law and this and other ordinances of the township, if the applicant records a notice on title at the county register of deeds for each such proposed resulting parcel, which notice shall contain the written statement set forth herein below, and the person seeking the split furnishes a copy of the recorded notice to the township, with proof of payment of the recording fee therefor. The notice shall state: Notice is hereby given that the real property herein described is presumed to be unbuildable under state law and/or township ordinance due to the presence of wetlands. This section shall not be interpreted as granting or creating a right to a variance from the requirements of Ordinance No. 67 (or any amendments thereto) or any other township ordinance. 
(3)  Survey approval by township assessor. The township assessor shall review the legal descriptions and illustrations contained in the site plan survey, and determine whether the legal descriptions are sufficient and in accordance with the standards used by the county department of equalization. 
(Ord. No. 104A, art. VIII, 11-10-1999; Ord. No. 104A.005, art. II, 6-9-2010)  
Sec. 46-39. - Variances. 
If some aspect of the applicant's proposed acreage division (shown by the surveyed site plan) fails to conform with the zoning ordinance concerning parcel width, parcel depth-to-width ratio, parcel area and road accessibility, the acreage split committee shall cease review of the proposed acreage division and shall not resume review of the proposed acreage division until and unless the applicant shall have obtained an appropriate variance from the township zoning board of appeals pursuant to the appropriate procedures of the zoning ordinance. An applicant's application for an acreage split shall not be considered complete if the proposed acreage division does not comply with the zoning ordinance as it pertains to a resulting parcel's width, depth-to-width ratio, area, and road accessibility and the applicant has not obtained a variance pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 104A, art. IX, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 46-40. - Acreage split committee final approval. 
Following receipt and review of the applicant's application, surveyed site plan and any comments or recommendations of the township planner, engineer or attorney, the acreage split committee shall grant the acreage division if it complies with this article or deny the proposed acreage division within 45 days from the date a complete application is received. The application shall be considered complete provided that the applicant has complied with all requirements of sections 46-33 and 46-34, has submitted all items required in section 46-35, has submitted a surveyed site plan as required in section 46-37 and does not require a variance from the zoning ordinance pursuant to section 46-39. The acreage split committee must state specific reasons for its finding to deny the acreage division. 
(Ord. No. 104A, art. X, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 46-41. - Compliance with other ordinances. 
Final approval of an acreage division under this article does not constitute a determination that a resulting parcel is in compliance with other ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 104A, art. XI, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 46-42. - Applicability of zoning ordinance. 
This article hereby incorporates by reference those provisions of the zoning ordinance that apply specifically to standards for a resulting parcel's width, area, depth-to-width ratio and road dimensions. Other provisions of the zoning ordinance shall have no application. 
(Ord. No. 104A, art. XII, 11-10-1999)  
Sec. 46-43. - Issuance of building permit. 
(a)  Verification of proper acreage division. Prior to the issuance of any building permit for construction upon a parcel of real property which has been divided pursuant to this article, the person applying for the building permit must first obtain verification of a proper acreage division from the township zoning compliance official. To obtain this verification, the applicant must provide the following to the zoning compliance official: 
(1)  Written verification and evidence of the approval of the division of real property by the township; 
(2)  A tax identification number (Sidwell Number) which has been assigned to each particular parcel of property to be built upon; 
(3)  A recorded copy of the survey, with legal description and drawings of the parcel of property; and 
(4)  A recorded copy of the legal document which establishes the applicant's ownership interest in the property, namely a warranty deed, quit claim deed, land contract, or other written evidence of ownership and title. 
(b)  Verification of adequate road access. No building permit shall be issued for construction upon a parcel of real property which has been divided pursuant to this article unless that parcel abuts and has access to a public road, or a private road approved and constructed in accordance with standards set forth in the zoning ordinance. 
(c)  Verification of adequate water supply and sewage treatment. No parcel less than one acre shall be issued a building permit unless the parcel has all of the following: 
(1)  Public water or city, county or district health department approval for the suitability of an on-site water supply under the same standards as set forth for lots under rules prescribed by the state department of environmental quality. 
(2)  Public sewer or city, county or district health department approval for on-site sewage disposal under the health department standards as set forth for lots under rules prescribed by the state department of environmental quality. 
(Ord. No. 104A, art. XIII, 11-10-1999)  
Secs. 46-44—46-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LAND DIVISIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. All terms as defined in the Land Division Act shall control in this article unless indicated to the contrary in this article. 
Clerk means the clerk of the township. 
Commission means the planning commission of the township. 
Date of filing means: 
(1)  For tentative approval of the preliminary plat, the date of the initial planning commission meeting at which the proprietor presents the preliminary plat for consideration. 
(2)  For final approval of the preliminary plat, the date on which the proprietor files, with the clerk, the tentatively approved preliminary plat and a certified list of all authorities required for approval. 
(3)  For approval of the final plat, the date on which the proprietor files, with the township clerk, the original and the necessary prints of the final plat. 
Division means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development, that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that satisfies the requirements of sections 109 and 109 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.108 and MCL 560.109 respectively). The term "division" does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) or the requirements of township ordinances. 
Easement means a grant by the owner of the use of land by the public, a corporation, or persons, for specific uses and purposes, to be designated as a "public" or "private" easement, depending on the nature of the use. 
Exempt split means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns that does not result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent. For a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) or the requirements of this article or township ordinances. 
Improvements means grading, street surfacing, curb and gutter, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains and lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts, bridges, utilities, and other additions or modifications to the natural state of land which increases its value, utility or habitability. 
Lot means a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land which is described in a proposed or recorded plat. 
Major streets or thoroughfare plan means that part of the master plan which sets forth the location, alignment and dimensions of existing and proposed streets and thoroughfares. 
Master plan means the comprehensive land use plan for the township, including graphic and written proposals indicating the general locations recommended for the streets, parks, schools, public buildings, zoning districts, and all physical developments of the township, and includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted, and any amendments to such plan or parts thereof duly recommended by the planning commission and adopted by the township board. 
Municipal engineer and engineer mean the consulting engineers of the township. 
Parcel and tract mean a contiguous area or acreage of land which can be described as provided for in the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
Parent parcel and parent tract mean a parcel or tract, respectively, lawfully in existence on the effective date of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.), March 31, 1997. 
Plat means a map or chart of a subdivision of land. 
(1)  Preliminary plat means a map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary consideration prepared in conformance with the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(2)  Final plat means a map of all or part of a subdivision providing substantial conformance to the preliminary plat of the subdivision prepared in conformance with the requirements of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and this article, and suitable for recording by the county register of deeds. 
Procedures guide means a guide for the platting of land in the township, including petition forms for platting , available from the clerk and consisting of a general guideline to proprietors. 
Proprietor and owner mean a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or combination of any of them, which may hold any ownership interest in land, whether recorded or not. 
Secretary means the secretary of the township planning commission. 
Street means any dedicated avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct, alley, or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway; or a street, as defined in this subsection, or way, on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the of the county register of deeds. A street, as defined in this subsection, includes the land between the right-of-way lines whether improved or unimproved and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and lawns. 
Alley means a minor service street used primarily to provide secondary vehicular access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting upon a street. 
Boulevard street means a street developed in two two-lane one-way pavements separated by a median. 
Collector street means a street intended to serve as a major means of access from minor streets to major thoroughfares which has considerable continuity within the framework of the major thoroughfare plan. 
Cul-de-sac street means a short minor street having one end permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
Major thoroughfare means an arterial street of great continuity which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the intermediate township area and region beyond, and may be designated in the township's major thoroughfare plan as a major thoroughfare, parkway, expressway or equivalent term to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the street plan. 
Marginal access street means a minor street paralleling and adjacent to a major thoroughfare which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
Minor street means a street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting residential properties. 
Turnaround means a short boulevard street permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
Subdivision means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development, that results in one or parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that is not exempted from the platting requirements, of the Land Division Act by sections 108 and 109 thereof (MCL 560.108 and MCL 560.109, respectively). The term "subdivision" or "subdivided" does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and the requirements of this article. 
Tract means two or more parcels that share a common property line and are under the same ownership. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0200, 10-14-1998; Ord. No. 103.003, 8-10-2011) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 46-72. - Purpose of article. 
The purposes of this article are to provide for the orderly growth and harmonious development of the community; to secure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems with relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivision and public facilities; to achieve individual property lots and parcels of maximum utility and livability; to secure adequate provisions for water supply, drainage and sanitary sewerage and other health sites and other public facilities; to provide a reasonable and proper basis for the design and construction of residential, commercial or industrial projects having site improvements, including sanitary sewer, storm drainage, water main, site grading and paving; and to provide logical procedures for the achievement of these purposes. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0102, 10-14-1998)  
Sec. 46-73. - Scope of article and Land Division Act. 
(a)  Subdivisions. Any subdivision of land as defined in this article or in the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) is subject to the platting requirements of this article and the Land Division Act. 
(b)  Divisions. A division of land is not subject to the platting requirements of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and of this article. 
(1)  A division, together with any previous divisions of the same parent parcel or parent tract, shall result in a number of parcels not more than the sum of the following: 
a.  For the first ten acres or fraction thereof in the parent parcel or parent tract, four parcels. 
b.  For each whole ten acres in excess of the first ten acres in the parent parcel or parent tract, one additional parcel, for up to a maximum of 11 additional parcels. 
c.  For each whole 40 acres in excess of the first 120 acres in the parent parcel or parent tract, one additional parcel. 
(2)  For a parent parcel or parent tract of not less than 20 acres, the division may result in a total of two parcels in addition to those in subsection (b)(1) of this section if one or both of the following apply: 
a.  Because of the establishment of one or more new roads, no new driveway accesses to an existing public road for any of the resulting parcels set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this section or this subsection (b)(2) are created or required. 
b.  One of the resulting parcels under subsection (b)(1) of this section and this subsection (b)(2) comprises not less than 60 percent of the area of the parent parcel or parent tract. 
(3)  A parcel of 40 acres or more created by the division of a parent parcel or parent tract shall not be counted toward the number of parcels permitted under subsection (b)(1) and subsection (b)(2) of this section if the parcel is accessible as defined in the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(4)  A parcel or tract created by an exempt split or a division is not a new parent parcel or parent tract and may be further partitioned or split without being subject to the platting requirements of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) or this article if all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  Not less than ten years have elapsed since the parcel or tract was recorded. 
b.  The partitioning or splitting results in not more than the following number of parcels, whichever is less: 
1.  Two parcels for the first ten acres or fraction thereof in the parcel or tract plus one additional parcel for each whole ten acres in excess of the first ten acres in the parcel or tract. 
2.  Seven parcels or ten parcels if one of the resulting parcels under this subsection comprises not less than 60 percent of the area of the parcel or tract being partitioned or split. 
3.  The partitioning or splitting satisfies the requirements of section 109 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.109). 
(5)  A parcel or tract created under the provisions of subsection (b)(4) of this section may not be further partitioned or split without being subject to the platting requirements of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and this article, except in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b)(4). 
(6)  Although a division is not subject to the platting requirements of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) or of this article pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, a division is subject to the procedural and other requirements of article II of this chapter and of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(c)  Exempt splits. 
(1)  An exempt split is not subject to the platting requirements of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) or of this article. 
(2)  An exempt split or other partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract that only results in parcels of 20 acres or more in size is not subject to approval under this article if the parcel or tract is not accessible and one of the following applies: 
a.  The parcel or tract was in existence on March 31, 1997. 
b.  The parcel or tract resulted from an exempt split or other partitioning or splitting under this section. 
(3)  The proprietor shall provide the purchaser of a parcel resulting from an exempt split or other partitioning or splitting under subsection (c)(1) of this section with the following written statement before closing: "This parcel is not accessible as defined in the Land Division Act, 1967 PA 288, MCL 560.101 to 560.293." 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0300, 10-14-1998)  
Sec. 46-74. - Compliance with applicable regulations. 
The approvals required under the provisions of this article shall be obtained prior to the installation of any subdivision or project improvements within the township, in public streets, public alleys, public rights-of-way and public easements, or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the township. All subdivision or project improvements within the public easements or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the township shall comply with all of the provisions and requirements of this article, the land improvement ordinance, or any other related ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0700, 10-14-1998)  
Sec. 46-75. - Fees. 
(a)  All fees as provided in this section shall be paid by the proprietor at the time of submission of the respective plats or plans. 
(b)  The following fees shall be charged for examination of engineering and improvement plans for the land proposed to be subdivided: 
(1)  Preliminary plat: $550.00 lump sum for up to 15 lots, plus $15.00 for each lot over 15. 
(2)  Engineering plan review: 
a.  Grading: $350.00 lump sum for up to 15 lots, plus $15.00 for each lot over 15. 
b.  Drainage: $575.00 lump sum for up to 15 lots, plus $50.00 for each lot over 15. 
c.  Sanitary sewer: $375.00 lump sum for up to 15 lots, plus $25.00 for each lot over 15. 
b.  Water main: $375.00 lump sum for up to 15 lots, plus $25.00 for each lot over 15. 
b.  Water supply and wells: $550.00 lump sum for up to 15 lots, plus $5.00 for each lot over 15. 
b.  Pumping Station: $550.00 lump sum for up to 15 lots, plus $5.00 for each lot over 15. 
b.  Water booster station: $550.00 lump sum for up to 15 lots, plus $5.00 for each lot over 15. 
(c)  The following review fees shall be charged for examination and inspection of plats, land proposed to be subdivided, and related expenses: 
(1)  Sketch plan: $200.00 plus $5.00 per acre. 
(2)  Preliminary plat review (tentative and final): $350.00 plus $20.00 per acre. 
(3)  Final plat review: $250.00 plus $5.00 per acre. 
(d)  The applicant shall be required to deposit in escrow a fee for attorney review equal to a lump sum of $450.00 for up to 40 lots, plus $5.00 for each lot over 40 lots, for each set of preliminary plat and final plat documents submitted. The fee shall be applied to cover only services actually rendered at the hourly rate charged to the township, and any balance will be refunded to the applicant. 
(e)  If the actual reasonable cost to perform the reviews described in subsections (b)—(d) of this section exceeds the fees set forth in subsections (b)—(d) of this section, the township may require the applicant to pay an additional amount equal to the difference between such fees and the actual reasonable cost of review. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0900, 10-14-1998; Ord. No. 103.002, arts. 1, 2, 3, 5-22-2002)  
Sec. 46-76. - Variances. 
The township board may authorize a variance from this article when, in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In granting any variance, the township board shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In making its findings, as required in this section, the township board shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the township board finds that: 
(1)  There are special circumstances or conditions affecting the proprietor so that the provisions of this article would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land. 
(2)  The variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner. 
(3)  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the territory in which the property is situated. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1300, 10-14-1998)  
Sec. 46-77. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, persons, firm, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate violation 
(Ord. No. 103, § 1000, 10-14-1998)  
Secs. 46-78—46-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SUBDIVISION PROCEDURE 
 
Sec. 46-101. - Generally. 
The preparation of a subdivision for platting shall be carried out through two phases: preliminary plat and final plat, all in accordance with the procedures in this division. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0400, 10-14-1998)  
Sec. 46-102. - Initial investigation. 
(a)  Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, it is suggested that the proprietor investigate the procedures and standards of the township with reference to this article and the master plan as they affect the area in which the proposed subdivision is located. The proprietor should not submit the preliminary plat at this time. 
(b)  The proprietor should concern himself with the following factors: 
(1)  The proprietor should secure a copy of the zoning ordinance, this article, the petition to plat land (refer to procedures guide), and other similar ordinances or controls relative to the subdivision and improvement of land so as to make himself aware of the requirements of the township. 
(2)  Whether the area for the proposed subdivision is properly zoned for the intended use. 
(3)  An investigation should be made of the adequacy of existing schools. 
(4)  An investigation should be made of the adequacy of public open spaces, including schools and playgrounds, to serve the proposed subdivision. 
(5)  The relationship of the proposed subdivision with respect to major thoroughfares and plans for widening of major thoroughfares shall be investigated by the proprietor. 
(6)  Standards for sewage disposal, water supply and drainage of the township shall be investigated by the proprietor. 
(c)  It is recommended that a pre-application meeting be held for the project prior to submission of the preliminary plat. The purpose of the meeting is to conduct an informal review of the proprietor's concept plan for the preliminary plat. 
(1)  The meeting may be requested by the proprietor by submitting a written request to the chairperson of the county plat board and submitting copies of a concept plan for the preliminary plat to the township and to each officer or agency entitled to review the preliminary plat, including the road commission for the county, the county water resources commissioner, the state department of transportation (if abutting a state trunk line highway), the state department of environmental quality, and the county health department. 
(2)  The meeting shall take place not later than 30 days after the written request and concept plan are received. The meeting shall be attended by the proprietor, representatives of each officer or agency entitled to review the preliminary plat, including the county road commission, the county drain commissioner and the county health department, as well as a representative of the township. Representatives of the state department of transportation if abutting a state trunk line highway) and the state department of environmental quality, as well as the township engineer and township planner, shall be informed of the meeting and may attend. 
(3)  In the absence of a pre-application meeting, it is recommended that the proprietor meet with members of the township departments concerned with the standards of this article. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0401, 10-14-1998; Ord. No. 103.003, 8-10-2011)  
Sec. 46-103. - Preliminary plat. 
The procedure for the preparation and review of a preliminary plat requires tentative and final approval as follows: 
(1)  Tentative approval. 
a.  Filing. 
1.  Ten copies of a valid and complete preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, together with the petition and supporting data as required by any "procedures guide for petition to plat land in Oxford Township" and the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.), shall be filed with the township clerk. The township clerk shall retain one copy of the plat for the clerk's records and forward the balance of the plats to the planning commission. 
2.  The preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance with the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
3.  The proprietor shall deposit the sum required to cover costs of reviewing all engineering plans and layout, said deposit to be made at the time the preliminary plat is submitted to the clerk. 
b.  Identification and description . The preliminary plat shall include: 
1.  The proposed name of the subdivision. 
2.  Location by section, town and range or by other valid legal description. 
3.  Names and addresses of the proprietor and the planner, designer, engineer or surveyor who designed the subdivision layout. The proprietor shall also indicate his interest in the land. 
4.  Scale of plat; one inch equals 100 feet is the minimum acceptable scale. 
5.  Date. 
6.  North point. 
c.  Existing conditions. The preliminary plat shall include the following: 
1.  An overall area map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 2,000 feet showing the relationship of the subdivision to its surroundings, such as section lines and/or major streets or collector streets, shall be provided. 
2.  The boundary line of the proposed subdivision, section or corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract and overall property dimensions. 
3.  Property lines of contiguous adjacent tracts of subdivided and unsubdivided land shown, including roadways up to 300 feet in relation to the tract proposed for subdivision, including those of areas across abutting roads with those unplatted landowners being designated by name. 
4.  Location, widths, and names of existing or prior platted streets and private streets, and public easements within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision, including those located across abutting roads. 
5.  Location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains and other underground facilities within or adjacent to the tract being proposed for subdivision. 
6.  Location of major stands of trees within the tract proposed for subdivision, as well as a written description of such stand of trees, including types of trees. 
7.  Existing topography drawn at contours with an interval of at least two feet in elevation, except, if the grade exceeds five percent, the contour interval shall be five feet. Topography shall be based on USGS datum. Benchmarks for the work shall be indicated on the plat. The contours shall extend a minimum of 150 feet beyond the boundary of the plat. 
8.  The school board or school board superintendent of the school district having jurisdiction in the area concerned shall be informed and made aware of the proposed preliminary plat by the proprietor. A copy of the letter to the school board or school board superintendent shall be submitted to the township clerk with the preliminary plat. 
d.  Proposed conditions . The preliminary plat shall include the following: 
1.  The layout of streets, indicating proposed street names, right-of-way widths, and connections with adjoining platted streets and also the widths and location of alleys, easements and public walkways. 
2.  Lot layout, numbers, and dimensions, and lot areas in square feet, including building setback lines showing dimensions. 
3.  An indication of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or set aside for public use or for the use of property owners in the subdivision. 
4.  An indication of the ownership and existing and proposed use of any parcels identified as "excepted" in the preliminary plat. If the proprietor has an interest in or owns any parcel so identified as "excepted," the preliminary plat shall indicate how this property could be developed in accord with the requirements of the existing zoning district in which it is located and with an acceptable relationship to the layout of the proposed preliminary plat. 
5.  Proposed preliminary plats with direct access to major and secondary thoroughfares shall provide acceleration and deceleration lanes where traffic safety so requires as determined by the township board. Such paving standards shall be determined by the road commission for the county and the state department of transportation (MDOT). 
6.  An indication of the required underground utilities to the proposed subdivision line (refer to section 46-163(a)). 
7.  An indication of system for sewage to the proposed subdivision line (refer to section 46-163(b)). 
8.  An indication of system proposed for water supply to the proposed subdivision line (refer to section 46-163(c)). 
9.  An indication of drainage, including any retention basins, and point of outlet at the proposed subdivision line (refer to section 46-163(d)). 
10.  In the case where the proprietor wishes to subdivide a given area, but wishes to begin with only a portion of the total area, the preliminary plat shall include the proposed general layout for the entire area. The part which is proposed to be subdivided first shall be clearly superimposed upon the overall plan in order illustrate clearly the method of development which the proprietor intends to follow. Each subsequent plat shall follow the same procedure until the entire area controlled by the proprietor is subdivided. 
11.  If the subdivision is proposed to be developed under a planned residential development or planned unit development pursuant to the zoning ordinance, it shall meet the planned residential development or planned unit development requirements, as applicable, of the zoning ordinance. 
e.  Planning commission review and tentative approval. 
1.  Before the planning commission acts on the tentative preliminary plat, the preliminary plat shall be submitted to the municipal engineer, municipal planner, and all affected departments for review and recommendation. 
2.  With consideration of the comments and recommendations received from the engineer, planner and from municipal departments, the commission shall act on the preliminary plat in due course to ensure that the plat is reviewed and decided upon by the township board within 60 days after the date of filing if a pre-application meeting was held, and 90 days if a pre-application meeting was not held. However, the proprietor may agree to an extension in writing of the time required for approval by the commission and the township board. The planning commission shall not act on a preliminary plat without holding a public hearing upon the proposed plat. Not less than 15 days before the date of the hearing, notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be sent to the proprietor and to any other person listed as a notice recipient on the plat at the address set forth on the plat by mail, and shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the proposed platted land. 
3.  Should the commission approve the preliminary plat, it shall notify the township board of this action in a written report and forward the report, together with all accompanying data, to the township board for review. 
4.  Should the commission find that the preliminary plat is not acceptable, the secretary shall record the reason in the official minutes and forward a written report, together with all accompanying data, to the township board and recommend that the township board disapprove the preliminary plat. 
f.  Tentative approval by township board . 
1.  The township board will not review a preliminary plat until it has received the review and recommendations of the commission, providing the commission acts within the appropriate time. Following the receipt of such recommendations, the township board shall consider the preliminary plat at such meeting that the matter is placed on the regularly scheduled agenda. The township board shall take action on the preliminary plat within 60 days after the date of filing if a pre-application meeting was held, or within 90 days of the date of initial filing of the plat as described in subsection (1)a. of this section if a meeting was not held. 
2.  Should the township board tentatively approve the preliminary plat, it shall record its approval on the plat and return one copy to the proprietor. 
3.  Should the township board tentatively approve the preliminary plat with conditions, it shall record its approval on the plat and return one copy to the proprietor. The conditions of approval shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting. 
4.  Should the township board disapprove the preliminary plat, it shall promptly notify the proprietor, in writing, stating the reasons for disapproval. In addition, the reasons for disapproval shall be included in the minutes of the meeting. 
5.  Tentative approval shall not constitute final approval of the preliminary plat. 
6.  No earth movement, installation or construction of any improvements shall be made at this time. 
7.  Tentative approval by the township board shall confer upon the proprietor, for a period of one year from the date, approval of lot sizes, lot orientation and street layout. Such tentative approval may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the township board in writing. 
8.  If tentative approval is granted, the proprietor shall submit copies of a preliminary plat to the each agency required according to Sections 112 through 119 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.112—560.119). 
9.  If tentative approval is granted, then the proprietor may proceed to the final preliminary plat approval process as governed by section 46-103(2). 
(2)  Final approval by township board. 
a.  The proprietor shall file a valid final preliminary plat, as tentatively approved by the township board, with the township clerk together with a certified list of all authorities required to approve the preliminary plat in Sections 112 to 119 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.112—560.119), and copies of the preliminary plat as approved by the required authorities. Upon receipt of such items, the township clerk shall forward the plat to the municipal engineer and planner, as well as to all affected township departments for their review and recommendations. Such review shall be submitted to the clerk within ten days of receipt. The clerk shall then submit the final preliminary plat and the comments and recommendations of all township departments, consultants and all required agencies to the township board. 
b.  The proprietor shall deposit the sum required to cover the costs of reviewing all engineering plans and layout, said deposit to be made at the time the preliminary plat is submitted for final approval to the clerk. 
c.  The township board shall take action at its next regular meeting or within 20 days of the date of filing, reviewing the final plat for compliance with the tentatively approved preliminary plat. The township board shall grant final preliminary plat approval if the submitted plat is in substantial compliance with the tentatively approved preliminary plat, and shall reject the final preliminary plat if the submitted plat does not conform substantially to the tentatively approved preliminary plat. 
d.  The clerk shall promptly notify the proprietor of approval or rejection, in writing. If the plat is rejected, reasons shall be given and shall be recorded in the minutes pertaining thereto. The minutes of the meeting shall be open for inspection. 
e.  Final approval of the preliminary plat shall confer upon the proprietor for a period of two years from date of approval, the conditional right that the general terms and conditions under which preliminary approval was granted will not be changed. The two-year period may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the township board, in writing. Written notice of the extension shall be sent by the township board to other approving authorities. 
f.  No earth movement, installation or construction of any improvements shall be made before the proprietor has met the following conditions: 
1.  Final approval by township board of the preliminary plat. 
2.  Approval by the municipal engineer of engineering plans, which shall include the planned setback of structures, public water and sewer plans, plans for road construction, lot grading and runoff pattern, and the location of all utilities. 
3.  Deposits required under division 4 of this article have been received by the township. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0402, 10-14-1998; Ord. No. 103.003, 8-10-2011)  
Sec. 46-104. - Final plat. 
The procedure for preparation and review of a final plat shall be as follows: 
(1)  Preparation. 
a.  The final plat shall comply with the provisions of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and this article. 
b.  The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the proprietor proposed to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to this article. 
c.  The proprietor shall submit as evidence of title to the clerk, an abstract of title certified to date with the written legal opinion thereon, or, at the option of the proprietor, a policy of title insurance for examination, in order to ascertain whether or not the proper names appear on the plat. 
d.  The proprietor shall submit proof that all property taxes and special assessments have been paid on the property. 
(2)  Review . 
a.  Twelve paper prints and one electronic copy of the final plat shall be filed by the proprietor with the clerk and such sums of money as the township board may require in this article, or by other ordinances, shall be deposited. The final plat shall have been processed in accordance with Sections 162 through 165 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.162—560.165), prior to submission to the township for its review. 
b.  The final plat shall be reviewed by the township clerk and municipal planner, as to compliance with the approved preliminary plat and by the municipal engineer as to compliance with the plans for utilities and other improvements. 
c.  A true copy of the final plat shall be provided to each agency required according to Sections 142 through 167 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.142—560.167). 
d.  The township clerk, municipal planner and municipal engineer shall notify the township board of their recommendations for either approval or rejection of the final plat within ten days of its date of filing. 
e.  The township board shall review all recommendations and take action on the final plat at its next regular meeting or at a meeting called within 20 days of its date of filing in accord with the procedures of Sections 166 and 167 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.166—560.167). The township board shall approve or reject the plat, instructing the clerk to notify the proprietor of the decision and to record the reasons for the decision in the minutes of the meeting. A copy of the minutes shall be sent to the county plat board. 
f.  Upon approval of the final plat by the township board, the subsequent approvals shall follow the procedure set forth in the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). One print of the final plat shall be forwarded to the clerk, one to the planning commission, and one to the building department. 
g.  Placing of required monuments and lot corner markers may be waived by the township board for a period of one year from the date of approval of the final plat by the township board, provided that: 
1.  Monuments or other markers, adequately witnessed, shall be in place at all angles and at all ends of curves in the boundaries of the subdivision. 
2.  The proprietor shall have delivered to the clerk cash or a certified cheek, or irrevocable bank letter of credit running to the township, whichever the proprietor selects, in an amount equal to $100.00 per monument remaining to be placed, plus $50.00 per lot corner marker remaining to be placed. In no case shall the deposit be less than $100.00. 
3.  Such cash, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be returned to the proprietor upon receipt of a certificate by a surveyor that the monuments and markers have been placed as required within the time specified. If the proprietor defaults, the township board shall promptly require a surveyor to locate the monuments and markers in the ground as certified on the plat at a cost not to exceed the amount of the security deposited and shall pay the surveyor. Any unexpended balance of the deposit shall then be returned to the party from whom it was received. 
h.  In lieu of the proprietor having installed improvements, the township board shall require of the proprietor, as a condition of final plat approval, a deposit in the form of cash, certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit, whichever the proprietor selects, running in favor of the township, for the improvement of public places, other than roads and streets, and the installation of any required public sanitary sewer, water supply, and drainage facilities, to ensure the completion of such improvements and facilities within a length of time agreed upon from the date of approval of the final plat by the township board. The township board shall rebate to the proprietor as the work progresses amounts of any cash deposits equal to the ratio of the work completed to the secured project. The amount of work completed shall be determined by the township board, and shall take into consideration certification of inspections and the township board may retain an amount necessary to ensure that such improvements and facilities will be placed in service and certified complete. 
i.  Three copies of the proposed subdivision restrictions shall be furnished to the township board. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0403, 10-14-1998; Ord. No. 103.003, 8-10-2011)  
Secs. 46-105—46-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 46-131. - Generally. 
The subdivision design layout standards set forth in this division are development guides for the assistance of the proprietor. All final plans must be reviewed and approved by the township board in accordance with this article and all other township ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0500, 10-14-1998)  
Sec. 46-132. - Streets. 
(a)  Generally . Streets shall conform to at least all minimum requirements of the general specifications and typical cross sections as set forth in the design layout standards of this article, and other conditions set forth by the township board and the county road commission. 
(b)  Location and arrangement. 
(1)  The proposed subdivision shall conform to the various elements of the master plan and shall be considered in relation to the existing and planned major thoroughfares and collector streets, and such part shall be platted in the location and width indicated on such insofar as possible. 
(2)  The street layout shall provide for continuation of local or collector streets in the adjoining subdivisions or the proper projection of streets when adjoining property is not subdivided, or conform to a plan for a neighborhood unit adopted by the commission. 
(3)  The street layout shall include minor streets so laid out that their use by through traffic shall be discouraged. 
(4)  Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain an existing or proposed major thoroughfare, the commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation and reduction to traffic hazards. 
(5)  Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain a railroad, expressway or other limited access highway right-of-way, the commission may require the location of a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the development of an appropriate use of the intervening land such as for parks and residential districts. Such distances shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for approach grades to future grade separation. 
(6)  All entrances to subdivisions of 80 lots or more shall be boulevard streets and designed in accordance with county road commission specifications ("rules and regulations for plat development" or any amendments or replacements thereof). 
(c)  Right-of-way widths; maximum length of cul-de-sac streets . Street right-of-way widths and maximum lengths of cul-de-sac streets shall conform to the requirements of the county road commission. 
(d)  Street geometrics. Street grades, vertical and horizontal street curves and sight distances shall comply with the standards of the county road commission. 
(e)  Street intersections. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at 90 degrees. Curved streets, intersecting with major thoroughfares and collector streets, shall do so with a tangent section centerline 50 feet in length, measured from the right-of-way line of the major or collector thoroughfare, where such minor streets are on a curve with a radius of at least 400 feet which tangent does not make a 90-degree intersection with the thoroughfare being intersected. 
(f)  Grading and centerline gradients . Grading and centerline gradients are required and shall be in accordance with the land improvement ordinance. 
(g)  Street jogs. Street jogs with the centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided. 
(h)  Truck wells. Truck wells, and receiving and shipping depots shall be so located as to provide adequate vehicular movement on the site and shall not face directly onto a public right-of-way unless at least 100 feet from the right-of-way, and shall be subject to the review of the county road commission. 
(i)  Driveways. All driveway and private roadways accessing directly upon a state highway shall have the approval of the state department of transportation, and those accessing onto county roads, shall have the approval of the county road commission. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0501, 10-14-1998; Ord. No. 103.003, 8-10-2011) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42.  
Sec. 46-133. - Easements. 
(a)  Location of utility line easements shall be provided along the front or side lot lines as necessary for utility lines. Easements shall give access to every lot, park or public grounds. Such easements shall be a total of not less than 12 feet wide, six feet from each parcel. 
(b)  Recommendations on the proposed layout of telephone and electric company easements should be sought from all of the utility companies serving the area. It shall be the responsibility of the proprietor to submit copies of the preliminary plat to all appropriate public utility agencies. 
(c)  Easements three feet in width shall be provided where needed along side lot lines and front lot lines so as to provide for streetlight dropouts. Prior to the approval of the final plat for a proposed subdivision, a statement shall be obtained from the appropriate public utility indicating that easements have been provided along specific lots. A notation shall be made on the final plat indicating as follows: "The side lot lines between lots (indicating lot numbers) are subject to streetlight dropout rights granted to the Detroit Edison Company." 
(d)  Drainage easements, when required by the municipal engineer, the county public works commissioner or the county road commission, shall be shown on the plat. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0502, 10-14-1998)  
Sec. 46-134. - Lots. 
Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Size and shape. The lot size, width, depth, and shape and placement of structures thereupon in any subdivision proposed shall conform to the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Arrangement. 
a.  Every lot shall front or abut an approved private street or a public street. 
b.  Residential lots of less than one acre abutting major thoroughfares or collector streets, where marginal access streets are not desirable or possible to attain, shall be platted with reverse frontage lots, or with side lot lines parallel to the major traffic streets, or shall be platted with extra depth and extra building setback to permit additional distances between buildings and such trafficway. 
c.  Lot splits. All lot splits within a subdivision shall be decided as follows: 
1.  An application for a lot split shall be filed with the clerk on a form supplied by the township. 
2.  A public hearing shall be held. 
3.  Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed by first class mail to all owners of parcels in the subdivision. 
4.  Expenses of the hearing notice shall be borne by the proponent of the lot split. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0503, 10-14-1998)  
Sec. 46-135. - Natural features. 
The natural features and character of lands shall be preserved wherever possible. Due regard must be shown for all natural features, such as natural hills, slopes and large trees, natural groves, watercourses and similar community assets that will add attractiveness and value to the property if preserved. The preservation of drainage and natural stream channels must be considered by the proprietor and the dedication and provision of adequate barriers (dams, bulkheads, retaining walls, etc.), where appropriate, shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0505, 10-14-1998)  
Sec. 46-136. - Floodplains. 
Any areas of land within the proposed subdivision which lie either wholly or in part within the floodplain of a river, stream, creek or lake, or any other areas which are subject to flooding or inundation by stormwater, shall require specific compliance with the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and the zoning ordinance, and review by the department of environmental quality, as determined by the municipal engineer. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0506, 10-14-1998)  
Secs. 46-137—46-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 46-161. - Generally. 
(a)  The improvements set forth under this division are to be considered as the minimum acceptable standard. All those improvements for which standards are not specifically set forth shall have such standards set in accordance with the zoning ordinance or other township ordinances. 
(b)  Prior to the undertaking of any improvements, the proprietor shall deposit with the clerk cash, a certified check or an irrevocable bank letter of credit, whichever the proprietor selects, or a surety bond acceptable to the township board, to ensure faithful completion of all improvements within the time specified. The township board shall rebate to the proprietor as the work progresses amounts of any cash deposits equal to the ratio of the work completed to the entire project. The amount of work completed shall be determined by the township board, and the township board shall take into consideration certification of inspections and the township board may retain an amount necessary to ensure that such improvements will be placed in service and certified complete. 
(c)  Improvements shall be provided by the proprietor in accordance with the standards and requirements established in this division and/or any other such standards and requirements which may, from time to time, be established by ordinances of the township. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0600, 10-14-1998; Ord. No. 103.003, 8-10-2011)  
Sec. 46-162. - Streets. 
All streets and appurtenances thereto, including private streets to which platted streets connect, shall be constructed with details and specifications approved by the county road commission and the township board. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0601, 10-14-1998) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42.  
Sec. 46-163. - Utilities. 
(a)  Requirements for underground wiring. The proprietor shall make arrangements for all local distribution lines for telephone, electric, television and other similar services distributed by wire or cable to be placed underground entirely throughout the area subdivided for residential use, except for main supply and perimeter feed distribution lines which serve areas outside the subdivided area, and except for surface facilities related to underground service, such as aboveground closures or terminals, and such wires, conduits or cables shall be placed within private easements provided to such service companies by the proprietor or within dedicated public ways; provided that overhead local distribution lines within such residential area may be permitted upon written recommendation from the commission, upon advisement from the municipal planner or municipal engineer, and the approval by the township board that overhead lines will not constitute a detriment to the health, safety, general welfare, plat design and character of the subdivision. All such facilities placed in dedicated public ways shall be planned so as not to conflict with other underground utilities. All such facilities shall be constructed in accordance with standards of construction approved by the state public service commission. 
(b)  Sewage disposal. A sanitary sewer system, including all appurtenances, shall be required in all subdivisions outside of the township sanitary sewer district in R1 zoning and all subdivisions in which such subdivision, including successive phases thereof, consists of 50 lots or more and contains any lot which is less than an acre in area, except that this requirement is waived if an alternative method of sewage disposal has been approved by appropriate county and state authorities. 
(c)  Water supply. In the event of the non-existence or non-availability of a municipal water supply, a subdivision water supply, as determined by the municipal engineer, shall be installed by the proprietor in all subdivisions where such subdivision, including successive phases thereof, consists of 50 lots or more and contains any lots which are less than one acre in area. All new subdivision developments, however, within the water district, as defined in section 62-31, where such subdivisions, including successive phases thereof, consist of 15 lots or more shall connect to the water supply system as defined in section 62-31. 
(d)  Storm drainage system. An adequate storm drainage system, including necessary storm sewers, stormwater retention basins, catchbasins, manholes, culverts, bridges and other appurtenances, shall be built in all subdivisions at the expense of the proprietor and maintained at the expense of the owners of record in the subdivision. Adequate provisions shall be made for proper drainage of stormwater runoff from residential rear yards. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0602, 10-14-1998) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 62.  
Sec. 46-164. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the township's design standards and construction specifications manual adopted by section 42-1, subject to the exceptions and additional requirements contained in this section. 
(b)  A sidewalk shall be located along all public streets abutting a subdivision unless a safety path is required by the township's safety path plan. For all other streets within the subdivision, a sidewalk shall be required on both sides of the street. 
(c)  In those instances where no good purpose will be served by the provision of sidewalks, the township board may waive some or all of the requirements of this section after review and recommendation by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0603(1), 10-14-1998; Ord. No. 103.001, 10-10-2001) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42.  
Sec. 46-165. - Public walkways. 
The township board may require public walkways in certain locations not in street rights-of-way. The surface of the walkways shall be paved. Planting pockets for trees and shrubs may be required by the township board. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0603(2), 10-14-1998)  
Sec. 46-166. - Fences and other screening. 
Fences and other improvements may be required if the commission or the township board determines them necessary to screen or protect the adjacent properties or the properties being developed. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0602(3), 10-14-1998)  
Sec. 46-167. - Streetlights. 
If the owner desires to provide street or area lighting for the development, the electric wires shall be underground. All construction costs shall be at the expense of the proprietor. All maintenance and usage shall be at the expense of the owners of record in the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0603(4), 10-14-1998)  
Sec. 46-168. - Street trees. 
Street trees shall be provided on both sides of all public streets in conformance with this section. 
(1)  Spacing. Street trees shall be spaced generally 50 feet on center, with a minimum of one street tree per lot. For purposes of calculating the required number of street trees, one street tree shall be required for every 50 lineal feet of lot frontage. 
(2)  Size. Street trees shall be three-inch caliper minimum at the time of planting. 
(3)  Location. Street trees shall be located generally between the sidewalk and road (back of curb or edge of pavement for streets with open drainage). 
(4)  County specifications. Where applicable, all street tree locations shall be in accordance with county road commission specifications. 
(5)  Ground cover. All right-of-way areas are to be grass (seeded or sod). 
(Ord. No. 103, § 0603(5), 10-14-1998)  
Chapter 50 - TAXATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-11(3); any ordinance levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes saved from repeal, § 1-11(13); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-111 et seq.; businesses, ch. 14. 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Tax exemption and fee in lieu of taxes for certain housing projects. 
(a)  Findings. 
(1)  It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its elderly persons of low and moderate income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq.). The township is authorized by such act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under the act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for such act. 
(2)  It is further acknowledged that such housing for elderly persons of low or moderate income is a public necessity, and as the township will be benefitted and improved by such housing, the encouragement of such housing by providing certain real estate tax exemptions therefor is a valid public purpose. 
(3)  The township acknowledges that Hope Seniors Non-Profit Housing Corporation, a Michigan nonprofit corporation (referred to in this section as the "sponsor"), has offered, subject to receipt of a federally aided or authority-aided mortgage or advance, to erect, own and operate a housing development identified as Oxford Seniors Apartments (referred to in this section as the "development"), MSHDA Development No. 883, on certain property located in the township, to serve elderly persons of low and moderate income. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authority means the state housing development authority. 
Contract rents means the rent payable to the owner of a qualified housing project under the owner's contract for the project, including the portion of the rent payable by the tenant as well as that payable under any governmental subsidy. 
Elderly means those persons 62 years of age or older or who otherwise qualify pursuant to the rules and regulations or practices of HUD or the authority for residency in an elderly housing project. 
Elderly housing project means a specific parcel of property, or divisible portion thereof, improved for rental to a low or moderate income individual which qualifies as an elderly housing project under the rules and regulations or standard practices of HUD or the authority to the extent it is occupied by the elderly or held for rental exclusively to the elderly. 
HUD means the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Mortgage loan means a loan made by the authority or insured by HUD to the sponsor for the construction and permanent financing of an elderly housing project. 
Utilities means fuel, public water, public sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service. 
(c)  Class of housing projects. It is determined that the class of housing projects to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be elderly housing projects which are financed or assisted pursuant to Public Act No. 346 of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq.). It is further determined that Oxford Senior Apartments is of this class. 
(d)  Exemption granted; payment in lieu of taxes. 
(1)  That portion of an elderly housing project exclusively and especially designated for and occupied by elderly persons of low and moderate income developed and constructed upon a parcel of land within the township sufficient for the operation of such project (but no larger) shall be exempt from all property taxation upon commencement of construction and continuing as long as the mortgaged loan insured by HUD or assisted or financed by the authority remains outstanding and unpaid and as long as HUD or the authority has any interest in such property, and shall be subject to a service charge in lieu of such property taxes in an amount equal to zero percent of contract rents of the preceding calendar year, exclusive of utility charges paid by tenants or the project. 
(2)  Notwithstanding subsection (1) of this subsection, in no event shall the service charge, at any time, be less than the property taxes upon the subject property for the tax year prior to the date when construction was commenced. 
(e)  Collection procedures. The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this section shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable in the township, except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before July 1 of each year. The entire tax collection procedure provided by the General Property Tax Act (MCL 211.1 et seq.) shall be effective with respect to such payment, including, but not by way of limitation, the provisions providing for interest and penalties on late payments, return of delinquent taxes and the sale of lands for delinquent taxes. 
(f)  Contractual effect of provisions. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15a(5) of Public Act No. 346 of 1966 (MCL 125.1415a(5)) to the contrary, a contract between the township and the sponsor naming HUD or the authority as a third-party beneficiary thereunder to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu thereof pursuant to the provisions of this section is effectuated by this section. 
(Ord. No. 81, §§ 2—7, 1-8-1992; Ord. of 4-8-1992)  
Sec. 50-2. - Application fee for redevelopment tax abatements or tax exemptions. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to impose license application fees to help defray the costs incurred by the township when the township processes applications for tax exemptions or abatements which have been filed pursuant to Public Act No. 198 of 1974 (MCL 207.551 et seq.), the Commercial Redevelopment Act (MCL 207.651 et seq.), and/or the Technology Parks Development Act (MCL 207.701 et seq.). 
(b)  Definition. In this section, the term "statute providing tax abatements or tax exemptions to certain facilities" shall mean the acts referred to in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Universal application fee. Notwithstanding any other requirements imposed by state laws or regulations, each application to the township for tax abatement or tax exemption pursuant to a statute providing tax abatement or tax exemption shall not be received for filing by the township clerk unless the application is accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of $1,000.00. 
(d)  Additional application fee where resultant tax benefit would exceed $20,000.00. 
(1)  If the tax exemption or tax abatement sought by a single application made pursuant to a statute providing tax abatement or tax exemption would, if granted, result in a tax benefit of $20,000.00 or more to the applicant, such application shall not be received for filing by the township clerk unless the application is accompanied by a license application fee of $2,500.00, which fee shall be in addition to the fee set forth in subsection (c) of this section. This additional application fee shall be maintained by the township in a separate account, and shall be used by the township to defray actual township costs resulting from the application, including review of matters relating to the application by professional consultants and staff employed by the township. 
(2)  Upon the payment by the township of any costs resulting from the application, the township clerk shall send a notice to the applicant setting forth the amount of the payment made and the name and address of the payee. The applicant shall thereafter remit to the township, within five days of the date of such notice, payment of an additional fee equal to the amount of the payment set forth in the notice. The additional fee shall be deposited in the account maintained for the application. Any balance remaining in the account after completion of the application process will be returned to the applicant. 
(e)  Multiple abatement or exemption requests on single application. A single application containing multiple abatement and/or exemption requests shall be considered as multiple applications for the purpose of determining fees set forth in this section. A fee in the amount established by resolution shall be imposed for each request, and an additional fee in the amount established by resolution shall be imposed for each request which would, if granted, result in a tax benefit of $20,000.00 or more to the applicant. 
(f)  Payment of fees to be made by certified check. Payment of all fees set forth in this section must be made by certified check made payable to township clerk. 
(Ord. No. 86, §§ 1—6, 11-14-1992)  
Chapter 54 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42; utilities, ch. 62; zoning, app. B. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 54-1—54-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Franchises, app. A. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 54-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cable communications company means any person who owns, controls, operates or manages a cable communications service to members of the public located in the township; except that such definition shall not include: 
(1)  A telephone, telegraph or electric utility in a case where it merely leases or rents to a cable communications company utility pole contact space for the placing thereon of wire or cable facilities used in the distribution of television or other signals to the subscribers of such cable communications company; or 
(2)  A telephone or telegraph utility regulated by the Michigan public service commission or Federal Communications Commission in a case where it merely provides communication channel service under published tariffs to a cable communications company for the distribution of television signals to the subscribers of such company. 
Cable communications service means the business, in whole or in part, of receiving directly or indirectly over the air and amplifying or otherwise modifying signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more signals, sound signals, pictures, visual images, digital signals, telemetry, or any other type of closed circuit transmission by means of electrical or light impulses, whether or not directed to originating signals or receiving signals off the air, and redistributing such signals by wire, cable or other means to members of the public located in the township who pay for such service. 
Cable communications system, cable system, cable television system, CATV and system mean a system of coaxial cables or other conductors, antennas, transmitters, fixtures, converters, distribution network, studios and other equipment used or to be used to originate or receive television or radio signals directly or indirectly off the air and to transmit them via cable to subscribers for a fixed or variable fee, including the origination, receipt, transmission, and distribution of voices, sound signals, pictures, visual images, digital signals, telemetry, or any other type of closed circuit transmission by means of electrical or light impulses, whether or not directed to originating signals or receiving signals off the air. However, such definition shall not include any separate system which serves only the residents of one or more apartment dwellings under common ownership, control or management, and commercial establishments located on the premises of such dwellings, upon approval of the commission. 
Commission means the Oxford Community Cable Communications Commission. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 3, 3-23-1981) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-32. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to provide fair regulation of cable communications service in the township in the interest of the public; to promote and encourage adequate, economical and efficient cable communications service to the residents of the township; to promote and to encourage harmony between cable communications companies and their subscribers; to provide for the furnishing of cable communications system service to the residents of the township without unjust discrimination, undue preferences or advantages; and to coordinate this article with such ordinances as may be enacted by the Village of Oxford in order to establish joint regulation of cable communications service in both communities. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 2, 3-23-1981)  
Sec. 54-33. - Cable communications commission. 
(a)  Establishment. The township board and the Oxford Village Council shall establish a commission to be known as the Oxford Community Cable Communications Commission. The township board and the Oxford Village Council shall solicit from the public and from the franchisee names of persons interested in serving on the commission, but are not limited to names thereby submitted. 
(b)  Membership; vacancies; compensation of members. The commission shall consist of seven members, two appointed by the Oxford Village Council, two by the township board, two by the Oxford Area Community Schools Board of Education, and one by the Oxford Library Board. Each member shall serve a term of two years. Any vacancy on the commission shall be filled by the board that originally appointed the vacated position for the remainder of the term. The village, township, school and library boards retain the power to remove at any time the commission members they appointed and to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the term. If the Oxford Area Community Schools Board of Education or the Oxford Library Board fails, refuses or neglects to appoint respective members to the commission, then such members shall be appointed by joint resolution of the Oxford Village Council and the township board. No employee or person with ownership interest in a cable television franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be eligible for membership on the commission. Members of the commission may be compensated at a rate to be determined by the Oxford Village Council and the township board. Such rate of compensation, if any, shall be established and may be revised, from time to time, by joint resolution of the Oxford Village Council and the township board. 
(c)  Duties. The commission, in addition to the duties and responsibilities otherwise provided for in this article and any duties and responsibilities that the Oxford Village Council and the township board may delegate to it from time to time by joint resolution, shall have the following functions: 
(1)  Discuss this article and the franchise thereunder with prospective franchise applicants. 
(2)  Prior to the granting of the first franchise, solicit applications from as many cable communications companies as possible. 
(3)  Establish general policy relating to access channels with a view to maximizing the diversity of programs and services to subscribers. 
(4)  Encourage the use of access channels by institutions, groups and individuals within the township. 
(5)  Encourage and supervise interconnection of systems. 
(6)  Conduct evaluations of the system at least every two years and make recommendations to the Oxford Village Council and the township board regarding amendments to this article or to the franchise agreement. 
(7)  Report to the Oxford Village Council and the township board on the following: 
a.  All applications for franchise. 
b.  All pertinent information regarding the granting of each franchise under this article. 
c.  All matters which might constitute grounds for revocation of a franchise under this article. 
d.  All resolutions of disputes, after hearing, between franchisees, between franchisees and subscribers, between franchisees and access users, and between access users. 
e.  All information regarding the regulation of rates under this article and any changes in rates, services or classifications. 
f.  All records and reports which the franchisee is required to submit under this article. 
(8)  Prepare an annual budget and, prior to adopting the budget, conduct a public hearing thereon, which budget shall not be effective until approved by joint resolution of the Oxford Village Council and the township board. 
(9)  Prepare an annual report to the Oxford Village Council and the township board, including an accounting of all monies received from cable franchise fees and distributed by the commission. Any funds remaining after distribution to the township and village shall be kept by or under the control of the township treasurer to be used by the commission only, including all interest generated by the investment of those funds. The township treasurer shall draw checks on such accounts only when a majority of the members of the commission have authorized such expenditure. 
(10)  Prepare an annual report of the type and amount of use of access channels. 
(11)  Elect a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary annually by majority vote of the commission members. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 20, 3-23-1981)  
Sec. 54-34. - Hearing and determination of complaints; local office. 
(a)  The commission, or any person or department designated by it, shall, upon its own motion or upon complaint of any person or subscriber of a cable communications company, have authority to hear and determine all complaints concerning the rates, charges, rules, regulations, practices, quality of service rendered or refused to be rendered, equipment furnished or refused to be furnished, or any other matter relating to the service or operation of the cable communications system or any person franchised under the terms of this article. 
(b)  Upon the filing of any complaint against any person pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the commission shall give such person at least 20 days' notice of the time and place of a hearing to be given such person upon the matters alleged in the complaint. The commission shall have the power to order such changes in the rates, charges, rules, regulations, services, equipment or other matters relating to the service or operation of the cable communications company as in its judgment, based upon the record of the hearing and findings of fact made thereon, appear to be just, reasonable and lawful. 
(c)  Every person granted a franchise pursuant to this article shall have a business office located in the Village of Oxford suitably staffed for the purpose, among others, of receiving and investigating complaints, dealing with its subscribers, receiving payment for service and otherwise conducting business, unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 15, 3-23-1981)  
Secs. 54-35—54-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FRANCHISE 
 
Sec. 54-51. - Required. 
(a)  No person shall construct, install, maintain or operate a cable communications system in the township, nor shall any person provide a cable communications service or acquire ownership or control of a cable communications company in the township, without such person having first obtained a franchise therefor from the commission in the form of a franchise agreement between the commission and the franchisee, which franchise agreement shall include, at a minimum, compliance with the specifications of this article. 
(b)  No person shall use, occupy or traverse the streets, alleys, lanes, avenues, boulevards, sidewalks, bridges, viaducts, or rights-of-way or any other public place or public way in the township or any extensions thereof or additions thereto, whether on, above, or under the surface of the ground, for the purpose of installing, constructing, maintaining or operating a cable communications system or facilities therefor or for the purpose of furnishing a cable communications service, without such person having first obtained a franchise therefor in the form of a franchise agreement between the commission and the franchisee, which franchise agreement shall include, at a minimum, compliance with all the specifications of this article. 
(c)  The specifications required by this article are minimum requirements of a franchise agreement. Additional requirements, including, but not limited to, rates, charges, deposits, specifications regarding required interconnections, studios or other signal origination facilities, number of channels to be equipped and available for immediate use upon initial construction of the system, use of channels by the township or the commission, schools, and other educational institutions, quality of community access, availability of equipment to users, required establishment and expansion of service area, other use of channels and other specifications or requirements of a cable communications franchisee or system, may be established in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 4, 3-23-1981)  
Sec. 54-52. - Application; granting; transfer. 
(a)  The application for such franchise to install, construct, maintain or operate a cable communications system in the township or to furnish a cable communications service therein shall be made in writing to the commission in such form as may be prescribed, shall include a description and map of the territory within the township in which the cable communications system is to be installed, constructed, maintained or operated or cable communications service is to be provided, shall be accompanied by a showing of the applicant's legal, financial, technical and other qualifications to be a franchisee under this article, and shall contain: 
(1)  In establishing legal qualifications, if other than a single individual, a certified copy of the partnership agreement, articles of association, or articles of incorporation, as the case may be, and also, if a foreign corporation, a certified copy of its authorization to do business in the state; 
(2)  In establishing financial qualifications, a copy of the applicant's current balance sheet as of a date not more than 60 days prior to the date of the application; if a loan or other credit arrangement is to be consummated to finance the establishment and operation of the proposed facilities, full particulars relative thereto shall be disclosed, including the identity of the creditor; 
(3)  In establishing technical qualifications, a statement of the arrangements to ensure the rendition of good service, including the type and kind of facilities to be employed, the technical standards to be followed, the maintenance and repair facilities to be used, and the number and a description of technical personnel, including copies of any contracts, agreements or arrangements relating to any of such matters; 
(4)  A statement as to the location of the antenna sites and the location of any places of business in the township; 
(5)  A statement as to any affiliated corporations or business organizations engaged in providing cable communications service, or interlocking directorships or ownerships held by any owners, officers or directors of the applicant with any other business engaged in providing cable communications service; 
(6)  A detailed statement as to the arrangements and timetable by which the applicant proposes to construct its cable communications facilities and system, including detailed descriptions of portions of the township to be served by the system within one year, 18 months, two years, 30 months, and three years of the granting of a certificate of compliance by the Federal Communications Commission; 
(7)  Information as to the programming services and public services which the applicant shall propose to provide, including: 
a.  The off-air signals to be carried initially; 
b.  The number of channels offered and the potential for diversified services to local government, educational institutions, community groups, householders and local commercial interests; and 
c.  Projected development of customer and community services, indicating priorities in development, and estimated time schedules therefor; 
(8)  Cost estimates of development, installation, and maintenance of the system, which items shall be deemed to include, but not be limited to, the proposed cost of acquisition of the system where approval of a transfer of the franchise has been requested; 
(9)  Revenue forecasts for the next five years of service; 
(10)  A proposed schedule of rates for installation charges, monthly service fees and relocation charges; and 
(11)  Such other information as the commission may request. 
The application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established by resolution, which fee shall be refunded, less expenses for review, if the applicant is not granted a franchise. 
(b)  Upon the filing of such an application and the payment of the fee as prescribed, the commission shall consider the application and may request such additional information as it may deem necessary to establish the legal, financial technical and other qualifications of the applicant to provide a cable communications service in Oxford. After considering all applicants, the commission shall, by resolution, select two applicants, for final review and public hearing prior to final decision on issuing a franchise, if two or more applications have been submitted. If only one qualified applicant has filed an application, the commission shall conduct final review and a public hearing on such application prior to a final decision on issuing a franchise. The commission reserves the right to reject any and all applications. Each applicant selected for final review shall pay actual costs of the final review, including legal, technical, engineering, consultant and commission expenses. 
(c)  If the commission determines that the applicant possesses the necessary qualifications, legal, financial, technical and otherwise, to reasonably assure applicant's ability to satisfactorily install, construct, maintain or operate a cable communications system or to furnish a cable communications service to the public in Oxford, the commission may issue applicant a nonexclusive franchise therefor in Oxford, provided, that no franchise shall be issued (1) until such franchise application has been on file and available for public inspection in the office of the township clerk for at least 30 days, and (2) until the commission has, thereafter, held a public hearing on such application after due notice of the time and place of such hearing has been given the public. 
(d)  In determining whether such a franchise shall be issued, the commission shall take into consideration, among other things, the technical qualifications of the applicant; the financial responsibility of the applicant; the ability of the applicant to perform efficiently the service for which the franchise is requested, including the prior experience, if any, of the applicant in providing cable communications systems or furnishing cable communications service; the proposed rate schedule; the nature and scope of the applicant's proposed system; and the timetables for development of the applicant's proposed system. 
(e)  No franchise granted under this article may be sold, transferred or assigned unless such transaction is first approved by the commission after receipt of a written application therefor containing the same information as to the transferee as would be required of an original applicant. Prior approval of the commission shall be required where ownership or control of more than 25 percent of the right of control of the franchise is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already own or control 25 percent or more of such right of control, singly or collectively. 
(f)  No franchise granted under this article may be sold, transferred or assigned, nor may more than 25 percent of the right of control of the franchisee be transferred to a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already own or control 25 percent or more of such right of control, singly or collectively, until such sale, transfer or assignment of the franchise or transfer of right of control shall first have been offered to the commission or to a person approved by the commission. Such offer shall be made at a price not greater than, and on terms equivalent to, that made to the offeror by a bona fide bidder for such franchise or right of control. The commission or the person approved by the commission shall accept or reject the offer within 90 days. This provision shall not be deemed to restrict the transfer by bequest or descent of stock of the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 5, 3-23-1981; Ord. No. 55B, 9-23-1981)  
Sec. 54-53. - Franchise nonexclusive; term; form. 
Any franchise issued pursuant to this article shall be a nonexclusive franchise for a term of years, not to exceed 15 years, as the commission may approve, and shall be issued in such form as shall be determined by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 6, 3-23-1981)  
Sec. 54-54. - Franchise fee; reporting; records. 
(a)  During the term of any franchise granted pursuant to this article, the person granted such franchise shall pay to the commission an annual franchise fee in an amount equal to five percent of the annual local gross subscriber revenues. Local gross subscriber revenues are those gross revenues of the franchisee from subscribers within the township. Local gross subscriber revenues include installation fees, disconnect and reconnect fees, and fees for regular cable benefits, including the transmission of broadcast signals and access and origination channels. Local gross subscriber revenues include local gross revenues from pay television in excess of the fair market value royalty paid by the franchisee therefor, and local leased channel revenues. To the extent that the franchisee's books of account do not reflect the source of any gross subscriber revenue, that portion of gross subscriber revenue allocable to the township shall be based on the ratio of the subscribers outside the township. Sales tax or other taxes levied directly on a per-subscription basis and collected by franchisee shall be deducted from the local gross revenues before computation of the fee due the commission is made. The commission shall be furnished a statement with each payment, certified as correct by the franchisee, and an annual statement for the entire year, prepared by a certified public accountant. All statements shall reflect the total amount of local gross subscriber revenues and the charges mentioned in this subsection, deductions and computations for the period covered by the statement. 
(b)  Of said five percent annual franchise fee, the commission shall distribute to the township and the Village of Oxford, for use in their respective general funds, three percent, or the maximum amount allowable by law and Federal Communications Commission regulations, whichever is greater. Such distribution shall be made on a pro-rata basis according to the number of subscribers in each jurisdiction on a year-by-year basis. Any amounts remaining after such distribution shall be used by the commission for the purpose of regulation and review of the system, maintenance and enhancement of access channel programming, and any other purposes allowable under Federal Communications Commission regulations. 
(c)  Such franchise fee shall be paid semi-annually on the 31st day of December and the 30th day of June of each year during the term of the franchise at the office of the treasurer of the township during his/her regular business hours. If the township treasurer's office is closed on said payment day, then payment may be made during his/her regular business hours on the next following day on which his/her office is open for business. 
(d)  The commission shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times the customer records of any person granted a franchise under this article from which its franchise fee payments are computed and shall have the right of audit and recomputation of any and all franchise fees paid. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the commission may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this article or for the performance of any other obligation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 7, 3-23-1981; Ord. No. 55C, 12-14-1983)  
Sec. 54-55. - Construction of facilities; conditions for use of streets. 
(a)  A franchise granted pursuant to this article shall confer upon the grantee named therein the nonexclusive right to erect, install, construct, reconstruct, replace, remove, repair, maintain and operate in or upon, under, above and across the streets, avenues, highways, sidewalks, bridges and other public ways, easements, and rights-of-way, as existing as of the date of the franchise, and all subsequent extensions thereof and additions thereto, in and belonging to the township, all necessary towers, poles, wires, cables, coaxial cables, transformers, amplifiers, underground conduits, manholes, and other television and/or radio conductors, equipment and fixtures for the installation, construction, maintenance and operation of a cable communications system (including audio, video and radio signals) or the furnishing of a cable communications service. 
(b)  Prior to the erection or installation of any towers, poles, guys, anchors, underground conduits, manholes, or fixtures for use in connection with the installation, construction, maintenance or operation of a cable communications system under a franchise granted pursuant to this article, the grantee of a franchise under this article desiring to erect or install such facilities for use in connection with its cable communications system shall first submit to the township engineer for his review and approval a concise description of the facilities proposed to be erected or installed, including engineering drawings, if requested or required, together with a map indicating the proposed location of such facilities. No erection or installation of any tower, pole, guy, anchor, underground conduit, manhole, or fixture for use in a cable communications system shall be commenced by any person until approval therefor has been received from the commission; provided that such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(c)  Any person accepting a franchise pursuant to this article and erecting or installing towers or poles shall, upon written request by the commission or the township, grant the commission or the township reasonable attachment space upon such towers or poles without a rental charge for the attachment of wire or cable owned and used by the commission or the township; provided, however, that the commission or the township shall pay any costs incurred by such person in providing attachment space to the commission or the township, including all necessary costs of rearrangement of such person's wires, cables, or equipment and tower or pole replacement cost for a larger tower or pole, if required. 
(d)  Upon the expiration, termination or revocation of any franchise granted pursuant to this article, or should any person wish otherwise to dispose of any tower or pole erected or installed for use in connection with a cable communications system or any portion of the system, the commission retains the first right and option to purchase in place such towers or poles as it may require or such portion of the system for the fair market value thereof. The commission shall be under no obligation to purchase all or any part of the system upon expiration, termination or revocation for cause of any franchise granted pursuant to this article. Further, upon the expiration, termination or revocation for cause of any franchise granted pursuant to this article, should the commission determine that it does not desire to purchase the system or any part thereof, the franchisee shall have a period of six months from the date of expiration, termination or revocation to remove its towers, poles, wires, cables, fixtures or other facilities from the streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public places; provided, however, that the franchisee shall not disturb any underground conduit, manholes or other facilities constructed underground. At the expiration of such six-month period, any property not removed by the franchisee shall become the property of the commission to do with as it may choose. Any cost to the commission in removing such property from the streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public places shall be claimed against the franchisee under the performance bond required under section 54-57(a). 
(e)  In areas or portions of the township where transmission or distribution facilities of public utilities providing telephone service and electric service are underground, or may be placed underground when installed, any person granted a franchise pursuant to this article shall likewise install, construct, maintain and operate its transmission and distribution facilities in like manner underground to the maximum extent feasible and permitted by existing technology and conditions, subject to the approval of the commission as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(f)  All construction, installation, maintenance, and operation of any cable communications system or of any facilities employed in connection therewith shall be in compliance with the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code as prepared by the National Bureau of Standards, the National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters, the Bell Telephone System's Code of Pole Line Construction, any standards issued by the Federal Communications Commission or other federal or state regulatory agencies in relation thereto, and applicable regulations of public utilities operating in the township. Every cable communications system installed, constructed, maintained or operated in the township shall be so designed, constructed, installed, maintained and operated as not to endanger or interfere with safety of persons or property in the township. 
(g)  Any opening or obstruction in, disturbance of or damage to the streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public places by any person in the exercise of any right granted pursuant to this article shall be properly guarded by adequate barriers, lights, signals and warnings so as to prevent danger to any person or vehicle using such streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public places and shall be properly and promptly repaired, all in a manner specified and approved by the township engineer, at such person's expense. 
(h)  Any person owning or maintaining a cable communications system or facilities therefor in or on the streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public places in the township shall, at his expense and without reimbursement from the township, upon request of the township, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, or remove from the street, alley, public right-of-way or public place any property of such person when required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or street construction, change or establishment of street grade, or installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal distribution facilities of any telephone or electric public utility or other public improvements. Any such person shall also, at the request of any private party holding an appropriate permit issued by the township, temporarily raise or lower its cable communications transmission or distribution wires or cable to permit the moving of any building or other structure, provided that the actual expense of such temporary raising or lowering shall be paid in full by the party requesting such work. 
(i)  If any person shall fail to commence, pursue or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this article as set forth in this section to be done in any street, alley, public right-of-way or public place as designated by the township engineer, the commission may cause such work to be done and such person shall pay to the commission the cost thereof within 30 days of the receipt of an itemized statement of such cost. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 8, 3-23-1981)  
Sec. 54-56. - Priority of use of streets. 
Any right or privilege granted to any person under this article to use or occupy any street, alley, public right-of-way or public place shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of such property. Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting in any way the township in the lawful exercise of the police power, and the grant of a franchise to any person as provided in this article shall confer no right, privilege, or exemption not specifically presented in this article. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 16, 3-23-1981)  
Sec. 54-57. - Indemnification and insurance requirements; effective date of franchise. 
(a)  Every cable communications company shall, within 30 days of the grant of a franchise to it pursuant to this article, file with the commission, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect for the term of the franchise, at its expense, a corporate surety bond, or such other surety arrangement as the commission may approve, in the amount of $25,000.00, conditioned upon the faithful performance by such cable communications company of its obligations under its franchise as set forth in this article, and upon the further condition that, if such cable communications company shall fail to comply with any one or more provisions of this article, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of such bond any damages or loss suffered by the township or the commission as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal of any property of such cable communications company as provided in this article plus attorneys' fees and costs, up to the full amount of the bond, such condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of any franchise granted under this article and any renewal thereof and thereafter until such cable communications company has liquidated all of its obligations with the township and the commission which may have arisen under the franchise or from the exercise of any privilege or right granted thereby. Any bond provided under this section shall provide that at least 30 days' prior notice of any intention not to renew, to cancel or to make a material change therein shall be filed with the commission. Nothing in this section shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by any cable communications company or in any way to limit its liability for damages or otherwise. The bond required under this section may be reduced in face amount to $10,000.00 at such time as the franchisee is actively providing cable communications service to 1,000 or more subscribers within the township. Such reduction shall be deemed a "material change" in the bond. 
(b)  Any cable communications company, within 30 days of the grant of a franchise pursuant to this article, shall file with the commission, in addition to the bond as set forth in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  An indemnity agreement to indemnify, defend and save the township and the commission harmless from and against any or all claims, suits, actions or liability for damages which may arise in any way from the grant of a franchise to such cable communications company, or its operation thereunder in the township, including all expenses incurred by the township and the commission in defending itself against any claim, action or suit; 
(2)  Proof of a general comprehensive liability insurance policy and an automobile liability insurance policy issued by companies licensed to do business in the state, protecting the township and the commission and their officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees against liability for loss or damage for personal injury, death and property damage occasioned by the installation, construction, maintenance or operation of a cable communications system in the township, with minimum liability limits of $500,000.00 for personal injury or death of any one person and $1,000,000.00 for personal injury or death of two or more persons in any one occurrence, and $500,000.00 for damages to property resulting from any one occurrence, and such policy shall contain a provision that a written notice of cancellation or material change or reduction in coverage shall be given the commission at least 30 days in advance of the effective date thereof; and 
(3)  Proof of adequate insurance as required by the Worker's Disability Compensation Act of 1969 (MCL 418.101 et seq.) applicable to it. 
(c)  No franchise under this article shall be effective until the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section have been fully complied with, and failure to file with the commission, within 30 days after grant of a franchise, the bond, indemnity agreement, proof of general comprehensive liability insurance policy, proof of automobile liability insurance policy and proof of adequate worker's compensation insurance, or any of them, as required by subsections (a) and (b) of this section, shall render the franchise null and void without notice or further proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 12, 3-23-1981)  
Sec. 54-58. - Rights of township. 
Any franchise granted under this article is made subject to all applicable provisions of law relating to the township and ordinances thereof, and specifically subject to the rights and powers of the township and limitations upon the cable communications company holding such franchise as are set forth in the statutes of the state pertaining to general law townships and villages, which are incorporated in this article by reference, and such cable communications company shall abide by and be bound by such rights, powers and limitations, and any franchise granted under this article constitutes and shall be considered as a public utility franchise and a cable communications company shall be deemed to be a public utility. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 19, 3-23-1981)  
Sec. 54-59. - Nonliability of township and commission. 
Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this article shall have no recourse whatsoever against the township or the commission, or its officers, boards, commissions, agents, or employees, for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this article or the enforcement thereof. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 21, 3-23-1981)  
Sec. 54-60. - Surrender of franchises or licenses in areas annexed to township. 
By the application for and acceptance of a franchise pursuant to this article, a cable communications company agrees that, upon subsequent additions of areas to the township, either by annexation, consolidation or otherwise, any and all franchises and/or licenses held by it to provide a cable communications service or to install, construct, maintain or operate a cable communications system in such areas shall be surrendered and any rights or privileges in streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public places to install, construct, maintain or operate a cable communications system or to furnish a cable communications service in such areas as may be subsequently be added to the township by annexation, consolidation or otherwise shall thereafter be subject to and authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 17, 3-23-1981)  
Sec. 54-61. - Termination, revocation or surrender. 
(a)  Any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall expire without further proceedings one year after its effective date if the person granted such franchise has not commenced construction of a cable communications system within such period. 
(b)  If any person granted a franchise pursuant to this article shall fail to provide cable communications service within and throughout the franchise areas as required under the terms of its franchise agreement, the franchise shall, on the anniversary of the effective date of such franchise next following the 12-month period during which cable communications service has not been extended as required under the terms of the franchise agreement, be deemed revoked without the necessity of commission action, unless, prior to such date, such person shall have applied to the commission, and the commission shall have, for good cause shown, granted an extension of the construction or service periods set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(c)  Any franchise granted pursuant to this article shall be terminated and cancelled without further proceedings 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of a cable communications company, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceedings, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of such period; provided, however, that such receiver or trustee may apply for a transfer or assignment of such franchise, as provided in section 54-52(e), within 60 days of the appointment of such receiver or trustee, if duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises; and provided further, in case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant, with or without the appointment of a receiver or trustee, including or excluding the franchise granted under this article, such franchise as granted will be terminated and cancelled without further proceedings upon 30 days' written notice of termination served upon the cable communications company and the purchaser thereof, unless within such 30-day period, the purchaser shall apply to the commission for a transfer or assignment to it of the franchise as provided in section 54-52(e). 
(d)  Any franchise granted pursuant to this article is revocable at will by the commission prior to its expiration; provided, however, that the franchise shall be submitted to the electors of the township pursuant to Public Act No. 266 of 1909 (MCL 460.601 et seq.). If the franchise is confirmed by the electors, the franchise shall not be revocable at will by the commission prior to its expiration, but the franchise shall be terminable for cause as provided in this article. If the electors shall not confirm the franchise, the franchise shall be deemed to be void as of the date granted. Any franchise granted pursuant to this article is revocable for cause by the commission prior to its expiration where the cable communications company has failed substantially to comply with any provision or requirement of this article or the provisions of its franchise agreement. The commission may give a written notice containing full particulars as to the provision or requirement with which compliance is claimed deficient and allow such cable communications company 60 days to comply. At the expiration of such 60 days, such franchise shall be deemed terminated and revoked, without further commission action, unless such cable communications company shall request a hearing before the commission upon its alleged failure to substantially comply with any provision or requirement of this article or of its franchise agreement. The hearing shall be public, with the cable communications company being permitted to fully participate therein, including the right to introduce testimony and exhibits and to examine and cross examine witnesses. The hearing shall be recorded, and at the conclusion thereof the commission, if it finds that the cable communications company has not substantially complied with any provision or requirement of this article or its franchise agreement, may terminate and revoke the franchise. 
(e)  Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this article may surrender it by written notice of intent to surrender its franchise filed with the commission not less than 60 days prior to the surrender date. On the surrender date specified in such notice, all rights, privileges and authority under the franchise shall terminate; provided, however, that such person shall have a period of six months thereafter to remove its towers, poles, wires, cables, fixtures or other facilities from the streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public places, subject to the rights of the township and the commission as set forth in section 54-55(d). At the expiration of such six-month period, any property not removed by such person shall become the property of the commission to do with as it may choose. Any cost to the township or the commission in removing such property from the streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public places shall be claimed against such person under the performance bond required under section 54-57(a). 
(f)  For failure to complete system construction in accordance with the agreed upon timetable in the franchise agreement, unless the commission specifically approves the delay by motion or resolution due to the occurrence of conditions beyond the grantee's control, for each year's delay in construction, the township will take two years off the initial 15-year term of the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 13, 3-23-1981; Ord. No. 55A, 6-24-1981)  
Secs. 54-62—54-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 54-81. - Commencement and completion of construction. 
(a)  Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this article shall commence construction or installation of its cable communications system within 120 days after issuance of a certificate of compliance by the Federal Communications Commission. 
(b)  Any person granted a franchise pursuant to the article shall, within such period as designated in the franchise agreement after the effective date of the issuance of a certificate of compliance, complete construction in the area designated in the franchise agreement. Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this article who is unable to construct according to the provisions of this section for good cause shall notify the commission in writing within 30 days of the occurrence of any delay or interruption of construction of more than 15 working days' duration, which interruption or delay would affect its inability to construct according to the schedule. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 14, 3-23-1981)  
Sec. 54-82. - Standard of service. 
(a)  Any cable communications company granted a franchise pursuant to this article shall install, construct, maintain and operate its cable communications system in accordance with the accepted standards of the industry, in conformity with the state of the art and any standards of operation or maintenance for a cable communications system which may be established or issued by the Federal Communications Commission. Further, it is the intention of this article that any person granted a franchise to furnish a cable communications service to the public within the township shall possess the financial and technical qualifications necessary to provide a cable communications system which will ensure its subscribers high-quality technical and public service. 
(b)  Every cable communications system franchised under this article shall be a two-cable system and each cable shall have at least 240 MHz of bandwidth (the equivalent of 40 television broadcast channels per cable) available for potential use for the totality of cable services to be offered. The system shall possess the capability for the reception and distribution of world-wide radio signals. 
(c)  Every cable communications system franchised under this article shall maintain bi-direction signal capability for digital, audio and video signal transmission on all elements of the system. The extent to which the reverse capability is available to subscriber use shall be specified in the franchise agreement. 
(d)  Every cable communications system franchised under this article, at a minimum, shall maintain and make available without charge such public access channels, education access channels and local government access channels as may from time to time to be designated, established, required, or regulated by the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, including the expansion of such access channels pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission as may from time to time be in force and effect. 
(e)  Every cable communications system franchised under this article shall maintain such capacity, capability and technical standards as will enable it to interconnect with any other cable communications system located in any adjacent community. It is the intention of this article to require that all access channels in the Detroit metropolitan area be interconnected to the cable communications system franchised under this article. 
(f)  Any cable communications company granted a franchise under this article shall ensure the protection of privacy of subscribers, including, but not limited to, transmitting subscriber viewing patterns by subscriber permission only, making available devices to inhibit signals originating from subscriber terminals, not allowing tabulation of subscriber opinions or social preferences, and not allowing sale of lists of subscriber names or viewing habits. Provisions for subscriber privacy shall be specified in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 9, 3-23-1981)  
Sec. 54-83. - Rates. 
(a)  No cable communications company shall make any unjust or unreasonable discrimination in rates, charges, classifications, promotions, practices, regulations, facilities or services for or in connection with like services, or subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage in any respect whatsoever; provided, however, that this shall not be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graded scale of charges and classifications of rates to which any subscriber coming within such classification shall be entitled. 
(b)  No rate or charge for installation or basic cable communications service provided in the township shall be effective, nor shall any cable communications company advertise, collect, or receive any rate or charge for its services, until it shall have filed a complete schedule of rates and charges with the commission. The applicant for a franchise shall include in its application its proposed rates, charges and deposits. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 10, 3-23-1981)  
Sec. 54-84. - Free service for public agencies and schools; provision of service during public emergencies. 
(a)  Every cable communications company furnishing service within the township shall, without charge for installation or service, provide one installation of its cable communications service to each department of the township and each fire and police station in the township and shall, without charge, provide cable communications service to each primary school, secondary school and public library within the franchisee's current service area; provided that such services provided without charge shall not be included in determining the number of subscribers in service for computation of the franchise fee as provided in this article. 
(b)  Every cable communications company providing service within the township shall make its cable system available, without charge, to the township, the county, the state, the United States of America and/or emergency operations agencies for the prompt and simultaneous communication to subscribers and the public within the township of any information resulting from or required by war, threat of war, natural catastrophe, riot or insurrection, necessary to save or protect life or property. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 11, 3-23-1981)  
Sec. 54-85. - Reports. 
Every cable communications company shall file annually with the commission a current map showing the exact location of the transmission and distribution facilities and equipment in the township used by it in providing cable communications service, and further shall prepare and furnish the commission, on written request therefor, at such times and in such form as may be prescribed, such reports as to its operations, finances, facilities and activities as may be reasonably necessary to enable the commission to perform its obligations, functions and duties under this article. 
(Ord. No. 55, § 18, 3-23-1981)  
Secs. 54-86—54-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42. 
 
Sec. 54-121. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight, Public Act No. 48 of 2002 (MCL 484.3101 et seq.), as amended from time to time. 
Permit means a nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the township for its telecommunications facilities. 
Township supervisor means the township supervisor or his or her designee. 
(b)  All other terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following: 
Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to section 3 of the Act. 
MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the department of consumer and industry services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in the Act. 
Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. The term "public right-of-way" does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
Telecommunication facilities and facilities mean the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. The terms "telecommunication facilities" and "facilities" do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 USC 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean those terms as defined in section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, Public Act 179 of 1991 (MCL 484.2102). The term "telecommunication provider" does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 USC 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this article only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
(1)  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(3)  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 4, 1-22-2003) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 54-122. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this article are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunication facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Public Act No. 48 of 2002) ("Act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the township qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 2, 1-22-2003)  
Sec. 54-123. - Conflict. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the Act or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 3, 1-22-2003)  
Sec. 54-124. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the township for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit from the township pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with section 6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file three copies of the application with the township clerk. Upon receipt, the township clerk shall make copies of the application and distribute a copy to each member of the township board, the township planner, township engineer and township zoning official. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with section 6(5) of the Act. 
(c)  Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231—15.246, pursuant to section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)  Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(e)  Additional information. The township board may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the township board deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the township board. If the township and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the township, the township or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in section 6(2) of the Act. 
(f)  Previously issued permits. Pursuant to section 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the township under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the township to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, but after 1985, shall satisfy the permit requirements of this article. 
(g)  Existing providers. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the township as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the township an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (d) of this section. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided in section 5(4) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 5, 1-22-2003)  
Sec. 54-125. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Approval or denial. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the Act, the township board shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under section 54-124(b) for access to a public right-of-way within the township. Pursuant to section 6(6) of the Act, the township clerk shall notify the MPSC when the township board has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which the permit was granted or denied. The township board shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)  Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the township shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act. 
(c)  Conditions. Pursuant to section 15(4) of the Act, the township board may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Bond requirement. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the Act, and without limitation on subsection (c) of this section, the township board may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 6, 1-22-2003)  
Sec. 54-126. - Construction/engineering permit. 
A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the township without first obtaining any permit that may be required by chapter 22, article III, of this Code; provided, however, that no fee, bond, or other financial guarantee of any kind shall be charged to a telecommunications provider for such a permit. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 7, 1-22-2003)  
Sec. 54-127. - Conduit or utility poles. 
Pursuant to section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this article does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 8, 1-22-2003)  
Sec. 54-128. - Route maps. 
Pursuant to section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the township, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the township. The route maps should be in paper format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with section 6(8) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 9, 1-22-2003)  
Sec. 54-129. - Repair of damage. 
Pursuant to section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the township, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 10, 1-22-2003)  
Sec. 54-130. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the township set forth in section 54-124(d), a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the township's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to section 8 of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 11, 1-22-2003)  
Sec. 54-131. - Modification of existing fees. 
(a)  In compliance with the requirements of section 13(1) of the Act, the township hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the authority. 
(b)  In compliance with the requirements of section 13(4) of the Act, the township also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the township's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under section 8 of the Act. 
(c)  The township shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this article, in compliance with the requirement of section 13(4) of the Act. 
(d)  To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the township's policy and intent and, upon application by a provider or discovery by the township, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 12, 1-22-2003)  
Sec. 54-132. - Savings clause. 
Pursuant to section 13(5) of the Act, if section 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 54-131 shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 13, 1-22-2003)  
Sec. 54-133. - Use of funds. 
Pursuant to section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the township from the authority shall be used by the township solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the township from the authority shall be deposited into the telecommunications fund. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 14, 1-22-2003)  
Sec. 54-134. - Annual report. 
Pursuant to section 10(5) of the Act, the township treasurer shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 15, 1-22-2003)  
Sec. 54-135. - Cable television operators. 
Pursuant to section 13(6) of the Act, the township shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services, unless section 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 16, 1-22-2003)  
Sec. 54-136. - Existing rights. 
Pursuant to section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided in this article with respect to fees, this article shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the township may have under a permit issued by the township or under a contract between the township and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 17, 1-22-2003)  
Sec. 54-137. - Compliance. 
The township hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The township shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231—15.246, as provided in section 54-124(c); 
(2)  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements of this article, in accordance with section 54-124(f); 
(3)  Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500.00 application fee, in accordance with section 54-124(g); 
(4)  Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the township, in accordance with section 54-125(a); 
(5)  Notifying the MPSC when the township has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with section 54-125(a); 
(6)  Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with section 54-125(a); 
(7)  Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in section 54-125(b); 
(8)  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with section 54-125(c); 
(9)  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with section 54-125(d); 
(10)  Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 54-126; 
(11)  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the township's right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with section 54-131; 
(12)  Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 54-134; and 
(13)  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 54-135. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 18, 1-22-2003)  
Sec. 54-138. - Reservation of police powers. 
Pursuant to section 15(2) of the Act, this article shall not limit the township's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the township's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 19, 1-22-2003)  
Sec. 54-139. - Enforcement. 
In addition to any county sheriff's deputy, the township supervisor or his or her designee, and the township's ordinance enforcement officer are hereby designated as authorized township officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations for violations under this article. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 21, 1-22-2003)  
Sec. 54-140. - Penalty. 
A person who violates any provision of this article or any of the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined by state statute, and shall be subject to a civil fine of not more than $500.00 along with costs which may include all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the township has been put in connection with the municipal civil infraction. In no case, however, shall costs of less than $9.00 nor more than $500.00 be ordered. A person who violates any provision of this article or any of the terms or conditions of a permit issued under this article shall also be subject to such additional sanctions and judicial orders as are authorized under state law. Each day that a violation of this article or a permit continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the township may pursue any injunctive or other relief which may be available. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the township in the event of a violation by a person of this article or a permit issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 116, art. 22, 1-22-2003) 
APPENDIX A
 
  
Chapter 58 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Junk motor vehicles, § 22-31 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 30; damaging or tampering with motor vehicles, § 30-66; motor vehicles in parks, § 34-37; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 58-1. - Definitions. 
The definitions in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as adopted in this chapter and the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.) apply to this chapter. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 58-2. - Interpretation; conflicting regulations. 
In the event of a conflict between the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as adopted in this chapter and this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall control. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.), the Michigan Vehicle Code shall control.  
Sec. 58-3. - Enforcement generally. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced in accordance with the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as adopted in this chapter and the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.).  
Sec. 58-4. - Michigan Vehicle Code adopted. 
(a)  The Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, MCL 257.1 et seq., as amended at this time or as amended in the future is hereby adopted by reference for the purpose of regulating traffic and motor vehicles in the township. 
(b)  Penalty. The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by reference. The township may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days; provided, however, that a violation of MCL 625(1)(C) is punishable by one or more of the following: 
(1)  Community service of not more than 360 hours; 
(2)  Imprisonment for not more than 180 days; 
(3)  A fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $700.00. 
(Ord. No. 101A, § 2, 7-12-2000; Ord. No. 122, § 3, 5-9-2012; Ord. No. 126, § 3, 1-8-2014)  
Sec. 58-5. - Pupil Transportation Act adopted. 
Pursuant to section 23 of Public Act No. 359 of 1947 (MCL 42.23), the township hereby adopts by reference the Pupil Transportation Act (MCL 257.1801 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 101A, § 2, 1-12-2000)  
Sec. 58-6. - Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages adopted. 
(a)  The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages promulgated by the director of state police and published in the 1979 edition of the Michigan Administrative Code and amendments as published in the Quarterly Supplement No. 5 to the 1979 edition of the Michigan Administrative Code, in accordance with Public Act No. 62 of 1956 (MCL 257.951 et seq.) are adopted by reference. 
(b)  References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages to "governmental unit" shall mean this township. 
(Ord. of 5-12-1982, §§ 1, 2)  
Sec. 58-7. - Enforcement on certain roads and parking lots. 
Officers of the township police department, county sheriff's department, and state police may enforce all provisions of the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages as adopted and amended in this chapter and the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.), including its penalty provisions, within the following roads and parking lots: 
(1)  Oxford Pines Subdivision, including Stacey Circle, Country View Drive and Estate Drive. 
(2)  Twin Lakes Estates Subdivision (all streets). 
(3)  The entrance road to Oxford High School, known as Wildcat Trail. 
(Ord. No. 40A, § 1, 9-28-1994; Ord. No. 40B, § 1, 4-9-1997)  
Sec. 58-8. - Motor carrier safety. 
(a)  State law adopted. The provisions of the state Motor Carrier Safety Act (MCL 480.11 et seq.) are hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)  Penalty. 
(1)  Pursuant to MCL 42.21, those offenses defined as civil infractions under the state Motor Carrier Safety Act, adopted by reference in subsection (a) of this section, shall be municipal civil infractions under this section. 
(2)  Pursuant to MCL 42.21, the offense described in MCL 480.17d shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 for each violation, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. 
(3)  All fines paid for violations of this section shall be collected and distributed according to law. 
(Ord. No. 115, 10-23-2002)  
Secs. 58-9—58-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARKING 
 
Sec. 58-31. - General parking prohibitions. 
The provisions of sections 673 through 676b of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.673—257.676b) are hereby adopted by reference. A violation of this section shall constitute a civil infraction payable with a fine up to $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 70.001, art. 4, 9-12-2001)  
Sec. 58-32. - Parking violations bureau. 
(a)  The township supervisor shall establish a parking violations bureau, which may be part of an established parking violations bureau, staffed with qualified employees to administer the bureau, and adopt rules and regulations for the operation thereof. 
(b)  Only those violations scheduled in this article shall be disposed of by the parking violations bureau. The fact that a particular violation is scheduled shall not entitle the alleged violator to disposition of the violation at the bureau, and the violator may be ticketed into a court of competent jurisdiction by the officer citing the violation. 
(c)  No penalty for any violation shall be accepted at the parking violations bureau from any person who denies having committed the offense, and in no case shall the person who is in charge of the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth of any fact or matter relating to such alleged violation. No person shall be required to dispose of a parking violation at the parking violations bureau, and all persons shall be entitled to appear before a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 2, 7-20-1989)  
Sec. 58-33. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any vehicle registered in his name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this article. 
(b)  Parking spaces may be used by vehicles during the legal parking limits provided by this article, and vehicles shall be considered unlawfully parked if they remain in such space beyond posted parking limits. 
(c)  The issuance of a traffic ticket or notice of violation by a police officer shall be deemed an allegation of a parking violation. Such traffic ticket or notice of violation shall indicate that the person to whom the ticket or notice was issued must respond to the parking violations bureau within 48 hours of the citation. 
(d)  Failure to pay the stated fine to the parking violations bureau within the specified time limits shall be deemed a choice of the cited person declining resolution by fine at the parking violations bureau, and the matter shall be referred to the district court automatically, for resolution. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 4, 7-20-1989; Ord. No. 70.001, art. 1, 9-12-2001)  
Sec. 58-34. - Citation procedures. 
(a)  Nothing in the article shall be construed to abridge the power of a police officer to arrest any violator and take the violator into custody. 
(b)  Whenever any motor vehicle is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this article, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice in writing for the driver to answer to the charge within ten days at the time and place specified in the notice. The officer shall deliver copies of such notice to the parking violations bureau. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 5, 7-20-1989; Ord. No. 70.001, art. 2, 9-12-2001)  
Sec. 58-35. - Impoundment of vehicles. 
Any police officer may impound any motor vehicle parked at a place where parking is prohibited by this article, or which has been parked for more than two hours in excess of the time allowed for parking in any place, or which has been involved in two or more violations of this article for which citation tags have been issued and not disposed of within the specified time limit at the parking violations bureau or a court of competent jurisdiction as required in this article. Any person desiring to redeem such impounded vehicle shall first pay such fine as may be assessed for the violation for which such motor vehicle was impounded together with the costs of towing and impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 5, 7-20-1989; Ord. No. 70.001, art. 2, 9-12-2001)  
Sec. 58-36. - Schedule of penalties. 
The following shall be considered parking violations in the township, and the penalties shall be as listed for violation citations presented and paid at the parking violations bureau: 
Violation 	Penalty 
Parking too far from curb 	$ 25.00 
Angle parking violations 	25.00 
Obstructing traffic 	25.00 
Unauthorized use of handicapped spot (any lot, public or private) 	
(1) 	Parking in a handicapped spot without proper permit 	100.00 
(2) 	Parking in a handicapped spot without proper display of permit 	40.00 	
Prohibited parking (signs unnecessary): 		
(1) 	On sidewalk 	25.00 	
(2) 	Blocking driveway 	25.00 	
(3) 	Within intersection 	25.00 	
(4) 	Within 15 feet of hydrant 	25.00 	
(5) 	On crosswalk 	25.00 	
(6) 	Within 20 feet of crosswalk or 15 feet of corner lot lines 	25.00 	
(7) 	Within 20 feet of street side traffic sign or signal 	25.00 	
(8) 	Within 50 feet of railroad crossing 	25.00 	
(9) 	Within 20 feet of fire station entrance 	25.00 	
(10) 	Within 75 feet of fire station entrance on opposite side of street (sign necessary) 	25.00 	
(11) 	Beside street excavation when traffic is obstructed 	25.00 	
(12) 	Double parking 	25.00 	
(13) 	Within 100 feet of accident where police are in attendance 	50.00 	
(14) 	In front of theater entrance 	25.00 	
(15) 	Blocking emergency exit 	50.00 	
(16) 	Blocking fire escape 	50.00 	
(17) 	Within 200 feet of emergency and firefighting equipment 	50.00 	
(18) 	In alley 	25.00 	
Parking longer than posted time limits: 		
(1) 	First ticket issued, per incident 	5.00 	
(2) 	Each additional hour or part thereof 	5.00 	
	 (Maximum fine: $50.00) 		
Parking for prohibited purposes: 		
(1) 	Displaying vehicle for sale 	50.00 	
(2) 	Working on or repairing vehicle 	50.00 	
(3) 	Storage over 48 hours 	50.00 	
Wrong wheel to curb 	25.00 	
Loading zone violation 	25.00 	
Bus, parking other than in bus stop 	25.00 	
Abandoned vehicles (plus towing and storage charge) 	25.00 	
Disabled vehicle, failure to move 	25.00 	
Keys in vehicle or motor running 	25.00 	
Parking in prohibited zone: 		
(1) 	Posted prohibited zone 	25.00 	
(2) 	Tow-away zone 	25.00 	
(3) 	Fire lane 	50.00 	
(4) 	No overnight parking 	25.00 	
Between sidewalk and curb 	25.00 	
Private property, without owner's consent 	25.00 	
Taxicab, parking other than in cabstand 	25.00 	
Bus, taxicab stand violations 	25.00 	
Parked on grade, wheels not turned to curb 	25.00 	
 
(Ord. No. 70, § 6, 7-20-1989; Ord. No. 70.001, art. 3, 9-12-2001; Ord. No. 70.002, art. 1, 5-8-2002)  
Sec. 58-37. - Parking in public parking lots. 
Any lot or area designated as a free public parking lot shall be restricted to 24 consecutive hours of parking with certain rules and regulations as designated by resolution of the township board. In all free parking areas within the township limits, there shall be no parking between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. daily unless posted otherwise. All time limits will be posted in the parking area and will be authorized and subject to change by resolution of the township board. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 3, 7-20-1989)  
Chapter 62 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 14; environment, ch. 22; stormwater drainage and land improvement control, § 22-61 et seq.; public water supply protection, § 22-191 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42; electric and gas supply franchises, § 42-31 et seq.; subdivisions, ch. 46; improvements to utilities in subdivisions, § 46-163; telecommunications, ch. 54. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 62-1—62-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 62-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned well means a well which is no longer used, or a well which is in such disrepair that its continued use for the purpose of obtaining potable groundwater is impractical, or a well which is a threat to groundwater resources, or a well which is or may be a health or safety hazard. 
As-built plans means engineering drawings prepared after installation of a water system which shall show a statement by a registered engineer or surveyor certifying this to be "as-built plans" and shall include, but not be limited to, length of mains, supply pipes and services pipes where applicable, their locations with respect to property lines, joints used and mechanical, electrical and structural details for pumps, wellhouses and a minimum of two witnesses to hydrants, valves and other necessary appurtenances and other parts of the water supply system and be of sufficient detail to comply with standards of the county water resources commissioner's ("OCWRC") office and to enable the township engineer to insert the water system changes into the current township hydraulic model. 
Base connection charge means that charge by the township for the connection of any premises or structure to the water supply system, and is equal to the base fee for one residential equivalent unit times the number of residential equivalent units assigned a premises or structure use as established from time to time by the township board by resolution. 
Charges for water supply services and charges mean the amount charged to each premises in the township connected to the system for water supply services, which may include those charges as set forth in section 62-41(a) and as may be established from time to time by the township board by resolution in an equitable manner to cover the costs of the water supply service. 
Contaminant is a biological, chemical, physical, or radiological component in water that is or may become injurious to public health, safety, or welfare. 
County means County of Oakland, Michigan. 
County connection charge means a charge by the OCWRC office paid coincident to the payment of the base connection charge at the time of connection to the water system. This charge is based upon water line size as well as costs associated with turning water on and off for a premises or structure. 
Cross connection means a temporary or permanent connection or arrangement of piping (link) between a potential source of pollution and a potable water supply through which a backflow could occur. 
Developer means the proprietor of multiple structures or multiple premises, and includes proprietors of a subdivision, condominium subdivision, shopping center, office building, apartments, industrial structures, manufactured housing, etc. 
Engineering standards ordinance means the township engineering design standards ordinance set forth in section 42-1 of this Code. 
Groundwater is subsurface water in a zone of saturation. 
Main and water main mean those pipes, other than supply pipes and service pipes, used for conveying or distributing water. 
Premises means that entity of use within a structure consisting of a separate ownership or tenancy, and shall also mean that use where no structure exists, but to which water supply service is made available to real property, including areas of landscape. 
Remote meter reader means a water meter placed upon a structure obtaining water from the public water system which collects consumption, diagnostic, and status data from the water meter and transfers that data to a central database for billing, troubleshooting, and analyzing. 
Residential equivalency unit, REU and unit mean that measure of potential water consumption equal to the quantity ordinarily consumed by occupants of a residence by a single family of average size. The number of units assigned to any premises or type of premises by the township board is designed to represent the potential water consumption thereof as a multiple of the quantity ordinarily consumed by occupants of a residence by a single family of average size as determined from time to time by the township board by resolution. 
Service pipe means a pipe extending from the property line or curb cock or valve into the premises supplied with water. 
State means the State of Michigan. 
Structure means a building to which water supply service is made available. 
Structure requiring potable water is a structure where the use of potable water is needed or intended including those used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes requiring the need for the use of potable water. 
Supply pipe means a pipe tapped into a main and extending thence to and including the curb cock or valve at the property line. 
Township means the Charter Township of Oxford, Oakland County, Michigan, and where the township has assigned its authority, it may include the assignee of the township. 
Usage charge means that charge as determined by the township board for the volume of water used by premises and, in the case of no usage, a minimum charge as established by the township board by resolution. 
Water booster station means a facility within the water supply system that is utilized to increase water pressure at certain designated points within the water supply system. 
Water district means that portion of township designated by resolution of the township board which is serviced or is to be serviced by the water supply system. The establishment of the water district does not constitute a representation that the township will extend the water supply system to this area. 
Water supply services means the transportation, distribution and sale of water to the premises or structure(s) connected, directly or indirectly, to the water supply system. 
Water supply system, water system and system mean collectively all plants, wells, well houses, storage tanks, pumps, work, properties and instrumentalities, as they shall from time to time exist, which are used or useful in connection with the obtaining of a water supply and/or the distribution of water by the township, including all extensions, enlargements and improvements thereto which are owned and operated by the township directly or through contract with the county. 
(Ord. No. 105.A, art. I, 8-9-2000; Res. of 2-8-2017) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 62-32. - Penalties. 
Unless stated otherwise in this article, violations of this article are a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 105.A, § 12.3, 8-9-2000; Res. of 2-8-2017)  
Sec. 62-33. - Variances to article. 
(a)  The township board may grant a variance from the requirements of this article. Such a variance from the terms of this article shall not be granted by the township board unless and until: 
(1)  An applicant submits a written request to the township water and sewer committee for a variance from the requirements of this article and otherwise demonstrates that compliance with the terms of this article is impracticable and the premises is otherwise serviced by an existing source of water that conforms with the requirements of the county health division and/or state department of environmental quality ("MDEQ"). 
(b)  The township water and sewer committee shall make an investigation of the written application and may consult with the township engineer and other professionals pursuant to that investigation. The water and sewer committee shall make a recommendation to the township board upon a variance request after a public hearing, with notice delivered or mailed, with proof of mailing retained, to the applicant and the owners of property within 300 feet of the subject property. 
(c)  The township water and sewer committee shall make findings of fact based upon competent evidence that the requirements of subsection (a)(1) have been met. 
(d)  The township water and sewer committee shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of a variance. 
(e)  The township water and sewer committee shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article and will not be detrimental to the public welfare. 
(f)  In recommending any variance, the township water and sewer committee may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this article. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted by the township board, shall be deemed a violation of this article and punishable under applicable provisions of this article. Conditions imposed shall meet all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety and welfare, and the social and economic well being of those who will use the premises under consideration, and the community as a whole; 
(2)  Be related to the valid exercise of the township's powers, and purposes which are affected by the premises; 
(3)  Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this water ordinance. 
(g)  Any variance granted by the township board pursuant to this section shall only continue as long as a source of water, in existence at the time the variance request was granted, continues to comply with the standards of the county health division and/or MDEQ. Should the source of water not comply, the variance shall terminate. 
(h)  The township board shall be the final ruling governmental body pertaining to any and all variance requests, including REU assignment factors and/or calculations. 
(Ord. No. 105.A, art. XIII, 8-9-2000; Ord. No. 105B.001, 11-21-2006; Res. of 2-8-2017)  
Sec. 62-34. - Organization and management; disposition of revenue. 
(a)  The operation, maintenance and management of the system shall be under the supervision and control of the township board. The township may collect revenues for the use of the system. The township board may designate another party or other parties, including but not limited to the OCWRC office, to perform the necessary labor and functions in the day-to-day operation and/or maintenance of the system as well as to provide for the collection of all revenues for the operation, maintenance and improvement of the system. The township board shall have the authority to accept such systems as gifts, as obtained by contract or otherwise, from any person, and may assign all or any part of the authority contained in this article or deed or transfer to the county, the system or any part thereof. 
(b)  To the extent that the township collects any revenue from the collection of usage charges or base connection charges, these revenues shall be received into the township water fund. 
(c)  Revenues received into the water fund are hereby pledged for the following purposes: 
(1)  First, an amount shall be directed, if necessary, each quarter, to an account designated "Operations and Maintenance" in a sum sufficient to provide for the payment for the next quarter of all current expenses for administration and operation of the system and such current expenses for the maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order. 
(2)  Once sufficient funds have been directed to the operations and maintenance account to pay the current expenses for administration and operation of the system pursuant to subsection (c)(1), remaining funds shall then be directed, if necessary, on a quarterly basis, to a second account, designated "Indebtedness and Bond Redemption," in a sufficient amount to pay any outstanding general indebtedness and/or bond obligations. 
(3)  Out of the remaining revenues in the water fund, there shall be set aside in any quarter, after meeting the requirements for the operations and maintenance account and the indebtedness and bond redemption account, if necessary, all remaining revenues into a third account for the purpose of making improvements, enlargements, extensions and repairs to the system, including but not limited to construction of new well houses, elevated storage towers, water booster stations, property acquisitions, etc., which account shall be designated "Improvement Account." 
(d)  No disbursements shall be made from the water fund except to the accounts as provided in this section. 
(e)  All monies in the water fund of the system shall be deposited with a bank designated by the township board. 
(Ord. No. 105.A, art. II, 8-9-2000; Res. of 2-8-2017)  
Sec. 62-35. - Extension of system. 
(a)  Extension of or changes in water mains may be initiated by the township board or by petition from property owners. The township board may refuse to grant the petition, or may grant the petition, and may prescribe the terms and conditions upon which the petition will be granted and may require the written acceptance of such terms and conditions by the petitioners. The work will be done at the expense of the property owners unless otherwise stipulated by the township board, and any and all extensions shall be subject to the provisions of this article. Plans submitted by a petitioning property owner shall be sufficiently detailed to determine whether the extension of the water system is compatible with the water system master plan as defined by the township's hydraulic model. The plans shall conform with the engineering standards ordinance (chapter 42, article IV of the Oxford Charter Township Code of Ordinances). 
(b)  The water system and all water lines, including the supply line and associated appurtenances from the curb cock box upstream in the system, are under the exclusive control of the township board, and all persons other than authorized agents and employees of the township are forbidden to disturb, tap, change, obstruct access to or interfere with them in any way. 
(c)  Any person installing water mains and associated appurtenances at his own expense shall first submit complete plans and specifications, prepared, signed and sealed by a registered civil engineer, for such work, to the township engineer for review and approval, and upon installation such shall be inspected and approved by the township engineer and required county and state agencies before such water mains and appurtenances are put in operation. All construction and extensions of any water main and appurtenances shall conform to the construction standards and guidelines as set forth in the engineering standards ordinance (chapter 42, article IV of the Oxford Charter Township Code of Ordinances). Any extension of the water main shall conform with the master plan for the water system as prepared by the township engineer, and any extension shall be constructed in a manner that will facilitate practicable extension of the water system as determined by the township engineer. Unless already paid and deposited under the requirements of the township zoning ordinance or other township ordinances, a person installing a water main shall deposit into an escrow account an amount sufficient to cover the projected cost of reviewing plans and specifications. The escrow amount shall be set forth in appendix A. 
(d)  Any person whose property lies outside of an unincorporated portion of the township desiring to connect to the water system will be subject to one (1) times the normal connection fees and one (1) times the normal quarterly billing rate. Such parties outside the unincorporated township interested in connecting to the water system shall prior to connection obtain a written franchise agreement as required by the state constitution from the governmental body in which the property is located permitting the township to provide water services to the property. The proposed connection shall be submitted to the township board for review and a decision within the sole discretion of the township board. The owner of the property shall pay into escrow an amount to cover the township's costs for negotiating and reviewing the terms of the franchise agreement with the governmental body in which the property is located. 
(e)  If any new structure occurs within an area for which connection to the water supply system is practicable, such structure shall be required to connect to the water supply system. The determination of practicability will take into consideration the application of associated costs of connection, and location of the structure with respect to the defined water district, and this determination shall be the responsibility of the township board; provided, however that all new subdivision developments within the water district where such subdivisions, including successive phases thereof, consist of 15 lots or more, as defined by section 46-163(c), shall, where capacity exists, connect to the water supply system. 
(f)  No premises shall be granted a certificate of occupancy or be allowed to connect to the water system until the township has received and has approved (pursuant to review by the township engineer) as-built construction drawings for that specific portion of the water system that was constructed for the purpose of providing water service to that premises. 
(Ord. No. 105.A, art. III, 8-9-2000; Res. of 2-8-2017)  
Sec. 62-36. - Service pipes, supply pipes and connections. 
(a)  Before any connection shall be made to any water main, application for such connection shall be made in writing to the township by the owner of the premises to be served, with payment made as established by the township board at appendix A and a connection permit secured. Such applications shall be made on forms provided by the township. By application, the owner, user and/or applicant for a water connection permit by such application agrees to abide by all provisions of this article, water system related rules and regulations of the township board, and county standards and specifications in all respects. The application must be accompanied by the fees specified by township board resolution, which will be returned and the application shall not be granted. The township board, by resolution, may establish rules and regulations related to applications for water service, fees related to installation of such service (including but not limited to engineering review fees, administrative fees, inspection fees, and tapping fees), and the requirements relating to supply pipes, service pipes, gate valves, meter connections, water supply pipes, and the connection thereof. 
(b)  Except as may otherwise be required or allowed by the county, all new meter installations shall have a remote reading register. The cost of this shall be included in the charge for installation of supply pipe and meters, referred to as the "county water connection charge." 
(c)  Except for fire hydrants, water shall be taken and used only through metered water service pipes under the supervision of the township where township water service is available, and no connection through which water may pass from one property to another shall be permitted even though the ownership of both properties shall be the same. 
(d)  Excessive or unnecessary use or waste of water, whether caused by carelessness or by defective or leaky plumbing or fixtures, is strictly prohibited. For disregard of or repeated violation of this requirement, after five days' written notice from the township, the water may be turned off by the township; provided, however, if in the sole judgment of the township the excessive use of water is so substantial that five days' notice would result in a significant loss of water, no prior notice is required. 
(e)  No unauthorized person shall interfere in any way with the supply pipe installed by the township. No unauthorized person is permitted to turn water on or off at the curb cock. 
(f)  All township water used on any premises where a meter is installed must pass through the meter. No bypassing of the meter will be permitted. 
(g)  The refusal or neglect of the owner to equip the premises with the service pipe connections, utilities and/or fixtures as approved by the township shall be sufficient grounds for discontinuance of township water supply to the premises or structure. 
(h)  Those structures connected to private water wells, which wells have developed contamination by any contaminant above the acceptable safe drinking water levels adopted and/or established by the state department of environmental quality, shall, where practicable, connect to the water supply system at such time as the township board determines the water supply system is available to such structure and the existing well shall be deemed abandoned at such time as the connection to the water system occurs. Upon connection to the water supply system, each private and public water well servicing such premises or structures shall be disconnected and abandoned in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations of the state, county and township to prevent contamination of the water supply system. 
(i)  All premises or structures which are on a private or public well shall connect to the water supply system, where available, at such time as the private or public well is abandoned for that premises of structure. The private or public well shall be abandoned in accordance with the standards of the county drain commissioner and/or county health division. Findings: the presence of arsenic contaminants in drinking water constitutes a health hazard requiring the filtration and treatment of all such water in order for it to be potable. By reason of private water wells sampled in the township in 2006 showing arsenic levels above the maximum concentration levels (MCL), through the requirements of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the county, the township constructed a water treatment plant, the purpose of which was the removal of arsenic contaminants from the water provided by the water system. 
As a matter of public health the owner of a structure requiring potable water shall be required to connect such structure to and obtain water from the water system if the connection is practicable when a new structure is constructed which is not connected to an existing structure which has a potable water supply and, in the case of existing structures requiring potable water, upon the private well servicing that structure becoming abandoned. 
(j)  Upon connection to the water system, the water well on the premises used or previously used for obtaining potable water shall be abandoned in accordance with the applicable laws and regulations of the state, county and township to prevent contamination of the water supply system. 
(Ord. No. 105.A, art. IV, 8-9-2000; Res. of 2-8-2017)  
Sec. 62-37. - Meters. 
(a)  All service connections except separate fire connections shall be metered and shall pay for water at the rate established by the township board by resolution. In no case will water be supplied, except for temporary use with township approval, without the installation of a meter to the premises to be serviced and at other than the established water rate. 
(b)  The supply pipe meter and remote reader shall remain the property of the township or its designated agent and will at all times remain under its control, and subject to the rules and regulations established from time to time by the township board by resolution. 
(c)  The owner of any premises where a meter is installed shall be held responsible for its care and protection from freezing or damage or interference by any person. 
(d)  All persons are forbidden to interfere with or move a water meter from any service connection without first receiving permission from the township. No person shall remove or break any seal on meters or bypass valves. 
(e)  If a meter should fail, it shall be the responsibility of the premises owner to have the meter repaired or replaced within 90 days. If a meter has failed to operate, the premises shall be billed at a rate equal to the greatest water use measurement of that meter taken over the preceding four quarterly billing periods. 
(Ord. No. 105.A, art. V, 8-9-2000; Res. of 2-8-2017)  
Sec. 62-38. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  Fire hydrants are provided for the use of the township or by such persons as may be specially authorized by the township. 
(b)  No unauthorized person shall open or cause to be opened any fire hydrant without first securing a permit as required by the OCWRC office and without paying to the county drain commissioner the appropriate fee based upon the estimated water usage from the fire hydrant. Proof that the OCWRC office permit has been obtained shall be presented to the township building inspector before the fire hydrant is opened. 
(c)  No person shall in any manner obstruct or prevent free access to or place or store temporarily or otherwise any object, material, snow debris, automobile, or structure of any kind within a distance of 20 feet of any hydrant. Any such obstruction when discovered may be removed at once by the township board or its duly authorized agent at the expense of the person responsible for the obstruction. 
(d)  The township board may establish, by resolution, rules and regulations relating to the maintenance, use, operating, and moving of fire hydrants, lines, and line connections. 
(e)  The township fire department and such other authorized persons shall pay for the water to be used by them at a fixed annual amount as determined by the township board by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 105.A, art. VI, 8-9-2000; Res. of 2-8-2017)  
Sec. 62-39. - Addition of fluoride to water. 
Pursuant to section 12721 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.12721), the addition of the chemical fluoride to the public drinking water supply of the township by any person is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 30, § 1, 6-13-1973; Res. of 2-8-2017)  
Sec. 62-40. - Use of water; premises with multiple occupancy; discontinuance of service. 
(a)  No person shall take or use township water from premises other than his own or of which he has possession, and no person shall sell or give away township water from his premises for any purpose except as approved by the township. Under no circumstances will any person be entitled to free water without the express written permission of the township board. 
(b)  Where there is one ownership of a structure that is occupied by two or more distinct family premises or where a business structure is occupied by two or more premises, a single charge for water will be made against the owners of the structure for the whole; provided, however, that where a structure or structures under one ownership consists of several premises, the premises may be served by more than one water service supply pipe and meter upon approval of the township. In multiple meter installations, no master meter will be allowed. When more than one meter is served by one water service supply pipe, all the meters served by the service must operate from a manifold type arrangement. 
(c)  Where a structure was originally serviced as a single premises and was fitted with one service pipe, but is divided into separate ownership, each premises must be connected to the main by separate service pipes and be separately metered, all of which must occur within 30 days after such division. 
(d)  Two or more structures not under common ownership shall not share a common service pipe. 
(e)  Water may be turned off from any premises against which charges stand delinquent for 30 days. Notification of delinquency shall be given the owner of the premises concurrent with the late billing together with a warning of the turn-off date if billing continues to remain unpaid. Where so turned off, the water will not be turned on again until all charges have been paid in full together with late charges, additional penalty sums and the charges for turning the water service on and off, which amount shall be established by appendix A. 
(f)  Where the water has been turned off by the authorized agent of the township for any reason, only authorized personnel shall turn it on again. When this requirement is violated the water may be turned off at the curb cock, in which case the owner or occupant shall, before it is again turned on, pay in advance the charges made by the township board for turning the water off and turning it on again. These charges shall be set forth in appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 105.A, art. VII, 8-9-2000; Res. of 2-8-2017)  
Sec. 62-41. - Water rates and payments. 
(a)  Generally. Water rates and charges to be charged for water supplied and use of the water supply system shall be established by resolution of the township board and shall be subject to necessary increases or decreases to provide sufficient funds on an equitable basis in order to maintain and operate the system in an efficient manner, keep it in good repair, contribute to capital costs and to maintain an adequate reserve for improvements and replacements. These township rates and charges include: 
(1)  Base connection charge. The charge for connection to the system by a given structure or premises will be determined by multiplying a base fee as established by resolution of the township board by the number of residential equivalent units assigned to the type of use of the premises or structure as also determined by resolution of the township board, with the process for that determination being set forth in subsection (h) of this section. 
(2)  Usage charge. That charge as determined by the township board by resolution for the volume of water used by a premise(s) and in all cases no usage charge shall be less than a minimum charge as established by the township board by resolution. 
(3)  Escrow fee. There shall be required an escrow fee for a sufficient amount to cover the cost of professional services, including those of the township engineer, utilized for the purpose of reviewing plans and specifications associated with extension of the water system as set forth in appendix A. 
(4)  Inspection and approval fees. Those fees identified in section 62-42 and appendix A. 
(5)  County connection charge. In addition, the county charges a county connection charge which charge is based upon water line size as well as charges for turning water on and off for a premises or structure. 
(6)  Debt service charge. A charge as determined by the township board by resolution from time to time to assist in bond debt reduction, the proceeds of which may be applied as provided for in subsection 62-34(c). 
(b)  Payment of charges for water supply services. 
(1)  The use of water from the water supply system at any new construction shall only be permitted upon the payment of required charges identified in subsection (a) of this section to the township. The use of water from the water supply system shall not be permitted and the township shall not accept payment on a connection charge until the basement and/or foundation of a new construction has been inspected and approved by the township. At such time as the basement and/or foundation of a new construction has been inspected and approved, the township will accept payment for a connection fee and allow the use of water from the water supply system at the new construction. 
(2)  At the time a person or entity obtains final approval of a site plan pursuant to Zoning Ordinance No. 67A for any new construction, requiring a site plan the township will conditionally reserve the required number REUs of capacity in the water supply system for that new construction for as long as the site plan for the new construction remains valid and capacity is available. For all other construction that does not require a site plan under Zoning Ordinance No. 67A, at the time a person or entity pays for and obtains a building permit for any new construction, the township will conditionally reserve the required number REUs of capacity in the water supply system for that new construction. To continue this reservation, the person or entity must obtain inspection and approval of the completed basement and/or foundation of the construction by the township within 90 days of the date the building permit was issued. If the person or entity does not obtain said inspection and approval within 90 days, the township will have no further obligation to reserve the number of REUs of capacity for the construction. The person or entity shall pay for such reserved capacity at the water rates at the time of payment as established by the township board. 
(3)  Change in premise use. Where a structure consists of multiple premises and there is a change in the use of a premises within a structure, which new use will have a greater number of residential equivalency units assigned to it under the unit factor chart as adopted by the township board, where there is a separate meter for the premises a new connection charge shall be paid for that premise equal to the base connection charge for the new use of the premise less the cumulative base connection charges previously paid for that premises and where there is not a separate meter for the premises and the premises receives its water supply through a common meter to the structure, which structure has multiple premises, a new base connection charge shall be paid for the premises equal to the sum of all base connection charges for all the premises serviced by a common meter given the new use less the cumulation of base connection charges previously paid for all premises within the structure served by a common meter. 
(4)  Inspection and approval fees. Those fees as provided for in appendix A. 
(c)  Usage charges. Usage charges shall be billed and collected quarterly or more often as determined by resolution of the township board. Failure to receive a bill shall not excuse failure to pay the bill when due. In the absence of a township board resolution to the contrary, bills shall be dated as of the first day of a month and shall be due and payable, without discount, as of the last day of that month which shall be indicated on the face of the bill. Interest/penalty at the rate of ten percent shall be payable to the township on all charges for water usage services that are not paid when due. 
(1)  Payment of connection and usage charges and all interest and penalties thereon shall be the personal obligation of the owner of the premises served. Usage charges and all interest and penalties thereon are also the personal obligation of the occupant of the premises served. In addition to the township's other collection rights and remedies contained in this article, the township may enforce these personal obligations by action in a court of competent jurisdiction for a money judgment. 
(2)  As security for the collection of connection and usage charges and all other rates, assessments, interest, penalties and charges for the provision of water supply services to or for a premises, the township shall have a lien upon the premises, effective immediately upon the provision of the water supply services, which except as otherwise provided in this article, shall be enforceable as provided in subsection 62-41(d) and in connection with any sale or transfer of the premises. 
(d)  Provisions. All connection and usage charges and any interest or penalties thereon that have been delinquent for six months or more as of September 1 of each year, plus a surcharge of five percent, shall be certified to the township board for collection on the tax rolls, and upon township board approval, shall be entered by the township supervisor on the next tax roll against the premises to which the charges, interest and penalties relate, to be collected and enforced in the same manner as provided by law for the collection of taxes. 
(e)  Lien for unpaid charges. The lien provided for in subsection (c)(2) of this section and enforcement of that lien as provided in subsection (d) of this section shall not apply to usage charges for water supply services provided to a premises after and for the period of time described in a written notice the township receives from the owner of the premises that: 
(1)  Includes a notice that an identified tenant is responsible for the charges; 
(2)  Indicates the period of time that the tenant will be responsible for the charges, corresponding to the term of the tenancy; 
(3)  Indicates whether there is a written lease or rental agreement with the tenant; 
(4)  Includes a copy of any written lease or rental agreement; and 
(5)  Includes an affidavit of the premises owner, signed under oath and attesting to the truth of all information provided in the notice. Upon receiving such a notice, the township shall deliver or mail, with proof of mailing retained, a written notice to the owner of the premises and identified tenant that water supply services to the premises will be discontinued unless a cash deposit equal to the average annual charge for services, with a minimum use of 1 MCF (1,000 cubic feet) as security for the payment of charges to the operator of the system. This deposit will also include all miscellaneous expenses and assessments such as IPP (Industrial Pretreatment Program), capital charge, etc. In the event that quarterly payments for services provided are not received, the amount due will be paid from the funds on deposit. Once the funds on deposit are exhausted, service will be shut off. Service will not be established until any unpaid balance is paid in full and another deposit equal to four times the average quarterly charge has been paid. The township's notice shall be given in the same manner and include and be subject to the same notices, rights and possible hearing as provided for in subsection 62-40(e). 
(f)  Special agreements. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the township board to contract for the construction of a water supply system or any part thereof where the terms of the contract may be different from the provisions of this section. No prior contract entered into between the township and another person for the construction of any part of the water supply system shall be considered as a precedence in the future. 
(g)  Installment and deferred payment for base connection charge. 
(1)  An owner of a structure or premises may pay the base connection charge in order to connect to the water supply system by installment payments over a five-year period provided the following conditions, in the opinion of the township supervisor, are met: 
a.  The structure or premises seeking to connect to the water supply system was in existence prior to the time connection to the water supply system became practicable and was previously served by an independent source of water supply, i.e., water well, which has become incapable of serving the structure or premises, and the owner of the structure or premises meets the following criteria: 
1.  The structure or premises qualifies as a homestead for the owner as defined under the state's general property tax laws at MCL 211.1 et seq. 
2.  The owner(s) of the structure or premises has a gross annual income of $30,000.00 or less. 
3.  The owner has been a resident of Michigan for five years or more and a citizen of the United States. 
3.  The owner has owned the structure or premises for five years or more. 
5.  The owner is 65 years old or older or is a totally and permanently disabled person, blind person, paraplegic, quadriplegic, serviceman, veteran, widow or widower as these persons are defined at MCL 206.501—MCL 206.532, or qualifies for the homestead poverty exemption pursuant to MCL 211.7u. 
b.  The applicable interest rate will be 5 3/10 percent at the time of connection to the water supply system. 
c.  An owner of an existing structure, who has this home declared as a 100 percent principal residence exemption as determined by the township assessor, may pay the base connection charge in order to connect to the water supply system by installment payments over a three-year period, upon the written opinion of the township supervisor. The owner will be responsible for paying one-third of the base connection charge upon obtaining a permit to connect to the water supply system. The remaining two-thirds are to be paid over equal yearly installments over a two-year subsequent period. The applicable interest rate will be five and three-tenths percent at the time of obtaining a permit to connect to the water supply system. This section does not apply to any new residential, commercial or industrial construction. 
(2)  In the event the structure or premises qualifies to pay the base connection charge by installment payment as set forth in subsections (g)(1)a. and b. of this section, the following shall apply: 
a.  The structure or premises shall make one installment payment each year in a pro-rata proportion of the total charge as calculated over five years (for subsection (g)(1)a. of this section) or three years (for subsection (g)(1)b. of this section). The installment payment shall be due on March 1 of each successive year. Interest shall be charged against the outstanding balance. Each installment payment shall be applied against the outstanding interest first with the balance applied against principal. 
b.  Each installment payment for the base connection charge shall constitute a lien as of March 1 of each successive year and any installment payment delinquent for six months or more shall be certified annually to the township supervisor who shall enter same upon the next township tax roll against the premises or structure and said unpaid installment payment shall be collected and said lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided for the collection of taxes assessed upon such roll and the enforcement of the lien thereon. Such installment payment as shall be delinquent for six months shall be certified annually by the township board to the township supervisor on or before October 1, of each year for failure of the property owner to pay the installment payment on or before March 1, of the same year. The treasurer of the township shall certify as delinquent such assessment to the Oakland County Treasurer's Office. 
(3)  An owner of any premises against which a water connection charge has been levied who is 65 years of age or older or who is totally and permanently disabled, a citizen of the U.S., a resident of this state for five or more years, and the sole owner of said premises for five or more years, is eligible for the deferment of payment of the base connection charge, under state law. Application for this deferred payment is to be made in accordance with state law, being Public Act No. 225 of 1976, MCL 211.761 et seq. This provision shall not be more restrictive than is allowed by state law as it may be amended from time to time. 
(h)  Residential equivalent units. The determination of residential equivalent units to be assigned for a premises for which connection to the water supply system is required or requested shall be as provided in this section. 
(1)  Except for single family residences with a unit factor of one, the building official shall make a written determination of the Units to be assigned to each premises for which connection to the water supply system is required or requested. The determination shall be based on the existing and intended or proposed uses of the premises as disclosed in property owner petitions and connection permit applications under this section, permit or approval requests under other township ordinances and other township records. The township engineer's determination, which shall identify the use categories from the unit factor schedule that were utilized, manner in which they were applied and the resulting unit factor assignments and required connection charges, shall be delivered or mailed to the premises owner and petitioner or permit applicant (as applicable.) 
(2)  The township engineer's written determination under subsection (h)(1) of this section shall include a written notice that the determination will be final unless a written request for review by the water and sewer committee ("petition") is filed with the township clerk within 30 days of the notice and of the right to submit additional information to or to meet with the township engineer regarding the determination. The submission of additional information to and/or a meeting with the township engineer shall not extend the time for filing a petition or require any additional written notice or determination by the township engineer. However, based on such additional information and/or meeting, the township engineer may modify the initial determination by an amended written determination and notice. 
(3)  Upon the timely submission of a petition, the township shall deliver or mail a written notice to the requesting party and owner of the affected premises ("petitioners"), providing the date, time, location and procedure for the water and sewer committee meeting when the review request will be initially considered. 
(4)  In considering a petition, the water and sewer committee may request additional information from the township engineer, petitioners or other persons, and may adjourn its hearing from time to time. The water and sewer committee shall keep a written record of its proceedings and all information considered, and upon completing its hearing, shall render a recommendation to the township board on the petition, recommending that the board affirm or modify the township engineer's determination. 
(5)  The township shall deliver or mail a written notice to the petitioners of a water and sewer committee recommendation under subsection (h)(4) of this section, that includes the information required by subsection (h)(1) of this section. 
(6)  Upon receipt of the water and sewer committee's recommendation, the township board shall deliver or mail a written notice to the requesting party and owner of the affected premises ("petitioners"), providing the date, time, location and procedure for the township board meeting when the review request will be initially considered. 
(7)  In considering a petition, the township board shall review and consider the recommendation and record of the water and sewer committee proceedings. The township board shall not be required to review or consider information that was not presented to the water and sewer committee, and may adjourn its hearing from time to time. Upon completing its hearing the township board shall render a decision on the petition which may accept, reject or modify the water and sewer committee recommendation, and shall be the final township decision. The township shall deliver or mail written notice of the decision to the petitioners. 
(8)  The provisions of this subsection (h) of this section shall apply to changes in the use of a premises under subsection (b)(3) of this section. 
(i)  Connection of premises for fire suppression. Any premises that connects to the water supply system solely for the purposes of fire suppression shall pay a fee for such connection as determined by resolution of the township board, and shall pay for the usage, if any, of water from such connection at the rate set forth for water usage generally by resolution of the township board; including, regardless of actual usage or lack thereof, any capital usage charge (calculated as if the premises had one REU), but excluding any other minimum usage charge in the event that no water is used in a given billing period. Any such premises shall have a meter installed by the OCWRC office to measure any such usage and shall pay any costs incurred or fees required for such installation by the OCWRC office. 
(Ord. No. 105.A, art. XII, § 12.7, 8-9-2000; Ord. No. 105B.002, art. I, 8-22-2007; Ord. No. 105B.003, art. 1, 5-14-2008; Ord. No. 105B.004, arts. 1, 2, 5-14-2008; Res. of 2-8-2017; Ord. No. 105.B.008, art. 1, 11-8-2017)  
Sec. 62-42. - Inspections and inspectors; payment of costs of locating shut-off valve. 
(a)  Should it become necessary for the customer to have the township locate the curb cock shut-off valve and the valve is not readily located by electronic surface probing as customarily used by the county, the cost of locating this curb cock shut-off valve shall be the responsibility of the customer and shall be considered a charge for water supply services under this article. 
(b)  New water services shall be subject to an inspection by the township or an appointed agent of the township and shall have passed the inspection prior to being placed in service. An inspection and approval fee, as established by appendix A, shall be payable at the time of the inspection. 
(c)  All new water systems, extensions of the water supply system and/or major construction and/or repair of the system shall be subject to appropriate inspections as deemed necessary by the township and shall have passed such inspections prior to being placed in service. The inspection costs shall be borne by the developer or contractor of the new water system, extension of an existing system and/or major construction and/or repair. 
(d)  Any person performing inspections under this article whose duty it may be to enter upon private property to make inspection and examination of the pipes, fixtures or attachments used in connection with the water supply from the water supply system will be provided with such credentials as the township board may deem proper to identify them as authorized agents of the township and/or county. No person shall be entitled to enter upon any private property unless he carries and exhibits such credentials. The type of credentials required shall be determined by appendix A. 
(e)  Upon the presentation of credentials verifying the person is lawfully there on behalf of the township for the purposes provided for in this section, the displayer of such credentials shall have free access at all reasonable hours to any private property, including structures and premises supplied with water, for the purpose of making any inspection of the entire water supply and plumbing system upon such private property. No person shall refuse to admit any such authorized person. In case any authorized person shall be refused admittance, or, once being admitted, shall be hindered or prevented in making such examination, the township board may turn off the water to such premises or structure after giving 24 hours' notice to the owner or occupant. 
(f)  No unauthorized person shall have or wear or exhibit any credentials of the township. It shall be the duty of each and every authorized person, upon termination of their authority, to surrender and deliver to the township at its office all credentials of the township board. 
(Ord. No. 105.A, art. IX, 8-9-2000; Res. of 2-8-2017)  
Sec. 62-43. - Contamination or pollution of water supply. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or undertake such actions as will cause any source of possible contamination or pollution to the water supply system as may be determined by the township engineer or consultant, and in no event shall such occur within a radius of 200 feet from any of the municipal water wells, except for special conditions as deemed appropriate by the state department of environmental quality. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act, or to allow to be done any act, that may contaminate or pollute or contribute to the contamination or pollution of the water supply wells or water supply system. 
(Ord. No. 105.A, art. X, 8-9-2000; Res. of 2-8-2017)  
Sec. 62-44. - Temporary shut-off of service. 
Should it become necessary for the township board to shut off water from any section of the system because of accidents, for the purpose of making repairs or in case of construction, the township will endeavor to give timely notice to the consumers affected thereby, and shall, so far as practical, use its best efforts to prevent inconvenience and damage arising from any such causes. However, failure to give such notice will not render the township responsible or liable for damages that may result therefrom, or from any other cause. 
(Ord. No. 105.A, § 12.1, 8-9-2000; Res. of 2-8-2017)  
Sec. 62-45. - Restriction of water use authorized. 
(a)  Whenever the supervisor of the township, based upon the recommendation of the township engineer, or the county, determines the supply or pressure demands for water cannot be accommodated, general welfare is likely to be endangered or conditions within the water supply system are likely to endanger the general welfare of inhabitants of the township, the supervisor shall, with the assistance of the township engineer, make such finding and prescribe emergency regulations which shall apply in the township for all properties connected to the township water supply system, which may include the following: 
(1)  Sprinkling of lawns and landscaping and all outdoor water use shall only be allowed for properties with even-numbered addresses on even-numbered dates within a month and for property with odd-numbered addresses on odd-numbered dates within a month. 
(2)  Sprinkling of lawns and landscaping and all outdoor water use shall not be allowed. 
(b)  The township supervisor shall cause these regulations to be posted at the township offices and through such other means as may be reasonably calculated to provide notice, including the publication of notices in newspapers, and through posting, broadcast and telecast. 
(Ord. No. 105.A, art. XI, 8-9-2000; Res. of 2-8-2017)  
Sec. 62-46. - Temporary restriction of water use for customers of Great Lakes Water Authority. 
(a)  This section shall apply only to those premises receiving water supplied by the Great Lakes Water Authority (GLWA). 
(b)  Whenever the supervisor of the township receives notification from the GLWA in conjunction with the water and radiological protection division of the state department of environmental quality that the supply or pressure demand for water cannot be accommodated and general welfare is likely to be endangered, or conditions within this water system of the township are likely to endanger the general welfare of the township, the supervisor shall determine that a state of emergency exists and prescribe the following emergency regulations which shall apply in the township for all properties connected to the township water system through the GLWA water supply: sprinkling of lawns and landscaping and all outdoor water use shall only be allowed for properties with even-numbered addresses on even-numbered dates within a month and for properties with odd-numbered addresses on odd-numbered dates within a month. 
(c)  Whenever the supervisor receives notification from the GLWA in conjunction with the drinking water and radiological protection division of the state department of environmental quality that provisions in subsection (b) of this section are not sufficient, or conditions within this water system of the township are likely to endanger the general welfare of the township, the following emergency regulations shall apply in the township for all properties connected to this township water system through the GLWA water supply: sprinkling of lawns and landscaping and all outdoor water use shall not be allowed. 
(d)  The township and the GLWA shall, within 24 hours of notification, cause these regulations to be posted at the township office and publicly announced by means of broadcasts or telecasts by the stations with a normal operating range covering the township, and may cause such announcement to be further declared in newspapers of general circulation when feasible. The regulations shall become effective immediately after notice by the township of enforcement of this section as posted at the township offices. Upon notification from the GLWA in conjunction with the drinking water and radiological protection division of the state department of environmental quality that the emergency regulations are no longer necessary, the township shall cause a public announcement to be made lifting the water restrictions. 
(e)  Any person convicted of using water in a manner contrary to the provisions of this section, or in any other way violating the provisions of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(f)  It shall be the responsibility of the township to enforce this section. 
(Ord. No. 98, arts. 1, 2, 4-9-1997; Res. of 2-8-2017)  
Sec. 62-47. - Cross connection control. 
(a)  Adoption of state rules. The township adopts by reference, as amended from time to time, the water supply cross connection control rules of the state department of environmental quality, R 325.11401 through R 325.11407 of the administrative code. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to promote and protect the public health, safety, and welfare by the prevention and elimination of cross connections, which have been recognized as the cause of public health problems due to the hazard caused to drinking water quality. 
(c)  Administration. The OCWRC office operations and maintenance division shall be the designated authority and administrator of the cross connection control program. 
(d)  Cross connection control plan. Pursuant to Public Act 399 of 1976, R 325.11404 of the administrative code, a comprehensive cross connection control plan shall be developed and submitted to the state department of environmental quality, division of water supply, for review and approval. The plan shall outline the conduct of the township cross connection control program, including the method for performing initial inspections, determining inspection/reinspection frequencies, backflow prevention assembly tracking and testing schedules, annual reporting, generation of compliance, noncompliance, pertinent piping information requests, and water service shut-off notices. Upon approval by the state department of environmental quality, the plan will become an instrument of this section for providing program conduct and policies. Any changes to the approved plan will be submitted to the state department of environmental quality, for review and approval before final approval by the authority/agent. The cross connection control plan will be made available to the public for review. 
(e)  Designation of agents. The authority has the right to appoint a designated agent to administer the cross connection control program and perform inspections in accordance with the approved cross connection control program. 
(f)  Inspections. The authority/agent shall have the right to enter any facility for the sole purpose of inspecting for cross connections. If a facility fails to allow the authority/agent entry, the facility shall be deemed to have a cross connection that is an immediate hazard to the public and, as such, the authority/agent will follow the steps as outlined in the approved cross connection control plan. 
(g)  Discontinuance of water service for noncompliance. If a facility fails to comply in correcting any deficiencies identified during the cross connection inspection and subsequent reinspection, follow-up inspection, and steps as outlined in the approved cross connection control plan, the water service to the facility will be discontinued until such time that the deficiencies are corrected and approved by the authority/agent. 
(h)  Penalty. Violations of this section are a misdemeanor. In addition, at the request of the authority/agent, the corporation counsel may bring an action for injunctive relief or other appropriate action in the name of the people of the township to enforce this section or an order issued pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 97, §§ 1—7, 10-9-1996; Ord. No. 97A, §§ 2-8, 7-10-2002; Res. of 2-8-2017)  
Sec. 62-48. - Sprinkling meter program. 
(a)  All water users within the township water supply system will be eligible to participate in the sprinkling meter program unless the township building department (hereafter for purposes of this article only, the "department") determines that participation in the program at a given premises would endanger the premises or the safe, efficient functioning of the water supply system or any element thereof. 
(b)  Any water user desiring to participate in the sprinkling meter program shall make written application to the township for the installation of the sprinkling meter. If the department determines that the applicant is eligible, then the applicant shall purchase a sprinkling meter from the OCWRC office. The applicant shall also install any other appurtenances, such as a cross connection/backflow preventer, that are required by the OCWRC office. If the township board determines that the administration of the sprinkling meter program imposes costs upon the township, then the township is authorized to set a fee for processing applications by resolution of the township board to defray such costs. The function of such sprinkling meter shall be to measure the quantity of water used that is not discharged into the township sewer system. All such meters shall be installed inside the premises. 
All sprinkling meters shall be permanently plumbed into the water system of the premises as mandated by the OCWR commissioner. No sprinkling meters shall be hooked to spigots or faucets. In the event that sewer usage is billed or allocated according to usage (as opposed to capacity), then no premises shall have its sewer usage adjusted unless any sprinkling meter upon such premises is in compliance with this article. The applicant shall contact the department in advance of the placement of a sprinkling meter to verify its location and compliance with these provisions. 
(c)  No water user participating in the sprinkling meter program shall cause or allow any water measured by the sprinkling meter to be discharged into the township sewer system. Any violation of this provision shall be a violation of this section; in addition to any other penalties set forth in this section or by law, such violation shall subject the water user to any sewer usage charge for the entire water measured by the sprinkling meter since its initial installation and, in addition, a penalty of ten percent shall apply. 
(d)  Meter(s) and remote reader(s) shall remain the property of the township or its designated agent and will at all times remain under its control, and subject to the rules and regulations established from time-to-time by the township water system ordinance. 
(e)  The owner of any premises where a meter is installed shall be held responsible for its care and protection from freezing or damage or interference by any person. 
(f)  All persons are forbidden to interfere with or move a water meter from any service connection without first receiving permission from the township. No person shall remove or break any seal on meters or bypass valves. 
(g)  In the event a meter should fail, it shall be the responsibility of the premises owner to have the meter repaired or replaced within 90 days. In the event a meter has failed to operate, the premises shall be billed at a rate equal to the greatest water use measurement of that meter taken over the preceding four quarterly billing periods. 
(h)  No determination of water usage made under the sprinkling meter program shall apply retroactively or entitle a water supply system user to a determination of usage prior to the connection of the sprinkling meter. 
(Ord. No. 105B.005, art. 1, 7-9-2008; Ord. No. 105B.006, art. 1, 5-13-2009; Res. of 2-8-2017)  
Secs. 62-49—62-80. - Reserved. 
APPENDIX A 
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF OXFORD 
COUNTY OF OAKLAND 
STATE OF MICHIGAN 
RESOLUTION 
REGARDING APPENDIX A OF CHAPTER 62 OF
THE OXFORD CHARTER TOWNSHIP CODE OF ORDINANCES 
WHEREAS, Section 62-31 of Chapter 62, Article II of the Oxford Charter Township Code of Ordinances provides that the Township Board shall establish a Water District to be serviced by the Water supply system. 
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that the Water District shall be set forth in Exhibit 1 to this Appendix A. 
WHEREAS, 62-41(a)(1) of Chapter 62, Article II of the Oxford Charter Township Code of Ordinances provides for a base fee to be multiplied by the Residential Equivalent Unit ("REU") assigned to each Premises for the purpose of determining Base Connection Charges. 
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that the amount of each base fee shall be $6,075.00. 
WHEREAS, Section 62-35(c) and Section 62-41(a)(3) of Chapter 62, Article II of the Oxford Charter Township Code of Ordinances provides for an escrow deposit for payment of profesional services, including those of the Township Engineer associated with the review of plans and specifications for the extension of the Water System. 
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that the amount of such escrow pursuant to 62-35(c) shall be $1,500. 
WHEREAS, 62-41 of Chapter 62, Article II of the Oxford Charter Township Code of Ordinances further provides that a schedule of REU's assigned to a particular Premises shall be adopted. 
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED that the Unit Factor Schedule attached as Exhibit 2 to this Appendix A is hereby adopted for the purposes of Section 62-41. 
WHEREAS, Section 62-41(a)(2) of Chapter 62, Article II of the Oxford Charter Township Code of Ordinances provides for a charge for the usage of water from the Water System. 
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that the amount of such Usage Charge shall be such amount as determined by the OCWRC office. 
WHEREAS, Section 62-38(e) of Chapter 62, Article II of the Oxford Charter Township Code of Ordinances provides for a fixed annual charge for the township's fire department usage of water from the Water System. 
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that the annual charge for such water usage shall be such amount as determined by the OCWRC office. 
WHEREAS, 62-36(a) and Section 62-42(b) of Chapter 62, Article II of the Oxford Charter Township Code of Ordinances provide for an inspection and approval fee for water service connections. 
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that the amount of such inspection and approval fees shall be as determined by the Charter Township of Oxford approved Fee Schedule. 
WHEREAS, Section 62-40 of Chapter 62, Article II of the Oxford Charter Township Code of Ordinances provides for a fee for the Township to turn water on and off in the event of a billing delinquency. 
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that the amount of such fee shall be the amount as determined by the OCWRC office. 
WHEREAS, Section 62-41(g) of Chapter 62, Article II of the Oxford Charter Township Code of Ordinances provides for payment of a base Connection Charge by installment and provides that the Township may charge interest for payment by installment. 
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that the amount of such interest shall be (8) percent reflecting the amount permissible pursuant to MCL 41.727(3) where no bonds have been issued. 
WHEREAS, Section 62-41(i) of Chapter 62, Article II of the Oxford Charter Township Code of Ordinances provides for payment of a fee for connection of a premises for purposes of fire suppression. 
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that the amount of such fee shall be $6,075.00. 
WHEREAS, Section 62-48(g) of Chapter 62, Article II of the Oxford Charter Township Code of Ordinances provides for payment of a fee for processing sprinkling meter applications. 
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that the fee for processing sprinkling meter applications shall be $640.00 for a dual meter. 
WHEREAS, Section 62-42(d) of Chapter 62, Article II of the Oxford Charter Township Code of Ordinances further requires persons entering private property for the purpose of inspecting, examining and/or maintaining the Water Supply System to present certain credentials to property owners to identify these persons as authorized agents of Oxford Township and Oakland County. 
NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED that the following shall constitute the credentials required: 
1.  Any person employed by the Charter Township of Oxford shall possess a laminated identification card which contains a photograph of the employee, the employee's name and the employee's title. 
2.  Any person not employed by the Charter Township of Oxford, but under contract with the Charter Township of Oxford, shall possess an identification card, signed by the Township Clerk or Supervisor, specifically identifying that person and authorizing that person to inspect, examine and/or maintain the Water supply system. 
3.  Any person employed by the County of Oakland shall possess such an identification card and in such form as required by the County of Oakland. 
MOVED BY: Treasurer Ferrari 
SECONDED BY: Trustee Nichols 
AYES: Dunn, Wright, Ferrari, Durr, Payne, Nichols, Curtis 
NAYS: None 
ABSENT: None 
Adopted at a meeting of the Charter Township of Oxford Board of Trustees held on the 8 th day of February, 2017. 
___________ 
Curtis W. Wright, Clerk 
STATE OF MICHIGAN ) 
)SS 
COUNTY OF OAKLAND ) 
I, Curtis W. Wright, CMC, duly elected Clerk of the Charter Township of Oxford, do hereby certify that the foregoing is a complete and true copy of a Resolution adopted by the Charter Township of Oxford at a meeting of the Board of Trustees held on the 8 th day of February, 2017. 
___________ 
Curtis W. Wright, Clerk 
(Res. of 2-8-2017) 
 
(Res. of 2-8-2017) 
Editor's note— The Oxford Township Water District Map was replaced with Supplement 6, at the instruction of the township, per an email of December 19, 2018. 
  
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Acceptable alternative graywater system means a system for the treatment and disposal of wastewater which normally does not receive human body wastes or industrial waste and is approved for use by the county health division. 
Acceptable innovative or alternative waste treatment system means a decentralized or individual waste system which has been approved for use by the county health division and which is properly operated and maintained so as not to cause a health hazard or nuisance. An acceptable innovative or alternative waste treatment system may include, but is not limited to, an organic waste treatment system or compost toilet which operates on the principle of decomposition of heterogeneous organic materials by aerobic and facultatively, anaerobic organisms and utilizes and effectively aerobic composting process which produces a stabilized humus. Acceptable innovative or alternative waste treatment system does not include a septic tank-drain field system or any other system which is determined by the state department of environmental quality to pose a similar threat to the public health, safety and welfare and to the quality of surface and subsurface waters of this state. 
Area and district mean that portion of the township which is serviced by sanitary sewers, or has available sanitary sewers for service, or is to be served by sanitary sewers; this designation does not constitute a representation that the township will provide sanitary sewers in this area, but rather that the township will encourage otherwise acceptable development to be serviced by sanitary sewers. The area or district shall be adopted by resolution of the township board and is set forth in appendix A of this article. 
As-built means engineering drawings prepared after installation of wastewater facilities which shall show a statement by a registered engineer or surveyor certifying the drawings to be as-built plans and shall include, but not be limited to, length of sewer, invert elevation, location with respect to property lines, wye and riser locations and depths, sewer material and joints used, and mechanical, electrical and structural details for pump stations, wastewater treatment facilities and other appurtenances. 
Board and township board mean the township board of trustees. 
Connection charge means the amount charged at the time and in the amount as determined by resolution of the township board, as provided in this article, for connecting or being connected to the township sewer system or to a privately owned sewer system, which in turn will be connected to the township sewer system, and represents the proportionate cost allocable to the premises for the interceptor, trunk, laterals and treatment facilities, by which sewage disposal services are provided. The connection charge shall be set forth in appendix A of this article. 
Connector stub means a fixture attached to a sewer lateral as a means of extending the sewer system. 
County drain commissioner and drain commissioner mean the successor to the board of public works of the county as the entity responsible for the operation and maintenance of the township sewer system pursuant to the terms of an operating agreement for the township extension of the Clinton-Oakland sewage disposal system. 
Inspection fee means the amount charged to each applicant by the township to cover the cost of inspecting and approving the physical connection to the system and the issuance of a connection permit. The inspection fee shall be set forth in appendix A of this article. 
Multiple family residence means any structure occupied as a residence by two or more single families living independently of each other where each family occupies a specific residence with separate cooking and lavatory facilities, which residence is separated by a common wall or floor, and whose sewer services are provided to the premises as one entity and charged for as one entity. 
Operating agreement means the agreement between the township and the county, dated January 18, 1973, whereby the county drain commissioner, as a successor to the county board of public works, has agreed to assume operations and maintenance responsibilities for the township extension of the Clinton-Oakland sewage disposal system referred to generally in this article as the township sewer system, sewer system or system. 
Premises means any dwelling, building, structure, or place where human beings reside, are employed or congregate and where such dwelling, building or structure is in existence, shall include the lot, parcel or property upon which such dwelling, building or structure stands, and in the case of buildings containing partitioned units for human use, such as apartments or stores within a shopping center building, the term premises means that individual partitioned unit. 
Sanitary sewer means all conduits and appurtenances for the transmission of sewage from structures or premises. 
Sanitary sewer construction means the laying, altering, or repairing of sanitary sewers. 
Service lead means a pipe extending from the property line into premises for the purposes of removing sewage effluent. 
Sewage disposal lateral and lateral mean the township extensions of the Clinton-Oakland sewage disposal system established under Public Act No. 185 of 1957 (MCL 123.731) as amended, to be constructed by the county under a certain contract dated June 9, 1970, between the county and the township, together with all additions and laterals added to the sewer system constructed by the township or by private developers. 
Sewage disposal services means the collection, transportation, treatment, and disposal of sanitary sewage emanating from premises now or hereafter in the area served by the sewage disposal laterals. 
Sewer system and system mean collectively all plants, work, properties and instrumentalities, as they shall from time to time exist, which are used or useful in connection with all sewer mains, laterals and appurtenances thereto, including specifically the township sewer system as described in the contracts between the county and the township. 
Structure means a single building with one connection to the sewer system even though more than one premises may be located within the structure. 
Unit means that measure of sanitary sewer disposal services equal to the quantity ordinarily required by occupants of a residence by a single family of average size, and the number or fraction of units assigned to any premises or type of premises by the township board, and adopting by reference the unit factor schedule prepared by the county drain commissioner, is designated to represent the potential sanitary sewer services thereof and resulting benefit as a multiple of the quantity ordinarily required by occupants of a residence by a single family of average size as determined from time to time by the township board. 
Unit factor schedule means a schedule prepared and adopted by resolution by the township board assigning "units" or fractions thereof to premises in accordance with the type or use of the premises for the purpose of determining connection charges and usage charges. 
Usage charges means the amount charged to the premises in the area served by the sewer system for sewage disposal services and which may include a debt service factor. 
Water and sewer committee means collectively those officials, employees and agents of the township invested by the board with authority over the system, but shall include the township supervisor as a member. 
Zoning ordinance means the township zoning ordinance, Ordinance No. 67. 
(Ord. No. 107A, art. I, 1-12-2005; Ord. No. 107A.003, art. 1, 10-8-2008) ;rn0;2; Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 62-82. - Organization and management. 
(a)  The sewer system shall be operated and maintained by the county drain commissioner pursuant to the provisions of the operating agreement. The township shall collect all connection charges and usage charges paid for the connection to and use of the sewer system, respectively, and shall administer revenues received from these connection and usage charges. The sewer system shall otherwise be administered and managed by the township water and sewer committee (which shall include the township supervisor as a member) or by a designated agent. The township supervisor shall also enforce the terms of this article as required by law. 
(b)  All revenues of the system shall be set aside and paid or transferred into the several funds of the system, as provided in this article. 
(c)  All components of the sewer system shall be operated and maintained as one system on a combined rate basis and shall include all laterals, pumping stations, sewers, sewage disposal facilities and all attendant facilities and equipment which are used or useful in the operation and maintenance of the sewage disposal facilities and all attendant facilities and equipment which are used or useful in the operation and maintenance of the sewage disposal systems, now in existence or hereafter acquired or leased. 
(Ord. No. 107A, art. II, 1-12-2005)  
Sec. 62-83. - Connection to sewers and extensions of sewer system. 
(a)  Required. Any existing premises from which sanitary sewage emanates shall be connected to the sewer system when a connection point to such sewer system is located in a right-of-way easement, highway, street or public way which crosses, adjoins or abuts upon the property and which right-of-way easement, highway, street or public way passes not more than 200 feet distant from a structure on such property from which sanitary sewage originates. The connection shall be completed within 12 months after the connection point is made available to the premises in accordance with this section. Any new premises must connect to the sewer system pursuant to this section before a certificate of occupancy is granted to such premises pursuant to the terms of the zoning ordinance. 
(1)  Permits for the remodeling or improvement of any existing premises situated upon a parcel of land or platted lot which premises thereon is required to be connected to the sanitary sewer system pursuant to this subsection (a) shall not be issued unless such premises shall first be connected to the sewer system. 
(2)  Premises currently served or to be served by an acceptable innovative or alternative waste treatment system in combination with an acceptable alternative graywater system need not connect to the township's sewer system pursuant to this subsection (a). 
(3)  The 12-month period pursuant to this subsection (a) shall commence following a publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the township of the availability of the sewer system to premises generally in the township pursuant to this subsection (a) or following the mailing of a specific notice to any premises advising the owner or person responsible for the premises of the availability of the sewer system pursuant to this subsection (a). For those premises that are not single-family homes, the publication and/or notice shall include reference to the assigned unit factor, if applicable, and the unit factor review procedures as are set forth in section 62-111(f), and the same review procedures shall be applicable as are set forth in section 62-111(f). 
(4)  If any premises should fail to connect to the sewer system within the period set forth in this subsection (a), a notice shall be sent to the address of the owner of the premises by first class mail informing the owner of the approximate location of the sewer system lateral or other appurtenances where connection can be made within 200 feet of the premises and of the need for immediate connection. The notice shall also state that if the premises has not made connection within 90 days of the notice date that the township may bring a suit for mandatory injunction to compel connection. The notice shall reference the variance and hardship alternatives and connection permit requirements of this article. 
(b)  Variance. The township water and sewer committee may grant a variance from the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. Such a variance from the terms of subsection (a) of this section shall not be granted by the township water and sewer committee unless and until: 
(1)  An applicant submits a written request to the township water and sewer committee for a variance from the requirements of subsection (a) of this section and otherwise demonstrates that connection is impracticable and the premises is otherwise serviced by an existing waste treatment system that conforms with the requirements of the county health division. 
(2)  The township water and sewer committee shall make an investigation of the written application and may consult with the township engineer and other professionals pursuant to that investigation. 
(3)  The township water and sewer committee shall make findings of fact based upon competent evidence that the requirements of subsection (b)(1) of this section have been met. 
(4)  The township water and sewer committee shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of a variance. 
(5)  The township water and sewer committee shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article and will not be detrimental to the public welfare. 
(6)  In granting any variance, the township water and sewer committee may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this article. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this article and punishable under applicable provisions of this article. Conditions imposed shall meet all of the following requirements: ;ol2; a. ..... Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety and welfare, and the social and economic well-being of those who will use the premises under consideration, the residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the premises, and the community as a whole; ;ol2; b. 
(7)  Any variance granted pursuant to this section shall only continue as long as the waste treatment system, in existence at the time the variance request was granted pursuant to subsection (b)(1) of this section, continues to function in accordance with the standards of the county health division. Should such waste treatment system fail, the variance shall terminate. 
(c)  Extensions and changes. Extension of, or changes in, sanitary sewer laterals and/or the sewer system generally may be initiated by the township water and sewer committee or by petition from the property owners. Petitions for the construction of new sanitary sewer laterals shall be addressed to the township upon blank forms provided for that purpose. The township water and sewer committee may refuse to grant or may grant such petition, and may prescribe the conditions upon which the petition will be granted, and may require the written acceptance of such terms and conditions by the petitioners. The work shall be done at the expense of the property owners unless otherwise stipulated, and any and all extensions shall be subject to the provisions of this section. Appropriate petition forms shall be made available by the township. 
(1)  Any persons who propose installing sanitary sewer laterals shall first submit complete plans and specifications, prepared by a registered civil engineer, for such work to the township for approval, upon receipt of which the township water and sewer committee shall determine the conditions for such installation upon consultation with the township engineer. Any applicant submitting plans and specifications under this section shall pay an amount into escrow with the township for the purpose of paying professional fees associated with review of plans and specifications. Any unused amount in escrow shall be refunded to the applicant. The amount of the escrow required shall be determined by township board resolution and is set forth in appendix A of this article. 
(2)  Any plans for extension of the sewer system shall be sufficiently detailed to enable the township engineer to ensure that the proposed extension of the sewer system is compatible with the sewer system master plan. 
(d)  Engineering and other applicable standards. All connection of premises to the sewer system and all extensions of the sewer system shall be made in accordance with any applicable provision of the township's engineering standards ordinance, this article and any applicable state law or regulation, including, but not limited to, part 41 and part 43 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.4101—324.4312) and any associated administrative regulations, state housing laws and regulations, regulations of the county health division, county drain commissioner, and the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, and any and all other applicable laws and regulations. In the event of a conflict between any applicable law or regulation, the stricter standard shall apply. 
(e)  Prohibited connections. All sewage disposal laterals and existing laterals shall be used for the collection and transportation of sanitary sewage only. Yard drains, patio drains, catchbasins, downspouts, footing drains, weep tile, or any conduit that carries stormwater or groundwater, alone or in combination with sanitary sewage, shall not be connected to the laterals directly or indirectly. 
(f)  Permit required. No person shall undertake connection to the laterals or to a connector stub, either directly or indirectly, without first obtaining a permit, as provided for in this article. 
(g)  License required for construction. No person shall undertake sanitary sewer construction within the township unless duly licensed by the state and in compliance with this article. 
(h)  Commercial and industrial waste. All industrial and commercial waste may be discharged into the system only when in compliance with the standards and regulations of the county drain commissioner and in compliance with standards and regulations as established by the City of Detroit's Water and Sewerage Department. All industrial connections to the sewer system shall, prior to connecting thereto, comply with the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department regulations. Any connection that discharges industrial waste to the sewer system shall have constructed a manhole on the industrial waste line for testing and sampling purposes upstream of the connection to the sewer system. 
(i)  Abandonment of septic tanks and similar facilities. At such time as any premises are connected to the sewer system, all existing septic tanks, cesspools or any similar sewage treatment facility serving such premises shall be abandoned within 45 days, and such abandonment shall occur in the following manner: Sludge held in the facility, whether it is solid or liquid or a combination thereof, shall be pumped out and disposed of in a lawful manner, and when such facility has been completely pumped out, it shall be filled with sand. 
(j)  Review and approval of construction plans prior to certificate of occupancy. No premises shall be granted a certificate of occupancy or be allowed to connect to the sewer system until the township has received and has approved pursuant to review by the township engineer as-built construction drawings for that specific portion of the sewer system that was constructed for the purpose of providing sewer service to that premises. 
(k)  Bonds and insurance. Prior to the issuance of any permit to connect any premises to a sewer lateral (not including the connection of a single-family home's service lead to a connector stub), the applicant or the applicant's contractor shall provide to the township building department: 
(1)  Cash or surety bond in an amount as established by the county drain commissioner, or by the township board in an amount as set forth in appendix A of this article whichever amount is greater, to ensure that the work is performed in compliance with county standards and in compliance with the ordinances and codes of the township and that, in a timely manner, the applicant will replace and restore sidewalks, pavement, street, soil and sod and landscaping features, including shrubs and trees which have been disturbed by the work. Both deciduous trees (hardwood type generally) and conifers (evergreen type generally) having a diameter of 10 inches or greater at 4 feet above existing grade shall be replaced in the following manner: Deciduous trees shall be replaced with trees of an equivalent total diameter (One ten-inch tree equals five two-inch trees); conifers shall be replaced by trees with an equivalent total height (one 20-foot tree equals four five-foot trees). The term of the bond shall be for a period of one year following the approved inspections of the work by the township. The bond shall otherwise comply with the requirements of the county drain commissioner and the township's engineering standards ordinance. 
(2)  Satisfactory evidence that there exists in force a prepaid liability insurance policy insuring the township for all claims for personal injury or property damage arising from, or in any way related to, the applicant's proposed sanitary sewer construction in an amount as established from time to time by the township board by resolution as set forth in appendix A of this article. The insurance policy shall otherwise comply with the requirements of the county drain commissioner and the township's engineering standards ordinance. 
(l)  Sanitary sewer construction by the township. The cost of sewer construction, including connection, when provided by the township, shall be the actual direct cost of labor and materials for the construction and, in addition, shall include all professional fees, such as engineering, legal, and planning, and, in addition, an amount equal to ten percent of actual costs to cover indirect costs of administration; in addition, the cost of sanitary sewer construction shall include the cost of any easements necessary for the construction. Such cost shall be reimbursed to the township by the owner of the premises connected, or by the person requesting the construction, subject to terms and conditions required by the township. 
(m)  Permit, inspection and professional fees. 
(1)  Permit and inspection fees. There shall be a fee charged for the permit and for inspections by the township ("inspection fee"), as set forth from time to time by resolution of the township board, as set forth in appendix A of this article. 
(2)  Professional fees. Actual professional fees as required to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of the community and to ensure compliance with the applicable ordinances and codes and as approved by the township board, such as engineering, legal and planning, shall be charged through the township to the applicant. This provision shall not apply to an application for the connection of a single-family residence. The applicant shall pay an amount into an escrow account pursuant to subsection (c)(1) of this section in order to cover these professional fees. 
(Ord. No. 107A, art. III, 1-12-2005)  
Sec. 62-84. - Discharges to sewer. 
(a)  No premises shall discharge waste or sewage to the sewer system except in compliance with this article. 
(b)  Only normal domestic strength wastewater as defined by the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department shall be discharged into the sewer system. Normal domestic strength wastewater is described in accordance with Detroit Water and Sewerage Department guidelines. 
(c)  Any industrial or commercial user of the sewer system shall comply with any permit or discharging requirements provided by and administered by the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department pursuant to a delegation agreement between the township and the City of Detroit as reflected in township Ordinance No. 84. 
(Ord. No. 107A, art. IV, 1-12-2005)  
Sec. 62-85. - Shut-off of service. 
(a)  Sewer service shut off by the township. Should it become necessary for the township to temporarily shut off service from any section of the system because of accidents or for the purpose of making repairs or in case of construction, the township will endeavor to give timely notice to the consumers affected thereby and will, so far as practical, use its best efforts to prevent inconvenience and damage arising from any such cases, but failure to give such notice will not render the township responsible or liable for damages that may result therefrom or from any other cause. 
(b)  Sewer service shut off requested by owner. The owner of premises from which sanitary sewerage no longer emanates for the reason that the premises is not occupied because of the damaged condition of the premises caused by fire, windstorm or some other disaster, may apply to the township to terminate, prospectively from the date of verification by the licensed contractor as provided in subsection (b)(2) below, the required payment of the sewer usage charge, which sewer usage charge will be terminated by the township ("termination") provided: 
(1)  The owner or the owner's representative has obtained from the township a demolition permit for the demolition of all or a part of the premises, and there has been a revocation by the township of the certificate of occupancy for the premises. 
(2)  The sewer lead from the premises has been capped and sealed by a licensed contractor so that no sanitary sewerage discharges from the sewer lead and such capping and sealing is verified by the licensed contractor. 
(3)  All requests for termination of any required amount of a sewer usage charge shall only be considered after the effective date of the ordinance amendment from which this section is derived and after the conditions set forth in this section have been met. Any requests for reimbursement due to fire, windstorm or some other disaster prior to the effective date of the ordinance amendment shall not be considered. 
(c)  Resumption of sewer service. At the request of the owner of the premises (subject to the additional condition that may be required in subsection (d) below in the event a request for resumption is made more than 360 days after termination), sewer service and sewer usage charges will be resumed provided that the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The sewer lead is uncapped and connected to the sanitary sewer system and such work has been inspected, approved and verified by a licensed contractor to be in compliance with the applicable codes, and any applicable permit and inspection fees are paid. 
(2)  A certificate of occupancy for the premises has been obtained. 
(d)  Request for resumption of sewer service more than 360 days after termination. In addition to meeting the conditions set forth in subsection (c) above, any request for resumption of sewer service on a date later than 360 days after the date of termination will also be referred to the water and sewer committee, which shall determine whether the premises was abandoned during the time period of the termination. If such a finding is made, the owner shall be required to pay a base connection charge in addition to the charges described in subsection (c) above as a condition for resumption of sewer service. 
Any person, persons, firms, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 107, § 9.1, 8-9-2000; Ord. No. 107A.005, art. I, 3-13-2013)  
Sec. 62-86. - Service of notice. 
Whenever notice is required to be given under this article, such notice may be given, either by notice in writing to the person to be notified by mail or by sending an employee of the township to the premises with a written or printed notice, which shall be served on the person to be notified or, in case it is impossible to make such service at that time, such notice may be posted in some conspicuous place on the premises. Notice by mail may be accomplished by enclosing a copy thereof in an envelope with first class postage prepaid, plainly addressed to the person to be notified, at the post office or residence address of such person, as such person appears on the books of the township, and depositing the notice in any United States Post Office, and such notice so given shall be conclusively deemed to have been given at the time of such depositing. 
(Ord. No. 107, § 9.2, 8-9-2000)  
Sec. 62-87. - Violation; penalty. 
Violation of the provisions of this article shall constitute a municipal civil infraction. A person found responsible for a violation of this article shall be subject to section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 107, § 9.4, 8-9-2000)  
Secs. 62-88—62-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RATES, CHARGES AND FEES 
 
Sec. 62-111. - Establishment and determination of charges. 
(a)  Connection charges. In order to finance and meet the bond obligation of the township for the construction of the township sanitary sewer system, including that portion of the system servicing any premises, and in order to pay for sewer system construction and operating expenses, there shall be a charge for any premises connected to the sewer system, as provided in this division whether directly connected or indirectly connected through a privately owned sewer ("connection charge") based upon the unit or fraction thereof, by type of premises ("unit factor"), times the base connection charge, which unit factor and base connection charge shall be established from time to time by resolution of the township board as set forth in appendix A of this article. For a single-family residential premises connected to the sewer system where the lateral adjacent to the premises has been constructed and paid for solely by private sources on behalf of such premises, the sewer connection charge shall equal the amount established by resolution of the township board as set forth in appendix A of this article. The township shall also adopt by resolution a unit factor schedule which is set forth in appendix A of this article. 
(b)  Usage charges. There shall be a charge for the use of the sanitary sewer system for sewage disposal services which shall be an amount each quarter times the unit factor or fraction thereof assigned the premises, which amount and unit factor shall be determined from time to time by resolution of the township board, as is set forth in appendix A of this article. 
(c)  Use of single meter for nonresidential premises. Nonresidential premises which are connected to a public water system may have sewer usage charges determined by the same water meter utilized to determine water usage charges relating to the public water system. Residential premises include single-family homes, multiple-family housing units and mobile homes. The rate for metered sewer usage shall be in an amount as set forth in appendix A of this article. 
(d)  Payment of sewer connection charges. 
(1)  New construction. All new construction shall pay the sewer connection charge prior to obtaining the township building permit; provided, however, in order to facilitate the financing of new construction, payment of the sewer connection charge may be made by paying not less than 50 percent of the charge as a condition to issuing the building permit, not less than 25 percent of the charge as a condition to a rough plumbing inspection, and the balance of 25 percent as a condition to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Existing premises. Existing premises have the option of paying the sewer connection charge in cash or by making installment payments of all or part of the sewer connection charge over a period of five years, together with interest upon any unpaid balance at an annual rate as determined by resolution of the township board from time to time for installment sewer connection charges, as set forth in appendix A of this article. All payments will be first applied against interest and the balance of the payments applied against principal. The sewer connection installment charges will be set forth as part of the quarterly sewer bill. All or part of the sewer connection charge may be paid off without penalty. This provision is intended to allow existing premises to extend their payments for a maximum period of five years in order to provide sanitary sewers to all regardless of economic status. 
(e)  Deferred payment of connection charge for elderly, and disabled. An owner of any premises against which a sewer connection charge has been levied who is 65 years of age or older or who is totally and permanently disabled, a citizen of the U.S., a resident of this state for five or more years, and the sole owner of such premises for five or more years is eligible for the deferment of payment of the lateral benefit charge, under state law. Application for this deferred payment is to be made in accordance with state law, being Public Act No. 225 of 1976 (MCL 211.761 et seq.). This provision shall not be more restrictive than is allowed by state law as it may be amended from time to time. 
(f)  Determination of unit factor for new construction. For premises to be newly constructed, the township building inspector shall assign the appropriate unit factor to determine the amount of the new premises' connection charge and usage charge. 
(1)  Written notice from building inspector. For premises other than single-family homes, the building inspector shall provide the premises owner or other responsible person a written notice of the unit factor assignment identifying the type or use of the premises and the corresponding unit factor assignment. The notice shall also inform the owner or responsible party that the party has 30 days following the date of the notice to review the unit factor determination with the building inspector, and further notice that should the determination remain unchanged following the meeting with the building inspector, the owner or responsible party has an additional ten days after the date of the written confirmation of the determination to file with the township clerk a request for review of this determination by the township's water and sewer committee. 
(2)  Meeting. The building inspector shall, if requested, provide an opportunity for the owner or responsible party to be heard on objections to the determination within 30 days of the date of the notice. After review with the owner or responsible party, the building inspector shall forthwith provide a written confirmation of the unit factor determination to the owner. 
(3)  Township water and sewer committee review. The owner, if aggrieved by such determination, may, within ten days of the building inspector's written confirmation, file with the township clerk a written request for review by township water and sewer committee. If no request is made to the township clerk within the ten-day period, the building inspector's determination shall become final. The township water and sewer committee shall thereafter review a timely request to review the building inspector's determination within 45 days of the filing of the request to review and shall have the authority to modify in whole or in part the determination made by the building inspector. The decision of the township water and sewer committee shall be final and shall be furnished to the premises owner or other responsible person in writing by the township clerk. 
(g)  Change in premises use. If the use of a premises is changed after the time the premises' initial connection charge and/or usage charges are determined and assessed, the township shall adjust the connection charge and/or usage charge pursuant to the unit factor schedule to reflect the amended use of the premises. 
(1)  For usage charges, the amended unit factor rate shall be adjusted for the quarterly billing date one full quarterly billing period after the township has been alerted of the change. 
(2)  For a connection charge, if the unit factor is adjusted higher than the original unit factor utilized to determine the initial connection charge, and the premises has paid the initial connection charge in full, the premises shall pay the difference between the initial connection charge and the adjusted connection charge based on the change in unit factor. In addition, if the unit factor is increased above the amount of the adjusted connection charge, the premises shall likewise pay the difference between a prior adjusted connection charge and the new higher adjusted connection charge. 
(3)  If a structure that has a single connection to the sewer system contains multiple premises, a change in a unit factor triggering an adjustment in a usage charge and/or connection charge under this section shall be determined based upon a change to the aggregate unit factor of the whole structure. 
(h)  Notice of increase in unit factor. In the event of a determination by the township that an increase in the unit factor for any given premises, as set forth above, required due to an increased use capacity, the township building inspector shall prepare and forward by mail to the owner or responsible party of the premises a notice of the increased unit factor. The notice shall contain the following: 
(1)  The present unit factor assignment based on existing or previous usage. 
(2)  A statement setting forth the nature of the increased use capacity necessitating a unit factor adjustment. 
(3)  A statement of the proposed increased unit factor assignment for the premises based upon the increased use capacity and a description as to how the unit factor increase will result in an adjustment of connection charges and usage charges. 
(4)  A statement that the increased unit factor assignment shall become effective with resulting changes to connection charges and usage charges prior to the time a new certificate of occupancy will be granted for the change in use and that the new certificate of occupancy will not be granted until the additional connection charges are paid. 
(5)  Notice to the owner or responsible party that if the amounts due are delinquent for more than six months, the amount shall be added to the tax rolls and collected pursuant to the general property tax laws. 
(6)  Notice to the owner or responsible party that the party has 30 days following the date of the notice to review the increased unit factor determination with the building inspector and further notice that should the determination remain unchanged following the meeting with the building inspector, whereby the building inspector confirms the determination in writing, the owner or responsible party has an additional ten days after the date of the written confirmation of the determination to file with the township clerk a request for review of this determination by the township's water and sewer committee. 
(i)  Building inspector to hear objections to determinations. The building inspector shall, if requested, provide an opportunity for the owner or responsible party to be heard on objections to the determination within 30 days of the date of the notice. After review with the owner or responsible party, the building inspector shall forthwith provide a written confirmation of the determination of increase to the owner and to the township water and sewer committee. The owner, if aggrieved by such determination, shall have an additional ten days thereafter to file with the township clerk a written request for review by the township water and sewer committee. If no request is filed within the time allowed, the building inspector's determination shall become final. 
(j)  Township water and sewer committee review. From the time of filing of a request for review with the clerk, the township water and sewer committee shall thereafter within 45 days review the building inspector's determination and shall have the authority to modify in whole or in part the determination. The decision of the township water and sewer committee shall be final and shall be furnished to the building inspector and premises owner or other responsible party in writing by the township clerk. 
(k)  Delinquent charges. All delinquent connection charges and usage charges as established in this section shall be made a lien on the premises and on September 1 of each year, the person charged with the management of the sewage disposal system shall certify any such charges which have been delinquent six months or more to the township supervisor, who shall enter such delinquency upon the next tax roll against the premises for which such services have been furnished, and such charges shall be collected and such lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided in respect to taxes assessed upon such roll. 
(Ord. No. 107A, art. V, 1-12-2005)  
Sec. 62-112. - Billing and collection. 
(a)  Usage charges shall be billed and collected as determined by resolution of the township board. Failure to receive a bill shall not excuse failure to pay the bill when due. In the absence of a township board resolution to the contrary, bills shall be dated as of the first day of the month and shall be due and payable, without discount, as follows: 
Billing Date Each Year 	Respective Due Dates Each Year 
April 1st 	April 30th 
October 1st 	October 31st 
 
(b)  Connection charges shall be the obligation of the owner of the premises served. Usage charges shall be the obligation of both the owner and the occupant of the premises. 
(c)  All delinquent connection and usage charges shall be a lien thereon the premises, and on September 1 of each year the township clerk shall certify any such charges which have been delinquent six months or more to the supervisor of the township, who shall enter the delinquency upon the next tax roll against the premises to which such services and facilities have been furnished, plus a surcharge of five percent to cover certain administrative expenses of the township. 
(Ord. No. 107A, art. VI, 1-12-2005; Ord. No. 107A.004, art. 1, 11-10-2009)  
Sec. 62-113. - Utilization of revenues. 
The rates established for connection and usage charges are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation of the system and such expenses for the maintenance and rental thereof as may be necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order, and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the system as are required by this article. Rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time by resolution of the township board so as to produce the foregoing provisions. 
(1)  Revenues received from connection and usage charges shall be directed to the sewer fund, where such revenues shall be collected. These revenues shall be utilized for the following purposes: ;ol2; a. ..... Out of such revenues, there shall first be designated quarter-annually into a separate account an amount sufficient to pay the regular operational, maintenance, administrative and other related costs of the sewer system, and out of such account amounts shall be paid as necessary to the county drain commissioner pursuant to the terms and requirements of the operating agreement entered into between the drain commissioner and the township. ;ol2; b. 
(2)  All revenues in the sewer fund shall be deposited with a bank designated by the township board and shall be kept in a separate depository account distinct from the township's general fund. 
(3)  No free sewage disposal facilities or services shall be furnished to the township, or to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality. 
(Ord. No. 107A, art. VII, 1-12-2005)  
Sec. 62-114. - Prospective and retroactive reduction in service fees. 
(a)  Prospective reduction. 
(1)  Any premises utilized for a purpose other than a single-family home, using the sewer system and paying quarterly service fees based on a unit factor greater than one, pursuant to section 62-111(b), shall be entitled, upon a timely and proper request, to a reduction in sewer usage charges to a unit factor of one, provided the premises shall be unoccupied and the sewer system unused for a period of at least 90 days. 
(2)  If any premises will be unoccupied and the sewer system unused for a period of 90 days or more and the premises owner desires a reduction in sewer fees, it is the responsibility of the premises owner or person responsible for the payment of the usage charges to inform the township of the prospective period when the premises will be unoccupied and the sewer system unused. 
(3)  Once the township is informed the premises will be unoccupied and the sewer system unused for a period of at least 90 days, beginning on the due date of the next quarterly sewer service payment, the usage charge for that quarter, and for any prospective quarter or quarters when the premises remains unoccupied and the sewer system unused, shall be reduced to a unit factor of one. 
(4)  If the premises should become occupied during such a quarter or should the sewer system be used, it is the responsibility of the premises owner or person responsible for payment of the sewer usage charge to inform the township immediately of the change. The sewer usage rate charged before the reduction shall then resume from the date when the property is reoccupied or the sewer system used. The quarterly usage charge will be reinstated on a prorata basis for the portion of the quarter that the property is reoccupied and the sewer system is used. 
(5)  Failure to inform the township of reoccupancy of the premises shall be considered a violation of this article. The township shall have the authority to recover the amount of sewer usage charges and all costs and actual professional fees incurred, including attorney fees, expended in order to determine compliance with and to enforce the requirements of this article. The township shall also have the authority to execute a lien against the property upon which the premises are located equal to the amount of unrecovered sewer usage charges and all enforcement costs and fees. 
(b)  Retroactive reduction. 
(1)  Any premises utilized for a purpose other than a single-family home, using the sewer system and paying quarterly usage charges based on a unit factor greater than one, pursuant to section 62-111(b), shall be entitled, upon a timely and property request, to a credit, to be applied against future sewer usage charges, in an amount equal to the difference between a unit factor of one and the unit factor assessed to the sewer service user, provided the premises were unoccupied, and the sewer system unused, for a period of at least 90 days within one year of the request. 
(2)  In order to qualify for such a credit, the premises owner, or person responsible for payment of the sewer usage fee, shall provide sufficient substantial evidence corroborating the claim the premises were unoccupied and the sewer system unused. 
(3)  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, any premises owner or person responsible for payment of the sewer service fee, seeking a credit against future sewer usage charges for any 90-day period when the premises have been unoccupied and the sewer system unused (after the enactment of the ordinance from which this article is derived), must apply for the credit within one year of the date when the premises were last unoccupied and the sewer system unused. In order to qualify for a credit, the owner or other person must show sufficient good cause why he failed to provide the township with advance notice pursuant to this subsection (b) of this section and must provide sufficient evidence to corroborate a claim the premises were unoccupied and the sewer system unused. 
(4)  In no event, however, shall the amount of any credit exceed an amount credited to the township by the county or any other entity administering the sewer system. 
(5)  In addition to violations of other requirements of this article, any misrepresentation about a past period of vacancy in order to obtain a credit shall be considered a violation of this article. The township shall possess all of the legal remedies cited in section 62-87 if such a violation should occur. 
(Ord. No. 107A, art. VIII, 1-12-2005)  
Sec. 62-115. - Hardship deferments of lateral benefit charges and capital charges. 
(a)  Eligibility. 
(1)  A property owner shall not be considered to have a hardship under the provisions of this section if he owns tangible or intangible property having a market value in excess of $1,500.00, or if married and not separated from spouse, his or her property together with the tangible or intangible property of spouse exceeds the value of $2,000.00. The value of the homestead, occupied by the property owner as a home, shall not be included in determining the value of property under this section. The value of life insurance shall be computed at the cash surrender value available and payable upon demand and only that portion of the value thereof which is in excess of $1,000.00 shall be included in determining of the value of the property. If the health of the insured is such as to make continuance of the insurance desirable, the entire cash surrender value of life insurance is to be excluded from consideration. Household goods and wearing appeal shall not be considered, nor shall farm stock or implements, including but not limited to horses, cattle, poultry, power machinery and motor powered vehicles having a fair market value of less than $750.00, be considered. The interest of the property owners in an estate or trust as heir, devisee, legatee, or otherwise shall not be considered the property owner under the provisions of this section unless and until it has been distributed to him or is available to him or is available to him for disposition or expenditure by him. 
(2)  If the property owner has an income from all sources of more than the amount necessary to provide such person, or married couple, with a minimum subsistence which shall be determined, as near as possible, by the use of recognized current standards of the department of agriculture and the department of labor and industry of the federal government, such property owner shall not be considered to have a hardship under the provisions of this section. The premiums paid in any type of life insurance on the life of the property owner, or on the life of his or her spouse, which have been in force and effect for five years or more, by any beneficiary thereof therein provided, shall not be construed as income of the property owner. 
(b)  Application for deferred payments. Any owner of property who by reason of hardship as defined in subsection (a) of this section is unable to comply with the provisions of section 12753 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.12753) and the provisions of section 62-113(a) may apply to the township supervisor for the deferral of all lateral benefit charges and capital charges. 
(c)  Determination of values. The township supervisor, upon the receipt of an application from a property owner who has a hardship as referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall ascertain the cash value of the premises and determine the nature and amount of all prior encumbrances of record and shall certify to the township board the difference between the cash value and the value of the encumbrances of record upon the premises. The term "cash value," as used in this subsection, shall be as defined in section 27 of the General Property Tax Act (MCL 211.27). If the difference between cash value and all of the encumbrances of record is greater than the amount of the payment method, including debt service charges, and the township's costs as denoted in subsection (e) of this section, then the property owner shall be determined to be qualified for deferred payment of the lateral benefit charges and capital charges. 
(d)  Execution of mortgage. The owner of record of the premises shall, as a condition precedent to being permitted to defer the payment of the lateral benefit charges and capital charges, execute a mortgage in recordable form upon the premises denoting the interest that township, as mortgagee, has in the premises, and that the mortgage will be payable on or before death, or in any event, upon the sale or transfer of the property owner's interest in the property. 
(e)  Township's cost. The property owner shall also be responsible for the direct costs of the township in connection with processing the property owner's application for deferred payments, such as, by way of illustration and not by way of limitation, costs of recording the mortgage, costs of title insurance insuring the mortgage interest of the township and any direct legal fees in connection with review of the foregoing and preparation of the mortgage to be recorded. Such costs shall be added to the amount due and owing upon the mortgage to be executed by the property owners. 
(Ord. No. 35, §§ 1—5, 7-10-1974)  
Sec. 62-116. - Quarterly charges on delinquent payment. 
Not withstanding any ordinances to the contrary prior to the adoption of this section amendment, all charges for sewerage disposal services prior to January 1, 2005, if not paid when due, shall have added to the amount thereof a penalty of ten percent, and in the event any charges for sewerage disposal services shall not be paid within 30 days after the same becomes due, then the charges for said sewerage disposal service plus the ten percent penalty thereon shall earn interest at the rate of .005 percent per month until finally paid; from January 1, 2005 until September 15, 2007, all charges for sewerage disposal service, if not paid when due, shall have added to the amount thereon, a penalty of five percent, and in the event any charges for sewerage disposal services shall not be paid within 30 days after the same becomes due, then the charges for said sewerage disposal service plus the penalty amount thereon shall earn interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month, cumulated monthly, until finally paid; after September 15, 2007, all charges for sewerage disposal service, if not paid when due, shall have added to the amount thereon, upon the delinquency and then each quarter of a year that such charges and any penalty thereon remain unpaid, a penalty of $3.20; all delinquent charges, including interest and penalty, which are required of the township to be placed upon the tax role shall have an additional penalty added to the delinquent amount to be placed upon the tax rolls of five percent of the total amount due as provided in section 6.3. 
(Ord. No. 107A.002, art. 1, 8-8-2007)  
Secs. 62-117—62-150. - Reserved.  
Appendix A. - Exhibits 1 and 2 to Ordinance No. 107A 
 
Editor's note— The Oxford Township Sanitary Sewer District Map was replaced with Supplement 6, at the instruction of the township, per an email of December 19, 2018. 
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF OXFORD 
Residential Equivalent Unit (REU) Allocation Factors 
Effective Date: January 1, 2019 
Proposed Use Category 	REU Allocation 
Single Family Residential 	1.00 	per dwelling 
Assisted Living/Retirement Facilities 	0.36 	per bed 
Auto Service Repair Centers/Showrooms/Dealerships 	0.37 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Banks/Credit Unions 	0.46 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Banquet Halls 	0.50 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Barber Shops 	0.20 	per booth 
Bars 	0.04 	per seat 
Beauty Salons 	0.71 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Bed and Breakfasts 	0.38 	per room 
Boarding Houses 	0.16 	per person 
Boarding Schools 	0.27 	per student 
Bowling Alleys 	0.16 	per alley 
Car Washes 	
 a. Manual, Do-It Yourself 	2.89 	per stall 
 b. Semi-Automatic (mechanical without conveyor) 	6.95 	per 1,000 sq ft 
 c. Automatic with conveyor 	33.00 	per lane 
Churches 	0.11 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Cleaners (pickup only) 	1.00 	per facility 
Cleaners with onsite cleaning/pressing facilities 	1.18 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Clinics 	
 a. Medical 	0.19 	per 1,000 sq ft 
 b. Dental 	0.83 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Convents/Seminaries 	0.20 	per person 
Country Clubs (additional uses calculated separately) 	0.04 	per member 
Child Care Facilities 	0.25 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Convenience Stores 	0.14 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Factories (exclusive of excessive industrial use) 	0.50 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Fitness Centers/Health Clubs: 	
 a. With showers and/or pool 	2.30 	per 1,000 sq ft 
 b. Without showers and/or pool 	0.29 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Fire Stations 	1.00 	per station 
Fraternal Organizations (members and rentals) 	0.04 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Fueling Stations (gas/electric/LP, etc.) 	0.24 	per pump 
Funeral Homes 	0.15 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Grocery Stores 	0.26 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Group Homes 	0.30 	per bed 
Hospitals 	1.22 	per bed 
Hotels/Motels (additional uses calculated separately) 	0.38 	per room 
Kids Indoor Activity Centers 	0.12 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Landscape Nursery 	1.00 	per structure 
Laundry (self-service) 	0.54 	per washer 
Manufacturing—Dry Process 	0.25 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Manufacturing—Wet Process 	0.40 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Mixed Use Buildings/Facilities 	per separate use types 
Mobile Homes 	1.00 	per site 
Multiple Family Residences: 	
 a. Apartments 	0.60 	per unit 
 b. Condominiums—Attached or Detached 	1.00 	per unit 
Nail Salons 	0.22 	per booth 
Office—General 	0.40 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Pet Care Grooming/Kennels 	1.33 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Pharmacies (incl. front end store) 	0.30 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Police Stations 	1.00 	per station 
Golf Courses (additional uses calculated separately) 	1.00 	per 9 holes 
Public Institutions (other than those listed) 	0.40 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Restaurants: 	
 a. Conventional style with alcohol 	0.13 	per seat 
 b. Conventional style without alcohol 	0.08 	per seat 
 c. Quick service franchises without dishes (McDonald's, Burger King, Taco Bell, etc.) 	5.60 	per restaurant 
 d. Quick service franchises with dishes (Panera, etc.) 	0.08 	per seat 
 e. Quick Service with or without dining and restrooms (carry out only, pizza franchises, etc.) 	1.80 	per restaurant 
Schools: 		
 a. Pre-K and Elementary 	0.01 	per student 
 b. Middle or Junior High 	0.02 	per student 
 c. Senior High 	0.04 	per student 
 d. Bus Maintenance Facility 	0.17 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Stores: 	
 a. Big Box w/ multiple uses (Meijer/Walmart) 	0.20 	per 1,000 sq ft 
 b. Big Box single use (Lowes/Home Depot) 	0.05 	per 1,000 sq ft 
 c. Other than specifically listed 	0.04 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Swimming Pools (actual pool size)—single family excluded 	3.00 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Theaters (Drive-In) 	0.02 	per car space 
Theaters (Indoor) 	0.02 	per seat 
Urgent Care Facilities 	0.31 	per 1,000 sq ft 
Warehouses 	0.10 	per 1,000 sq ft 
 
(Res. of 2-9-2005; Res. of 2-8-2017) 
Editor's note— The Residential Equivalent Unit (REU) Allocation Factors Table was replaced with Supplement 6 at the instruction of the township, per an email of December 19, 2018.  
ARTICLE IV. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 74.002, adopted Feb. 28, 2007, amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 62-151—62-163, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 74.001, arts. 1—13, adopted Mar. 27, 2002. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-151. - Delegation of authority. 
The City of Detroit, through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, as the state approved control authority, is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this article on behalf of the township. The township has executed and hereby ratifies its delegation agreement with the City of Detroit through the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, which sets forth the terms and conditions of such delegated authority, consistent with this article, and shall allow the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department to perform the specific responsibilities of control authority pursuant to state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, art. 1, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-152. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is the protection of the environment, and of public health and safety by abating and preventing pollution through the regulation and control of the quantity and quality of wastes admitted to or discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment system under the jurisdiction of the township and enabling the township to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq.), and the General Pretreatment Regulations, being 40 C.F.R. part 403. 
(b)  The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge, or will pose a hazard to the health or welfare of the people or of employees of the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage department; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will pass inadequately treated through the system into receiving waters, the atmosphere or the environment, or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim wastewater or sludge from the system in an economical and advantageous manner; and 
(4)  To provide for the recovery of the costs from users of the wastewater collection and treatment system sufficient to administer regulatory activities and meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system. 
(5)  This article provides for the regulation of contributors to the Detroit and township wastewater collection and treatment system through the issuance of wastewater discharge permits to certain users and through the enforcement of general requirements for all users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement, and authorizes fees and penalties. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, art. 2, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-153. - Authority. 
By virtue of the obligations and authority placed upon the township by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, being (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.; the 1963 Constitution of the State of Michigan; Public Act 245 of 1929, as amended, being M.C.L. 323.1 et seq.; M.S.A. 3.521 et seq.; the Township Charter; the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit for the City of Detroit Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW); the consent judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al, Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan Case No. 77-1100, as amended; and existing or future contracts between the board of water commissioners and suburban communities or other governmental or private entities; or by virtue of common law usage of the system, this article shall apply to every user contributing or causing to be contributed, or discharging, pollutants or wastewater into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the City of Detroit POTW. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, art. 3, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-154. - Definitions. 
(a)  For purposes of this article and unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
Act or the act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)  Responsible corporate officer, where the industrial user submitting the reports required by this article is a corporation, who is either (a) the president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of a corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or (b) the manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 in second-quarter 1980 dollars, when authority to execute documents has been assigned or delegated to said manager in accordance with corporate procedures; or 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor where the industrial user submitting the reports required by this article is a partnership or sole proprietorship respectively. See section 62-174. 
Available cyanide means the quantity of cyanide that consists of cyanide ion (CN) hydrogen cyanide in water (HCNaq), and the cyano-complexes of zinc, copper, cadmium, mercury nickel and silver, determined by EPA method OIA-1677, or other method designated as a standard method or approved under 40 CFR 136. 
Best management practices (BMP) means programs, practices, procedures or other directed efforts initiated and implemented by the user which can or do lead to the reduction, conservation or minimization of pollutants being introduced into the ecosystem, including but are not limited to the Detroit sewer system. BMPs include, but are not limited to, equipment or technology modifications, process or procedure modifications, reformulation or redesign of products, substitution of raw materials, and improvements in housekeeping, maintenance, training, or inventory control and may include technical and economic considerations. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quality of dissolved oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure five days at 20 degrees centigrade expressed in terms of mass and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)) as measured by standard methods. 
Board means the Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Detroit. 
Bypass means the intentional diversion of a wastestream from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. [See 40 C.F.R. § 403.17.] 
Centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility means any facility that treats any hazardous or nonhazardous industrial waste received from off-site by tanker truck, trailer roll-off bins, drums, barges, or any other forms of shipment including 
(1)  A facility that treats industrial waste received exclusively from off-site; and 
(2)  A facility that treats industrial waste generated on-site as well as industrial waste received from off-site. 
City means the township. 
Compatible industrial wastewater means wastewater that is produced by an industrial user which has a pollutant strength or characteristics similar to those found in domestic wastewater, and which can be efficiently and effectively transported and treated with domestic wastewater. 
Compatible pollutant means pollutants which can be effectively removed by the POTW treatment system to within the acceptable levels for the POTW residuals and the receiving stream. 
Composite sample means a collection of individual samples which are obtained at regular intervals and collected on a time-proportional or flow-proportional basis over a specified period and which provides a representative sample of the average stream during the sampling period. A minimum of four aliquot per 24 hours shall be used where the sample is manually collected. [See 40 C.F.R. § 403, Appendix E.] 
Confidential information means the information which would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user. (See section 62-203.) 
Control authority means the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department which has been officially designated as such by the State of Michigan under the provisions of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12. [See 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(a).] 
Cooling water means the non-contact water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, and whose only function is the exchange of heat. 
Days mean consecutive calendar days for the purpose of computing a period of time prescribed or allowed by this article. 
Department means the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, and authorized employees of the department. 
Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Michigan. 
Director means the Director of the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, or the director's designee. 
Discharger means a person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes, or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW. 
Domestic sewage means waste and wastewater from humans or household operations which is discharged to, or otherwise enters, a treatment works. 
Environmental protection agency or administrator or EPA administrator means the United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the authorized representatives or employees of the EPA. 
Facility means a location, which contributes, causes or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW including, but not limited to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private, commercial or charitable. 
Fats, oils or grease (FOG) means any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils, and any other nonvolatile material of animal, vegetable or mineral origin that's extractable by solvent in accordance with standard methods. 
Flow proportional sample means a composite sample taken with regard to the flow rate of the wastestream. 
Grab sample means an individual sample collected over a period of time not exceeding 15 minutes, which reasonably reflects the characteristics of the stream at the time of sampling. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the discharge or the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under 33 U.S.C. §1317(b), (c) or (d). 
Industrial user means a person who contributes, causes or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW, including, but not limited to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private, commercial or charitable but excludes single family and multi-family residential dwellings with discharges consistent with domestic waste characteristics. 
Industrial waste means any liquid, solid or gaseous waste or form of energy, or combination thereof, resulting from any processes of industry, manufacturing, business, trade or research, including the development, recovery or processing of natural resources. 
Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1345, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), as amended, (including the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
May means permissive. 
National categorical pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with 33 U.S.C. § 1317 (b) and (c) which applies to a specific class or category of industrial users. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit means a permit issued pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342. 
New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under 33 U.S.C. § 1317(c) which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided, that: (a) the building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site where no other source is located; or (b) the building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or (c) the production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered; or 
(2)  Construction on a site where an existing source is located resulting in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (2) or (3) of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment; or 
(3)  Construction of a new source has commenced where the owner or operator has: (a) begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on site construction program: (i) any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or (ii) significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities that are necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or (b) entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this section. 
Pass through means discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, unit of government, school district, or any other legal entity, or their legal representative, agent or assigns. 
pH means the intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution, calculated by taking the negative base-ten logarithm of the hydrogen ion activity. Activity is deemed to be equal to concentration in moles per liter. 
Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, or industrial, municipal and agricultural waste which is discharged into water. 
Pollution means the introduction of any pollutant that, alone or in combination with any other substance, can or does result in the degradation or impairment of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the removal of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction, removal or alteration may be attained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by federal, state or local law, rules and regulations. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirements related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. [See 40 C.F.R. § 403.3(r).]. 
Pretreatment standards means all National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, the general prohibitions specified in 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(a), the specific prohibitions delineated in 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(b), and the local or specific limits developed pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 403.5(c), including the discharge prohibitions specified in Division 2. 
Public sewer means a sewer of any type controlled by a governmental entity. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means a treatment works as defined by 33 U.S.C. § 1292(2)(A) which is owned by a state or municipality, as defined in 33 U.S.C. § 1362, including: 
(1)  Any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, or reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature; 
(2)  Sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant; or 
(3)  The municipality, as defined in 33 U.S.C. § 1362, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. 
POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater, including recycling and reclamation of wastewater. 
Quantification level means the measurement of the concentration of a contaminant obtained by using a specified laboratory procedure calculated at a specified concentration above the detection level. It is considered the lowest concentration at which a particular contaminant can be quantitatively measured using a specified laboratory procedure for monitoring of the contaminant. 
Representative sample means any sample of wastewater, which accurately and precisely represents the actual quality, character, and condition of one or more pollutants in the wastestream being sampled. Representative samples shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136. 
Sanitary wastewater means the portion of wastewater that is not attributable to industrial activities and is similar to discharges from domestic sources including, but not limited to, discharges from sanitary facilities and discharges incident to the preparation of food for on-site non-commercial consumption. 
Shall means mandatory. 
Significant noncompliance means any violation which meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same parameter; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, Fats, Oil and Grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the department determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health or welfare, or to the environment, or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority; 
(5)  Failure to meet a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism, or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance within 90 days after the scheduled date; 
(6)  Failure to provide required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules within 30 days after the due date; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the department determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
Significant industrial users means any user of the POTW who: 
(1)  Has an average discharge flow of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater excluding sanitary, boiler blowdown, and noncontact cooling water; or 
(2)  Has discharges subject to the national categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(3)  Requires pretreatment to comply with the specific pollutant limitations of this article; or 
(4)  Has in its discharge toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1317, or other applicable federal and state laws or regulations, that are in concentrations and volumes which are subject to regulation under this article as determined by the department; or 
(5)  Is required to obtain a permit for the treatment, storage or disposal of hazardous waste pursuant to regulations adopted by this state or adopted under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended, and may or does contribute or allow waste or wastewater into the POTW including, but not limited to, leachate or runoff; or 
(6)  Is found by the City of Detroit or township to have a reasonable potential for adverse effect, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the POTW operation, the quality of sludge, the POTW's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the POTW. 
Slug means any discharge of a non-routine episodic nature including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended. 
Standard methods mean methods set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, "Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants" or the laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" prepared and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation, or methods set forth in 40 C.F.R. 136, "Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants." Where these two references are in disagreement regarding procedures for the analysis of a specific pollutant, the methods given in 40 C.F.R. Part 136 shall be followed. 
State means the State of Michigan. 
Storm water means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
Suspended solids (total) mean the total suspended matter which floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by laboratory filtration or as measured by standard methods. 
Total PCB means the sum of the individual analytical results for each of the PCB aroclors 1016, 1221, 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, and 1260 during any single sampling event with any aroclor result less than the quantification level being treated as zero. 
Total phenolic compounds means the sum of the individual analytical results for each of the phenolic compounds of 2-chlorophenol, 4-chlorophenol, 4-chloro-3-methylphenol, 2,4-dichlorophenol, 2,4-dinitrophenol, 4-methylphenol, 4-nitrophenol, and phenol during any single sampling event expressed in mg/l. 
Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants designated as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317, or included in the Critical Materials Register promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or by other federal or state laws, rules or regulations. 
Trade secret means the whole, or any portion or phase, of any proprietary manufacturing process or method, not patented, which is secret, is useful in compounding an article of trade having a commercial value, and whose secrecy the owner has taken reasonable measures to prevent from becoming available to persons other than those selected by the owner to have access for limited purposes but excludes any information regarding the quantum or character of waste products or their constituents discharged or sought to be discharged into the Detroit wastewater treatment plant, or into the wastewater system tributary thereto. 
Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with limits imposed under this article or with national categorical pretreatment standards due to factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user but excludes noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
User means any person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater into the POTW as defined herein. 
Wastewater or wastestream means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to or permitted to enter the POTW including infiltration and inflow waters, storm water, and cooling water. 
Wastewater discharge permits mean permits issued by the department in accordance with Division 3. 
Waters of the state mean groundwater, lakes, rivers, streams, all other watercourses and waters within the confines of this state as well as bordering this state in the form of the Great Lakes. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, the following acronyms shall have the meanings designated by this section: 
(1)  BMR—Baseline monitoring report. 
(2)  BOD—Biochemical Oxygen Demand. 
(3)  C.F.R.—Code of Federal Regulations. 
(4)  EPA—Environmental Protection Agency. 
(5)  FOG—Fats, Oil or Grease. 
(6)  l—liter. 
(7)  MDEQ—Michigan Department of Environment Quality. 
(8)  mg—milligrams. 
(9)  mg/l—milligrams per liter. 
(10)  NPDES—National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
(11)  POTW—Publicly Owned Treatment Works. 
(12)  RCRA—Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq. 
(13)  SIC—Standard Industrial Classification. 
(14)  SWDA—Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq. 
(15)  TSS—Total Suspended Solids. 
(16)  U.S.C.—United States Code. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, art. 4, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-155. - Fees. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the POTW. The applicable charges or fees established by the board shall be sufficient to meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system, or as provided by law or by board action. 
(b)  The board shall adopt charges and fees which shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of establishing, operating, maintaining, or improving the department's industrial waste control and pretreatment programs; and 
(2)  User fees based upon volume of waste and concentration or quantity of specific pollutants in the discharge, and treatment costs including sludge handling and disposal; and 
(3)  Reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs for hearings including, but not limited to, expenses regarding hearings officers, court reporters, and transcriptions; and 
(4)  Other fees, which the board may deem necessary, to carry out the requirements contained herein, or as may be required by law. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, art. 6, 2-28-2007)  
Secs. 62-156—62-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS 
 
Sec. 62-161. - General pollutant prohibitions. 
No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will cause interference or pass through. These general discharge prohibitions shall apply to all users of the POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or to any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. In addition, it shall be unlawful for a user to discharge into the POTW: 
(1)  Any liquid, solid or gas, which by reason of its nature or quantity, is sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to create a fire or explosion hazard or to be injurious in any other way to persons, to the POTW, or to the operations of the POTW. Pollutants, which create a fire or explosion hazard in a POTW, include, but are not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flash point of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21; or 
(2)  Any solid or viscous substance in concentrations or quantities, which are sufficient to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other encumbrances to the operation of the POTW, including, but not limited to, grease, animal guts or tissues, bones, hair, hides or fleshing, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, cement, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, strings, fibers, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastic, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubrication oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes, or tumbling and deburring stones; or 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 units or greater than 11.5 units; or 
(4)  Any wastewater containing petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin, or toxic pollutants in sufficient concentration or quantity either singly or by interaction with other pollutants to cause interference, or pass through, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(5)  Any liquid, gas, solid or form of energy, which either singly or by interaction with other waste is sufficient to create toxic gas, vapor, or fume within the POTW in quantities that may cause acute worker health and safety problems, or may cause a public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair; or 
(6)  Any substance which is sufficient to cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residue, sludge, or scum to be unsuitable for reclamation processing where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria guidelines or regulations developed under 33 U.S.C. § 1345, with any criteria, guidelines, or developed and promulgated regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Federal Clean Air Act, the Federal Toxic Substances Control Act, or with State criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used; or 
(7)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate either the consent judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al., Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan Case No. 77-1100, or the City of Detroit's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit; or 
(8)  Any discharge having a color uncharacteristic of the wastewater being discharged; or 
(9)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into a public sewer which exceeds 150 degrees Fahrenheit or which will cause the influent at the wastewater treatment plant to rise above 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius); or 
(10)  Any pollutant discharge which constitutes a slug; or 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable federal or state regulations; or 
(12)  Any floating fats, oil or grease which are sufficient to cause interference with or pass through the POTW; or 
(13)  Any solid materials having a specific gravity greater than 1.2 or a cross section dimension of one-half inch or greater which are sufficient to cause interference with the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 5.1, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-162. - Specific pollutant prohibitions. 
No user shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following limitations: 
(1)  Compatible pollutants. See Appendix C. 
(2)  Non-compatible pollutants. No user shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of: 
mg/l 
a.  Arsenic (As) ..... 1.0 
b.  Cadmium (Cd) ..... See App. C 
c.  Chromium (Cr) ..... 25.0 
d.  Copper (Cu) ..... 2.5 
e.  Cyanide (CN) (Available) ..... 1.0 
f.  Iron (Fe) ..... 1000.0 
g.  Lead (Pb) ..... 1.0 
h.  Nickel (Ni) ..... 5.0 
i.  Silver (Ag) ..... 1.0 
j.  Zinc (Zn) ..... 7.3 
k.  Total phenolic compounds ..... 1.0 
Or see Appendix B. 
All limitations are based on samples collected over an operating period representative of an industrial user's discharge, and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. part 136. 
(3)  The limitation for total PCB is non-detect. Total PCB shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. EPA Method 608, and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2 ugm/l, unless a higher level is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one or more samples indicate detectable levels of total PCB, the user shall be required to demonstrate compliance. For purposes of this section, this demonstration may be made using analytical data showing that the total PCB concentration is below the detection level, or submission of a bmp in accordance with section 62-214. 
(4)  The limitation of mercury (Hg) is non-detect. Mercury (Hg) shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S. EPA Method 245.1, and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2 ugm/l, unless a higher level is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix interference. Where one or more samples indicate detectable levels of mercury, the user shall be required to demonstrate compliance. For the purposes of this section, this demonstration may be made using analytical data showing that the mercury concentration is below the detection level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with section 62-214. 
All limitations are based on samples collected over an operating period representative of an industrial user's discharge, and in accordance 40 CFR Part 136. 
(5)  Compliance period. Within 30 days of the effective date of this article, the department shall notify all industrial user's operating under an effective wastewater discharge permit of the requirement to submit a compliance report within 180 days after the effective date of this article. The compliance report shall demonstrate the user's compliance or non-compliance with these limitations, and, in the event of non-compliance, include the submission of a plan and schedule for achieving compliance with the stated limitation. In no event shall a compliance schedule exceed 18 months from the effective date of this article. An industrial user who does not demonstrate compliance may petition the department for a second extension as part of an administrative consent order. The department shall include appropriate monitoring, reporting, and penalties into an administrative consent order that relates to a second extension, and shall enter into such an agreement only upon a good-faith showing by the industrial user of the actions taken to achieve compliance with this provision. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 5.2, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-163. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
All users shall comply with the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and requirements promulgated pursuant to the act as set forth in 40 C.F.R. Subchapter N, Effluent Guidelines and Standards, which are hereby incorporated by reference and with all other applicable standards and requirements, provided, that where a more stringent standard or requirement is applicable pursuant to State law or regulation, or to this article, then the more stringent standard or requirement shall be controlling. Affected dischargers shall comply with applicable reporting requirements under 40 C.F.R. part 403 and as established by the department. The national categorical pretreatment standards which have been promulgated as of the effective date of this section are delineated in Appendix A. 
(1)  Intake water adjustment. Industrial users seeking adjustment of National Categorical Pretreatment Standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in their intake water must comply with the requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.15. Upon notification of approval by the department, the adjustment shall be applied by modifying the permit accordingly. Intake water adjustments are not effective until incorporated into an industrial user's permit. 
(2)  Modification of national categorical pretreatment standards. The department may apply to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or to the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, whichever is appropriate, for authorization to grant removal credits in accordance with the requirements and procedures in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7. Such authorization may be granted only when the POTW treatment plant can achieve consistent removal for each pollutant for which a removal credit is being sought, provided, that any limitation of such pollutant(s) in the NPDES permit neither are being exceeded nor pose the prospect of being exceeded as a result of the removal credit being granted. Where such authorization is given to the department, any industrial user desiring to obtain such credit shall make an application to the department, consistent with the provisions of 40 C.F.R. § 403.7 and of this article. Any credits which may be granted under this section may be subject to modification or revocation as specified in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7, or as determined by the department. A requisite to the granting of any removal credit may be that the industrial user pay a surcharge based upon the amounts of such pollutants removed by the POTW, such surcharge being based upon fees or rates which the board may establish and, when appropriate, revise from time to time. Permits shall reflect, or be modified to reflect, any credit granted pursuant to this section. 
(3)  New sources. Industrial users who meet the new sources criteria shall install, maintain in operating condition, and 'start-up' all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time and not to exceed 90 days, new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards. 
(4)  Concentration and mass limits. When limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the department may convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users. Equivalent limitations shall be calculated in accordance with Sections 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c)(3) and/or 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c)(4) and shall be deemed pretreatment standards for the purposes of 33 U.S.C. §1317(d) and of this article. Industrial users will be required to comply with the equivalent limitations in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived. 
(5)  Reporting requirements for industrial users upon effective date of categorical pretreatment standards-baseline report. Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under Section 40 C.F.R. § 403.6 (a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging into or scheduled to discharge into the Detroit POTW shall submit to the department a report containing the information listed in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)(1-7). Where reports containing this information have already been submitted to the director or regional administrator in compliance with the requirement of 40 C.F.R. § 128.140(b), the industrial user will not be required to resubmit this information. At least 90 days before commencement of any discharge, each new source and any existing sources that become industrial users after the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall submit to the department a report which contains the information listed in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)(1-5). In such report, new sources shall include information concerning the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall provide estimates of the information requested in 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b)(4) and (5). 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 5.3, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-164. - Dilution prohibited. 
Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no user shall increase the use of process water, or in any way dilute or attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant specific limitation or requirement imposed by the township, the City of Detroit or by the State of Michigan. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 5.4, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-165. - Hauled in wastewater. 
Any waste material or wastewater which is hauled into or within the service region for discharge to the POTW is subject to the requirements of this article including, but not limited to, permits, inspection, monitoring and enforcement. Unloading liquid or solid waste from hauling vehicles, directly or indirectly, into the POTW, with or without the benefit of pretreatment, is prohibited unless the person proposing to unload such waste has applied for and received a permit from the department for unloading such waste in accordance with the board's rules pertaining thereto. The discharger shall be subject to applicable terms and conditions, surcharges, fees or rates as established by the board. Hauled in wastewater shall only be discharged at points designated by the POTW after authorization or approval issued pursuant to the general permit requirements specified in Division 3 of this article. The department may establish specific limitations for sludge from municipally owned or operated POTW treatment plants which are different than the specific limitations in this article. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 5.5, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-166. - Centralized waste treatment. 
It is unlawful for a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility to discharge any industrial waste or wastewater into the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit from the department. Any authorization granted, or permit issued, by the department to a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall specify the type of wastewater for which treatment is provided, and discharge approval is sought, from the POTW. Unless such industrial waste or wastewater is determined by the department to require further authorization, a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility that has submitted an application to, and received previous approval from, the department to discharge wastewater is not required to obtain further authorization from the department before discharging such wastewater. An industrial user, that provides centralized waste treatment services and files an application for the treatment and discharge of such types of wastewater to the POTW, shall provide the following minimum information in support thereof: 
(1)  The general nature, source and process(es) generating the type of wastewater. Any wastewater, which is generated from those processes and is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards as delineated in Appendix A, shall be so designated; 
(2)  The identity of the toxic pollutants known or suspected to be present in the wastewater; 
(3)  At least one sample report showing the results of an analysis for the EPA priority pollutants for each type of wastewater for which application is made in subsection 62-155(a) of this section; 
(4)  A statement, that is certified by a professional engineer, which addresses the treatability and compatibility of the wastewater, received or collected by the facility's treatment process(es); 
(5)  The identity of the materials and/or pollutants whose transport or treatment are regulated by the EPA, by the state, or by any other governmental agency. Upon request, the centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall provide a copy of its permit and/or license to the department; and 
(6)  Other information requested by the department including, but not limited to, information required by section 7.3.1-18, or by rules adopted by the board. ;b0; The discharge from a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility will be deemed approved for those specific types of wastewater delineated in a permit and, upon issuance of such permit in accordance with the procedures contained in Division 3, will be deemed approved for discharge into the POTW. The centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility shall comply with all applicable provisions contained in Division 3 regarding permits. In furtherance of its obligations as control authority, the department may include in the permit a requirement to report at selected intervals the information mandated in subsections (1) through (6) of this section. All users granted a permit under this section shall maintain records which, at a minimum, identify the source, volume, character, and constituents of the wastewater accepted for treatment and disposal. These records may be reviewed at any time by the department. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 5.6, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-167. - Groundwater discharges. 
Unless authorization has been granted by the department, the discharge of any groundwater into the POTW is prohibited. The department may authorize the discharge of groundwater resulting from maintenance and related activities of gas, steam, or electrical utilities through the use of general permits. Subject to appropriate reporting requirements, the general permit shall authorize discharge in accordance with the terms of the permit. Utilities shall comply with this provision within 180 days after its enactment. If a person, who proposes to discharge groundwater resulting from purge, response activity, or UST projects, has applied for and received a permit from the department, the department may authorize the discharge of such wastewater. Permits shall be issued in accordance with the procedures contained in Division 3, or in accordance with any rules adopted by the board. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 5.7, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-168. - Township right of revision. 
The City of Detroit and the township reserve the right to establish rules or regulations adopted by the board, additional or more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the POTW. [These rules and regulations shall be adopted in accordance with the rule-making procedures section 2-111 of the 1997 Detroit City Charter in the 1997, if any.] Ninety days after adoption by the board, industrial users shall comply with such rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 5.8, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-169. - Accidental discharges. 
(a)  Each industrial user, which does not currently have an approved spill prevention plan or slug control plan, shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article, and all significant industrial users shall submit to the department detailed plans which show facilities and operating procedures to be implemented to provide protection against such accidental discharges. Facilities and measures to prevent and abate accidental discharges shall be implemented, provided, and maintained at the owner's or industrial user's cost or expense. Unless the significant industrial user has an approved spill prevention or slug control plan, all existing significant industrial users shall complete and submit such a plan within 60 days of the effective date of this article [November 19, 1986]. New significant industrial users shall submit such a plan prior to the time they commence discharging. 
For purposes of this section, the information provided shall include the approximate average and maximum quantities of such prohibited materials or substances kept on the premises in the form of raw materials, chemicals and/or waste therefrom and the containment capacity for each. Only substances that are in a form which could readily be carried into the POTW and constitute a concentration of five percent or greater in the raw material, chemical solution or waste material, are required to be reported. Volumes of less than 55 gallons, or the equivalent thereof, need not be reported unless lesser quantities could cause pass through or cause interference with the POTW. 
The industrial user shall promptly notify the department of any significant changes or modifications to the plan including, but not limited to, a change in the contact person, or substance inventory. 
(b)  At least once every two years, the department shall evaluate whether a significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges, as defined by 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(2)(v). Unless otherwise provided, all significant users shall complete, implement, and submit such a plan within 30 days of notification by the department. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 5.9, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-170. - Notification requirements. 
Unless a different notice is provided by this article or applicable law, within one hour of becoming aware of a discharge into the POTW which exceeds or does not conform with federal, state or township laws, rules, regulations or permit requirements, or which could cause problems to the POTW, or which has the potential to cause the industrial user to implement its plan prepared in accordance with subsection (1) of this section, the industrial user shall telephone the department at its control center and notify the department of the discharge. The notification shall include the name of the caller, the location and time of discharge, the type of wastewater, the estimated concentration of excessive or prohibited pollutants and estimated volume, and the measures taken, or being taken, to abate the discharge into the POTW. Within five calendar days after the discharge, the industrial user shall submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences and when required by the department, the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit may be modified to include additional measures to prevent such future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, cost of treatment, loss, damages or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other environmental impairment or any other damage to person or property. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 5.10, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-171. - Notice to employees. 
A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board, or other prominent place, advising employees whom to contact in the department in the event of an actual or excessive or prohibited discharge. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 5.11, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-172. - Recovery of costs. 
Any user discharging in violation of any of the provisions of this article, which produces a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or impairs the department's POTW, or causes the department to violate its NPDES permit, shall be liable to the department for any expense, loss, damage, penalty or fine incurred by the department because of said violation or discharge. Prior to assessing such costs, the department shall notify the user of its determination that the user's discharge was the proximate cause of such damage, obstruction, impairment, or violation of the city's NPDES permit and the department's intent to assess such costs to the user. Any such notice shall include written documentation which substantiates the determination of proximate cause and a breakdown of cost estimates. Failure to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this article. Such charge shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any penalties or remedies provided under this article, or this Code, or other statutes and regulations, or at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 5.12, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-173. - Hazardous waste notification. 
All industrial users, who discharge into the township collection system, shall notify the department in writing of any discharge of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 261. Such notification must comply with the requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(p). 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 5.13, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-174. - Authorized representative. 
The authorized representative, as defined in section 62-154 may designate a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in section 62-154 where: 
(1)  The authorization is made in writing by the individual defined in section 62-154; 
(2)  The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility where the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
(3)  The written authorization is submitted to the department. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 5.14, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-175. - Pollution prevention. 
The department shall encourage and support industrial users to develop and implement pollution prevention programs that are designed to eliminate or reduce pollutant contributions beyond the levels required by this article. The department may require an industrial user to implement pollution prevention initiatives or BMP, as part of an enforcement response, or as necessary to comply with its NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 5.15, 2-28-2007)  
Secs. 62-176—62-185. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS 
 
Sec. 62-186. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for users to discharge into the POTW any wastewater which will cause interference or pass through, or otherwise not comply with the discharge prohibitions of Division 2. It shall be unlawful for a significant industrial user to discharge into the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the department through permit, order, rule or regulation, any discharge must be in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  All significant industrial users, which are in existence on the effective date of this article, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of the effective date of this article. Significant industrial users who are currently operating with a valid wastewater discharge permit are not subject to this provision. These applications are to include all information specified in section 62-188 and, where applicable, any additional information which may be needed to satisfy the federal baseline monitoring report requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b). 
(2)  All new significant users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit at least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge. The application must include all information specified in section 62-188 and, where applicable, any additional information that may be needed to satisfy the federal BMR requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b). Until a permit is issued and finalized by the department, no discharge shall be made into the POTW. 
(3)  Any user, who proposes to discharge any wastewater other than sanitary or noncontact cooling water into the POTW, shall request approval from the department for the discharge(s) at least 30 days prior to the commencement of the discharge. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 7.1, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-187. - Permit application or reapplication. 
The department may require any user to complete a questionnaire and/or a permit application and to submit the same to the department for determining whether the industrial user is a significant user, or to determine changes in the wastewater discharges from a user's facility. Within 30 days of being so notified, a user shall comply with the department's request in the manner and form prescribed by the department. Failure of the department to so notify a user shall not relieve the user of the duty to obtain a permit as required by this article. 
(1)  A user, which becomes subject to a new or revised national categorical pretreatment standard, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 90 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard, unless an earlier date is specified or required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b). The existing user shall provide a permit application which includes all the information specified in sections 62-188 and 62-192. 
(2)  A separate permit application shall be required for each separate facility. 
(3)  Existing permittees shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of existing permits on a form prescribed by the department. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 7.2, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-188. - Application or reapplication information. 
In support of an application or reapplication for a wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Corporate or individual name, any assumed name(s), federal employer identification number, address, and location of the discharging facility; 
(2)  Name and title of the authorized representative of the industrial user who shall have the authority to bind the industrial user financially and legally; 
(3)  All SIC numbers of all processes at this location according to the Standard Industrial Classification manual, issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended; 
(4)  Actual or proposed wastewater constituents and characteristics for each parameter listed in the permit application form. Such parameters shall include those applicable pollutants having numeric limitations as enumerated in sections 62-186 and 62-187, those pollutants limited by national categorical pretreatment standards regulations for applicable industries and any toxic pollutants known or suspected to be present in the discharge, regulated in the previous permit, or specifically requested by the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. For each parameter, the expected or experienced maximum and average concentrations during a one-year period shall be provided. For industries subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements, the data requested herein shall be separately shown for each categorical process wastestream. Combined wastestreams proposed to be regulated by the combined wastestream formula shall also be identified. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to 33 U.S.C. §1314(g) and contained in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, as amended. Where 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using validated analytical methods approved by the administrator. 
(5)  A listing and description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises. Those processes, which are subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements, shall be so designated. As pertains to subsection (4) of this section, identify which pollutants are associated with each process; 
(6)  Restricted to only those pollutants referred to in subsection (4), of this section, a listing of raw materials and chemicals which are either used in the manufacturing process or could yield the pollutants referred to in subsection (4) Any user claiming immunity from having to provide such information for reasons of national security shall furnish acceptable proof of such immunity; 
(7)  A description of typical daily and weekly operating cycles for each process in terms of starting and ending times for each of the seven days of the week: 
(8)  Denote: (i) The average and maximum 24-hour wastewater flow rates including, if any, daily, monthly and seasonal variations; (ii) each national categorical process wastestream flow rate and the cooling water, sanitary water and storm water flow rates separately for each connection to the POTW; and (iii) each combined wastestream; 
(9)  A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by the size, location, elevation and points or places of discharges into the POTW; also a flow schematic showing which connections receive each national categorical process wastestream and which connections receive storm water, sanitary water or cooling water; also show which lines handle each combined wastestream. This schematic shall be cross-referenced to the information furnished in subsection (8) of this section; 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production as pertains to processes subject to production based limits under the national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements only; 
(11)  A statement regarding whether or not the requirements of this article and of the national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance work and/or additional construction is required for the industrial user to meet the applicable standards and requirements. This statement shall be reviewed and signed by the authorized representative and, as appropriate, certified by a qualified professional; 
(12)  Basic information on the program for the prevention of accidental discharges in accordance with the requirements of section 62-169; 
(13)  Proposed or actual hours of operation of each pretreatment system for each production process; 
(14)  A schematic and description of each pretreatment facility which identifies whether each pretreatment facility is of the batch type or continuous process type; 
(15)  If other than Detroit Water and Sewerage Department potable water, the industrial user's source of intake water together with the types of usage and disposal method of each water source, and the estimated wastewater volumes from each source; 
(16)  If additional construction and/or operation and maintenance procedures will be required to meet the requirements of this article and the national categorical pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional construction and/or implement the required operation and maintenance procedures; 
(17)  Identify whether the user has conducted a waste minimization assessment or audit of its operations in order to identify all feasible source reduction and recycling practices that may be employed to reduce or eliminate the generation of pollutants and other waste at the facility; and 
(18)  Any other information as may reasonably be required to prepare and process a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 7.3, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-189. - Permit issuance. 
Upon receipt of an application, the department shall review the application, determine, and so notify the industrial user in writing regarding any of the following: 
(1)  The industrial user does not meet the definition of a significant industrial user and is not required to have a wastewater discharge permit; 
(2)  The industrial user does meet the definition of a significant industrial user but is found by the department to have no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, and is not required to have a wastewater discharge permit. The department shall make such determination in accordance with the requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6); 
(3)  The application is incomplete or the information only partially satisfies the information and data required by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12 or by the department, and that additional information and data are required which shall be promptly furnished. Where appropriate, the industrial user is notified regarding specific information that is missing, or that the application is unacceptable; 
(4)  The industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge permit. The department shall notify the industrial user of its determination and the basis of the determination. 
(5)  The department may withhold issuance of a permit to a significant user, which has not submitted an adequate or timely report, or permit application, to the department as the control authority in accordance with the reporting requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.12, or whose discharge is in violation of this article. If the department determines that an industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge permit and has evaluated and accepted the data furnished, the industrial user will be notified accordingly by certified mail. The notification shall contain a copy of the draft permit, so marked, for the industrial user's review. An industrial user has 30 days from the date of mailing to file a response to the draft permit and, in accordance with the procedures contained in Division 6, 20 days from the date of mailing to file an appeal regarding a permit issued as final. Upon disposition by the department of any contested terms or conditions, a permit shall be issued as final. Only one facility location shall be included in each permit. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 7.4, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-190. - Permit conditions. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall contain all requirements of 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(1)(iii) and shall be deemed to incorporate all provisions of this article, other applicable laws, rules, regulations, and user charges and fees established by the City of Detroit or township without repetition therein. In addition, permits may contain the following: 
(1)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents or characteristics which are equivalent, more restrictive than, or supplemental to the numeric limits enumerated in Division 2, or the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards; 
(2)  Limits on average, and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(3)  Requirements for installation, operation, and maintenance of discharge sampling manholes and monitoring facilities by the industrial user; 
(4)  Restrictions on which of the user's discharge wastestreams are to be allowed to be discharged at each point of connection to the POTW; 
(5)  Specifications for industrial user monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency and type of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedules; 
(6)  Requirements for the prevention of accidental discharges and the containment of spills or slug discharges; 
(7)  Restrictions based on the information furnished in the application; 
(8)  Additional reporting requirements: ;ol2; a. ..... All permittees shall submit a report on the form prescribed by the department, or on an alternative form approved by the department, indicating the status of compliance with all conditions enumerated or referred to in the wastewater discharge permit, or made applicable to the permit by this article. Unless required more frequently, the reports shall be submitted at six-month intervals on a schedule to be established by the department. Analytical data generated by the department may not be submitted in lieu of the facility's own monitoring data as required by the wastewater discharge permit. ;ol2; b. 
(9)  In the event the director determines that an industrial user is discharging substances in quality, quantity or at locations which may cause problems to the POTW, or the receiving stream, the department has the authority to develop and enforce effluent limits applicable to the user. To the extent the department seeks to impose restrictions in a permit which are more restrictive than established in this article, the department shall provide written documentation to explain the greater restriction for protection against pass through, interference, or violation of the NPDES permit; 
(10)  Requirement for pollution prevention initiatives; and 
(11)  Other requirements reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 7.5, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 64-191. - Permit duration. 
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period. Except as deemed necessary by the department, or as otherwise provided for under this article, permits shall be issued for a specified period of not more than five years nor less than one year. The existing permit for significant industrial users, who timely submit an application for permit reissuance to the department, shall be automatically extended until a permit is issued as final. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 7.6, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-192. - Permit modification. 
The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the department during the term of the permit as limitations or pretreatment standards and requirements identified in Division 2 are amended, or other just cause exists. Just cause for a permit modification includes, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Material or substantial changes to an industrial user's facility or operation, or changes in the characteristics of the industrial user's effluent. It shall be the industrial user's duty to request an application form and apply for a modification of the permit within 30 calendar days of the change; 
(2)  Change(s) in the department's NPDES permit; 
(3)  Embodiment of the provisions of a legal settlement or of a court order; 
(4)  Any changes necessary to fulfill the department's role as control authority; 
(5)  An industrial user's noncompliance with portions of an existing permit; 
(6)  A change of conditions within the POTW; 
(7)  A finding of interference or pass through attributable to the industrial user; 
(8)  Amendments to, or promulgation of, national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements including 40 C.F.R. Part 403 and those delineated in Appendix A of this article. Permittees shall request an application form and apply to the department for a modified permit within 90 days after the promulgation of a new or revised national categorical pretreatment standard to which the industrial user shall be subject. Information submitted pursuant to this subsection shall be confined to that information related to the newly promulgated or amended national categorical pretreatment standard or requirement. However, information previously submitted need not be duplicated, insofar as the previously submitted information continues to be current and applicable. In addition, the department may initiate this action; 
(9)  Changes in the monitoring location. (See Division 4); 
(10)  Typographical errors or omissions in permits; 
(11)  The department may modify the permit on its own initiative based on its findings or reasonable belief of the above; or 
(12)  The user may request a modification of the permit. When initiated by the department, the industrial user shall be informed of any proposed change in its permit. The department will issue a draft permit and an industrial user has 30 days to file a response to the draft modified permit. Thereafter, the department will issue a final permit and, unless appealed in accordance with the procedures contained in Division 6, the permit will become effective 20 days after issuance. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 7.7, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-193. - Permit custody and transfer. 
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific person as defined herein for a specific discharge. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a different person, new owner, new industrial user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without notice to and written approval of the department, and providing a copy of the existing permit to the new owner or operator. It shall be the permit holder's duty to notify the department of any such change at least 30 days before the date of the change. Wastewater discharge permits, which do not receive the written approval of the department prior to the change, shall be null and void regardless of reassignment, or transfer, or sale. If it has occurred, the department may revoke a permit. If a change takes place, the department may require the application for a new or modified permit. Any succeeding person shall comply with the terms and conditions of any existing permit which the Department allows to be retained. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 7.8, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-194. - Permit notification requirements. 
All industrial users shall promptly notify the department in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous waste for which initial notification under 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(p) has been made, request a permit application form, and apply for a modification of the permit at least 30 calendar days prior to the change. Failure of the industrial user to so apply shall be considered a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 7.9, 2-28-2007)  
Secs. 62-195—62-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 62-201. - Monitoring facilities. 
(a)  Significant industrial users shall provide, operate and maintain at their own expense a sampling manhole or special structure to facilitate monitoring, inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of their discharge by the department and the industrial user, and to enable the department to conduct such other monitoring and sampling as required for determining compliance with discharge requirements, limits and standards as provided for in this article. In the event the department determines that the monitoring facility identified in the permit application is inadequate, a new monitoring facility must be identified, or provided, which shall allow for collection of a representative sample of the wastewater discharged from the facility. Unless otherwise determined at the discretion of the department, said facility shall be provided within 90 days of receipt of notification by the department. The industrial user shall provide the department with: 
(1)  A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by the size, location, elevation, and points or places of discharges into the POTW; 
(2)  A flow schematic showing: (i) which connections receive each national categorical process wastestream, (ii) which connections receive storm water, sanitary water or cooling water, and (iii) which lines handle each combined wastestream. This report shall be certified by a professional engineer. If a significant industrial user fails to install the monitoring facilities within the prescribed time limits, then the department may install such structure or device and the significant user shall reimburse the department for any costs incurred therein. 
(b)  The sampling manhole should be situated on the industrial user's premises in a location readily accessible to the department. When such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the industrial user, the department may allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area when there is room and the location will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. It shall be the responsibility of the industrial user to obtain any necessary approvals which may be required from other government agencies for the location and construction of monitoring facilities. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling or monitoring manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility and any permanently installed sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the industrial user. Whether constructed upon public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the department's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications [(See section 62-192)]. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, art. 8, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-202. - Inspection, sampling and record-keeping. 
(a)  For purposes of administering and enforcing this article, any other applicable provisions of this article or applicable state or federal laws and regulations, the department may inspect the establishment, facility or other premises of the industrial user. The department's employees or authorized representative shall have access to the industrial user's premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, compliance monitoring and/or metering activities. 
(b)  Each such inspection or sampling activity shall be commenced and completed at reasonable times, and in a reasonable manner. Upon arrival at the industrial user's premises, the department shall inform the industrial user, or the industrial user's employees, that sampling and/or inspection is commencing, and that the facility's authorized representative has the right to observe the inspection and/or sampling. The department shall neither refrain from, nor be prevented or delayed from, carrying-out its inspection or sampling duties due to the unavailability of the authorized representative of the facility to observe or participate in the inspection or sampling activity. 
(c)  While performing work on private property, employees or authorized representatives of the department shall observe all reasonable safety, security and other reasonable rules applicable to the premises as established by the industrial user. Duly authorized employees or representatives of the department shall bear proper credentials and identification, and at the industrial user's option may be accompanied by a duly authorized representative of the industrial user. Duly authorized department representatives shall not be restricted from viewing any of the facility site. Department employees or representatives may take photographs of facilities subject to this article. Which shall be maintained by the department as confidential in accordance with section 62-203 of this Code. 
(d)  Where an industrial user has security measures in force, the industrial user shall make prompt and necessary arrangements with the security personnel so that, upon presentation of appropriate credentials, personnel from the department will be permitted to enter for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(e)  Significant industrial users shall sample and analyze their discharge in accordance with the provisions of their permit. The department may require such samples to be split with the department for the department's independent analysis. 
(f)  Industrial users shall maintain records of all information from monitoring activities required by this article, or by 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(n). Industrial users shall maintain the records for no less than three years. This period of record retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the industrial user, or the operation of the City of Detroit's Industrial Waste Program, or when requested by the department, by the state, or by the EPA. 
(g)  Upon the request of the department, industrial users shall furnish information and records relating to discharges into the POTW. Industrial users shall make such records readily accessible to the department at all reasonable times, and allow the department to copy such records. 
(h)  In the event the department obtains samples, and analyses are made of such samples, a copy of the results of such analyses shall be promptly furnished upon written request by the industrial user's authorized representative. When requested by the industrial user, the department employee or representative shall leave with the user, a portion of any sample of the user's discharge taken from any sampling point on or adjacent to the premises for the user's independent analysis. In cases of disputes arising over shared samples, the portion taken and analyzed by the department shall be controlling unless proven invalid. 
(i)  In addition to any other violation caused by the discharge described herein, in the event a single grab sample of the industrial user's discharge is obtained by the department, and then analyzed in accordance with 40 C.F.R. Part 136, and found to contain concentrations of pollutants which are two or more times greater than the numeric limitations as listed in section 62-162, or as contained in the facility's wastewater discharge permit, the industrial user shall implement its slug control plan, and shall provide a written report to the department within 14 days, which describes the cause of greater concentration and provides a description of the means by which future discharge concentrations will be held to values of less than two times the limitation in the future. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, art. 9, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-203. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data on an industrial user obtained from written reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the department that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial user. 
When submitted to the department, all information claimed to be confidential must be clearly marked 'confidential'. When requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions of a report determined by the department to disclose trade secrets or trade secret processes, and which are clearly labeled as confidential, shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, and to the state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs, provided, however that information shall be treated as confidential by the governmental agency, until such time as the information has been determined to be non-confidential by the governmental agency. Confidential information on industrial users, which the department releases pursuant to a request of another governmental agency, should be handled by the other governmental agency pursuant to its own confidentiality procedures. The department cannot control how another governmental agency handles such confidential information, and assumes no responsibility for the disposition of the information released to the governmental agency. The department will use sufficient care to inform the other governmental agency of the existence of the industrial user's confidentiality claim. 
The department shall determine whether the information requested to be treated as confidential, in fact, satisfies the requirements of confidential information as defined herein. The decision of the department shall be made in writing. 
Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(b)  Except as otherwise determined by the department or provided for by applicable law, all information with respect to an industrial user on file with the city shall be made available upon request by such user or the user's authorized representative during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, art. 10, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-204. - Statutes, laws and regulations. 
The national categorical pretreatment standards defined in 40 C.F.R. Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471, shall be and are incorporated by reference herein and made a part hereof. Unless otherwise provided, any reference in this article to a code, standard, rule, regulation, or law enacted, adopted, established, or promulgated by any private organization, or by any element or organization of government other than the subsections 62-190(9) and (11) shall be construed to apply to such code, standard, rule, regulation, or law in effect or as amended or promulgated, from the date of enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, art. 11, 2-28-2007)  
Secs. 62-205—62-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 62-211. - Violations. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any user to: 
(1)  Fail to completely and/or accurately report the wastewater constituents and/or characteristics of the industrial user's discharge; 
(2)  Fail to report significant changes in the industrial user's operations or wastewater constituents and/or characteristics within the time frames provided in 62-192(1); 
(3)  Refuse reasonable access to the industrial user's premises, waste discharge, or sample location for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; 
(4)  Restrict, lockout or prevent, directly or indirectly, access to any monitoring facilities constructed on public or private property. The locking or securing of the monitoring facility shall not constitute a violation pursuant to this subsection, provided, that upon request reasonable access to the facility is promptly provided to the department; 
(5)  Restrict, interfere, tamper with, or render inaccurate any of the department's monitoring devices including, but not limited to, samplers; 
(6)  Fail to comply with any condition or requirement of the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit; 
(7)  Fail to comply with any limitation, prohibition, or requirement of this article including any rule, regulation, or order issued hereunder. Industrial users acting in full compliance with wastewater discharge permits issued prior to the effective date of this article shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this article, and such permits shall remain in effect and be enforceable under this article until a superseding permit is effective. Industrial users shall comply with applicable national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements on the date specified in the federal Regulations, regardless of compliance schedules. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 12.1, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-212. - Upsets. 
An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with national categorical pretreatment standards where the requirements of subsection (1) of this section are met. 
(1)  An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that: ;ol2; a. ..... An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; ;ol2; b. 
(2)  In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof; 
(3)  The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with this article upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 12.2, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-213. - Bypass. 
Bypasses are prohibited unless the bypass does not cause a violation of pretreatment standards or requirements, but only if it is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the treatment system. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(1)  Notice of anticipated bypass. Industrial users anticipating a bypass shall submit notice to the department at least ten days in advance. 
(2)  Notice of unanticipated bypass. An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes or should have become aware of the bypass. A written submission shall be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes or should have become aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass including exact dates and times, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. 
(3)  Prohibition of bypass and enforcement. Bypass is prohibited, and the department may take enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: ;ol2; a. ..... The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; ;ol2; b. 
(4)  Where one or more of the measurements taken for any pollutant defined in section 62-162 during a six-month period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum non-detect limit for the same parameter, the industrial user may develop and implement pollution prevention initiatives, or a BMP, as part of its response. The department may, as part of an administrative order, also require development of a BMP as a part of the department's enforcement response. Upon approval of the department, these pollution prevention initiative, or BMPs shall be made an enforceable part of the wastewater discharge permit. Industrial users shall provide, at six-month intervals, analytical results and certifications in support of its implementation of an approved pollution prevention initiative or BMPs. Upon demonstration of compliance, the industrial user may request to be relieved of this implementation requirement. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 12.4, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-214. - Reserved.  
Sec. 62-215. - Emergency suspensions and orders. 
The department may order suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit where, in the opinion of the department, such suspension is necessary to stop any actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or significant hazard to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, interferes or may interfere with the POTW, or causes or may cause the City of Detroit to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. Any person notified of a suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event the department provides informal notification under this section, written confirmation and an order shall be provided within 24 hours. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with any suspension or revocation order, the department shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection or services, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or danger to any individual or the environment. In the event such steps are taken, the director shall notify the industrial user within 24 hours in writing of such action and order, and the specific recourse available. In any event, the department shall provide the industrial user with an opportunity for a hearing before the director, or his designated representative, within ten days of such action. The industrial user shall submit a detailed written statement to the department within 15 days of the occurrence describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. Upon proof of elimination of the noncomplying discharge, the department shall reinstate the wastewater discharge permit and/or the sewer or wastewater treatment service. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 12.5, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-216. - Notice of violation. 
Except in the case of an actual or threatened discharge as specified in section 62-215, whenever the department has reason to believe that any industrial user has violated or is violating this article, the department shall serve a written notice stating the nature of the violation upon such industrial user. Where applicable, the department shall pursue appropriate escalating enforcement action as defined within its approved enforcement response plan. The failure of the department to issue a notice of violation shall not preclude the department from escalating its enforcement response. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 12.6, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-217. - Administrative actions—Generally. 
Whenever the department has reasonable grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its wastewater discharge permit, or a pretreatment standard or requirement or any prohibition of this article, the department, may initiate appropriate administrative enforcement action, except in the case of emergency or flagrant violation, in order to compel the industrial user to eliminate or to remedy such violation as soon as possible. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 12.7, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-218. - Same—Compliance. 
(a)  Conferences. The department may order any person, who violates this article, to attend a conference wherein the department may endeavor to cause the user to eliminate or remedy the violation by establishing an enforceable compliance schedule. The notice of violation shall be served at least ten days before the scheduled conference and shall set forth the date, time, and place thereof. The conference shall be conducted by a representative of the department. The industrial user shall present a plan and schedule for achieving compliance with this article. Nothing contained herein shall require the department to accept or agree to any proposed plan or schedule, or to prevent the department from proceeding with a show cause hearing as set forth in subsection (b) of this section. If the attendees agree upon a compliance schedule, the user and the department's duly authorized representative may enter, by consent, into a compliance agreement or an administrative order setting forth the terms of such agreement. An industrial user must exhibit good faith and expeditious efforts to comply with this article and any procedures, requirements, and agreements hereunder. 
(b)  Compliance schedules. The user and the department may agree upon a schedule which sets forth the terms and conditions, and time periods or schedules for completion of actions to remedy or to eliminate the causes of violation. These schedules may be developed as part of a compliance agreement, administrative consent order. Schedules developed under this subsection shall adhere to the following conditions: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of upgraded or additional pretreatment facilities, or to the implementation of additional operation and maintenance procedures required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment requirements and standards including, but not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, and completing construction; 
(2)  No single increment referred to in Subsection (i) of this section shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the Department including, at a minimum, whether it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason(s) for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  Any deviations from the compliance schedule may result in the industrial user being found in violation of this article. 
(c)  Administrative orders. The department may order any industrial user, who violates or continues to violate this article or a duly issued permit, to install and to properly operate devices, treatment facilities, or other related appurtenances. In addition, orders may contain such other requirements as might reasonably be necessary and appropriate to address the violation including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and management practices, implementation of a waste minimization assessment to identify and implement feasible source reduction, and recycling practices to reduce the generation or release of pollutants at the facility. An order may be either an administrative consent order, which is the result of an agreement, or a unilateral administrative order. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 12.7.1, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-219. - Same—Show cause hearing. 
The department may order any industrial user, who violates this article or allows such violation to occur, to show cause before the department why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served upon the industrial user specifying the time and place of a hearing before the department regarding the violation, the reason(s) why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the industrial user to show cause before the department why any proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally, or by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made upon any agent or officer of a corporation, or its authorized representative. 
(1)  Hearing proceeding. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures adopted by the board. A hearings officer shall conduct the show cause hearing and take the evidence, and may: ;ol2; a. ..... In the name of the board, issue notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing. ;ol2; b. 
(2)  Transcript. At any show cause hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony shall be recorded by a court reporter. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 12.7.2, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-220. - Actions. 
After a show cause hearing has been conducted, the hearings officer shall issue order to the industrial user directing any of the following actions: 
(1)  Immediate compliance with the industrial user's wastewater discharge permit or with any applicable limitation, condition, restriction or requirement of this article, or applicable local, state or federal law or regulation; 
(2)  Pretreatment of waste by installation of adequate treatment equipment or proper operation and maintenance of existing treatment equipment be accomplished within a specified time period; 
(3)  Submission of compliance reports on effluent quality and quantity as determined by self-monitoring and analysis during a specified time period; 
(4)  Submission of periodic reports on effluent quality and quantity determined by self-monitoring analysis throughout the final period set by a compliance date; 
(5)  Control of discharge quantities; 
(6)  Payment of costs for reasonable and necessary inspection, monitoring, and administration of the industrial user's activities by the department during compliance efforts; and/or 
(7)  Any such other orders as are appropriate including, but not limited to, immediate termination of sewer or wastewater treatment services, or revocation of a wastewater discharge permit, or orders directing that following a specified time period sewer or wastewater treatment service will be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or operation and maintenance practices have been employed. 
(8)  A finding the user has demonstrated by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation either of this article or of a duly issued permit did not occur. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 12.7.3, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-221. - Public notification of significant noncompliance. 
The department shall publish in the largest daily newspaper published in the City of Detroit and the list of all industrial users which were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements at any time during the previous 12 months. All industrial users identified in a proposed publication shall be provided with a copy of the proposed notice at least 30 days before publication and allowed an opportunity to comment as to its accuracy. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 12.7.4, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-222. - Legal actions. 
(a)  Criminal action. Any user, who violates any provision of this article including the failure to pay any fees, fines, charges or surcharges imposed hereby, or any condition or limitation of a permit issued pursuant thereto, or who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or wastewater discharge permit, or who tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device required under this article, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation per day, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both. the department is hereby authorized, through its counsel, to seek prosecution of criminal charges against any person violating any provision of this article. 
(b)  Civil action. Whenever the department has reasonable grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of its wastewater discharge permit, a pretreatment standard or requirement or any requirement of this article, the director may commence a civil action to compel compliance in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the user from discharging, and/or to obtain appropriate relief to remedy the violations. The department or board may also seek additional legal and/or equitable relief. The commencement of suit neither constitutes an exclusive election of remedies nor prohibits the department, director, board, or City of Detroit from commencing action in federal court for discharges believed to be in violation of this article, state and federal requirements contained in the Clean Water Act, the City of Detroit's NPDES permit, or other applicable laws or requirements. In addition, the City of Detroit may recover the reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court reporters' fees, and other unusual expenses related to enforcement activities or litigation against the person found to have violated this article, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. 
(c)  All fines, costs, and penalties which are imposed by any court of competent jurisdiction shall be payable to the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 12.8, 2-28-2007)  
Secs. 62-223—62-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - RECONSIDERATION AND APPEAL 
 
Sec. 62-231. - Generally. 
Through the procedures of reconsideration and appeal, a user may contest actions, determinations, or decisions of the department which result from its construction, application and enforcement of this article. The procedures contained within this section govern reconsideration and appeal with respect to construction, application, and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, art. 13, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-232. - Selection of reconsideration or of appeal. 
(a)  Except for those actions, determinations, or decisions which are expressly identified as subject only to appeal, reconsideration may be requested by any permit applicant, permittee, authorized industrial wastewater discharger or other discharger, who is adversely affected by any action, determination, or decision that is made by, or on behalf of, the department by the director, or an authorized representative, and that interprets, implements or enforces the provisions of this article. 
(b)  An appeal may be requested by any permit applicant, permittee, authorized industrial wastewater discharge or other discharger, who is adversely affected (i) by a permit issued as final by the department, or (ii) by an administrative order entered after a show cause order and hearing, or after a hearing for reconsideration. 
(c)  Unless otherwise expressly provided for by this article, a request for reconsideration or appeal must be signed by an authorized representative, and received at the department's general offices within 20 days from the date of the occurrence of the action, determination, or decision in dispute. A request for reconsideration shall contain the requester's name and address, a brief statement of the reason(s), and the factual basis underlying the request. 
(d)  A request for reconsideration shall be filed in triplicate either by hand delivery or by certified mail to the general offices of the department. Where a request for reconsideration or appeal either is not filed within the time period provided for in this subsection or is improperly made, the action, determination or decision of the director, or the department's authorized representative, is final and any right to reconsideration appeal may be deemed waived. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 13.1, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-233. - Reconsideration. 
Within 15 days after receipt of a timely and proper request for reconsideration, the department shall notify the applicant of the time and place for a hearing. 
(1)  A hearing for reconsideration shall be conducted by a hearings officer who is designated by the director and may be an employee of the department. The decision of the hearings officer shall be in the form of a recommendation to the director and embodied in an administrative order. Except for an administrative consent order that was negotiated and agreed to by both parties, an administrative order is appealable in accordance with subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  Where improperly or untimely submitted, the department may reject a request for reconsideration. The department shall notify the requester in writing that the request has been rejected. 
(3)  Unless the date is mutually extended by both parties, the hearing shall be conducted neither less than ten days nor more than 30 days after mailing of the notice. For cause and at the discretion of the hearings officer, the hearing may be continued for a reasonable time. 
(4)  The hearing for reconsideration shall be an informal consultation and conference where the requester in person, or by counsel, shall present their argument, evidence, data, and proof in connection with the issue(s) being reconsidered. The parties shall not be bound by the Michigan Rules of Evidence. The hearing shall be transcribed and the requester may obtain a copy of the hearing transcript, as appropriate, from the department or from the court reporter. 
(5)  Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the hearings officer shall issue a final decision, which shall contain a recommendation to the director. The hearings officer shall send such decision to the requester by certified mail. 
(6)  Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass-through, interference or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the waters of this state, the filing of a request for reconsideration in accordance with this section shall stay the action by the department that is the subject of the hearing for reconsideration. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 13.2, 2-28-2007)  
Sec. 62-234. - Appeal. 
Within 30 days after receipt of a timely and proper request for an appeal, the department shall notify the applicant in writing regarding the time and place for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures set by the board until rules are promulgated pursuant to section 2-111 of the 1997 Detroit City Charter. In addition: 
(1)  Any request for an appeal must be made within 20 days of the department's action, determination or decision regarding the request for reconsideration or any permit issued in accordance with this article. 
(2)  Where a request either is not filed within the time period contained in this subsection or is improperly made, the action, determination or decision of the director, or the department's authorized representative, is final and any right to appeal may be deemed waived. Where untimely or improperly submitted, the department may reject the request for an appeal, and shall notify the requester in writing that such request has been rejected. 
(3)  The department shall appoint a hearings officer. The hearings officer shall review the evidence, and within 15 days after the close of the hearing shall issue a written recommendation to uphold, modify or reverse the action, determination, or decision of the department. 
(4)  The written recommendation of the hearings officer shall be submitted to the board which shall render a final decision within 30 days of its next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(5)  In accordance with applicable law, the user or the department may appeal any final decision of the board to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(6)  Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass through, interference, or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the waters of this state, the filing of a request for appeal in accordance with this section shall stay the action by the department that is the subject of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 74.002, § 13.3, 2-28-2007) 
Appendix A. 
Aluminum Forming ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 467 Asbestos Manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 427 Battery Manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 461 Builder's Paper and Board Mills ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 431 Canned and Preserved Fruits/Vegetables ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 407 Canned and Preserved Seafood Proc ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 408 Carbon Black Manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 458 Cement Manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 411 Centralized Waste Treatment ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 437 Coal Mining ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 434 Coil Coating ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 465 Copper Forming ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 465 Dairy Products Processing ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 405 Electrical and Electronic Components I & II ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 469 Electroplating ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 413 Explosives Manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 457 Feed Lots ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 412 Ferroalloy Manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 424 Fertilizer Manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 418 Glass Manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 426 Grain Mills ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 406 Gum and Wood Chemicals Mfg ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 454 Hospital ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 460 Ink Formulating ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 447 Inorganic Chemicals Manufacture (I & III) ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 415 Iron and Steel ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 420 Landfills ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 445 Leather Tanning & Finishing ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 425 Meat Products ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 432 Metal Finishing ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 433 Metal Molding and Casting ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 464 Metal Products and Machinery ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 438 Mineral Mining and Processing ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 436 Nonferrous Metals Forming ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 471 Nonferrous Metals Mfg. I ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 421 Nonferrous Metals Mfg. II ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 421 Ore Mining and Dressing ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 440 Organic Chemicals, Plastics, and Synthetic Fibers ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 414 Paint Formulating ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 446 Paving and Roofing Material ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 443 Pesticide Chemicals ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 455 Petroleum Refining ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 419 Pharmaceutical ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 439 Phosphate Manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 422 Photographic ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 459 Plastics Molding and Forming ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 463 Porcelain Enameling ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 466 Pulp, Paper, and Paperboard ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 430 & 431 Rubber Manufacturing ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 428 Soap and Detergent Mfg ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 417 Steam Electric ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 423 Sugar Processing ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 409 Textile Mills ..... 40 C.F.R. Part 410 Timber Products ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 429 Transportation Equipment Cleaning ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 442 Waste Combusters ..... 40 C.F.R. 
Part 444 
Appendix B. 
An Industrial User may elect, in lieu of the Total Phenols Limitation specified in Section 56-3-59.1(b)(2), to substitute specific limitations for each of the eight individual phenolic compounds identified under the Total Phenols Limitation. The following specific limitations, expressed in mg/l, shall be applied in lieu of the Total Phenols Limitation, upon election; 2-Chlorophenol ..... 2.0 mg/l 4-Chlorophenol ..... 2.0 mg/l 4-Chloro-3-methylphenol ..... 1.0 mg/l 2,4-Dichlorophenol ..... 5.5 mg/l 2,4-Dinitrophenol ..... 2.0 mg/l 4-Methylphenol ..... 5.0 mg/l 4-Nitrophenol ..... 15.0 mg/l Phenol ..... 14.0 mg/l 
Following election, the wastewater discharge permit shall be modified to incorporate these substituted parameters and an Industrial User shall be responsible for monitoring and reporting compliance with these parameters. 
Appendix C. Interim Discharge Limitations 
No user shall discharge wastewater containing any of the following pollutants in excess of the following interim pollutant discharge limitations: 
(1)  Compatible Pollutants: 
a.  Any Fats, Oil or Grease (FOG) in concentrations greater than 1,500 mg/l based on an average of all samples collected within a 24 hour period. 
b.  Any Total Suspended Solids (TSS) in concentrations greater than 7,500 mg/l. 
c.  Any Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) in concentrations greater than 7,500 mg/l. 
d.  Any Phosphorus (P) in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l. 
Unless otherwise stated, all limitations are based upon samples collected over an operating period representative of a User's discharge, and in accordance with 40 CFR Part 146. 
(2)  Non-Compatible Pollutants. 
Cadmium (Cd) 1.0 mg/l 
(Ord. No. 74-002, App. A—C, 2-28-2007)  
Chapter 66 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 22; wetland and watercourse protection, § 22-131 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 34; boats in parks, § 34-47; swimming, bathing or wading in parks, § 34-48; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 46; zoning, app. B. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 66-1—66-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATERCRAFT SAFETY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Marine safety, MCL 324.80101 et seq.; local regulation of marine safety, MCL 324.80108 et seq. 
 
Sec. 66-31. - Definitions. 
The definitions in sections 80101 through 80104 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.80101—324.80104) apply to this article. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. This section does not apply to section 66-33 or 66-38. 
Navigable waters includes all lakes, ponds, streams, lagoons, canals or other waters capable of navigation within the territorial limits of the township. 
(Ord. No. 22, § 1, 6-15-1962; Ord. No. 38, § I, 7-9-1975; Ord. No. 49, § I, 3-14-1979; Ord. No. 54, § I, 5-14-1980; Ord. No. 57, § I, 5-10-1982) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 66-32. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to prohibit the running of racing or exhibition boats muffled or unmuffled during any race or regatta operating under the provisions of section 80164 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.80164). 
(Ord. No. 22, § 11, 6-15-1962)  
Sec. 66-33. - Areas where boats prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. Words and phrases used in this section shall be construed and have the same meanings as those words and phrases defined in sections 80101—80104 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.80101—324.80104). 
(b)  Prohibited areas. Areas where boats are prohibited are as follows: 
(1)  Davis Lake. On the waters of Davis Lake, Section 28, Town 5 North, Range 10 East, Oxford Township, Oakland County, it is unlawful to operate a motorboat. Any person found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this subsection shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or confinement in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both, in the discretion of the court, plus costs of prosecution. 
(2)  R281.763.55: Manitou Lake; operation of vessel powered by motor; rule 55. On the waters of Manitou Lake, Sections 34 and 35, T5N, R10E, Oxford Township, and sections 2 and 3, T4N, R10E, Orion Township, Oakland County, it is unlawful to operate a vessel powered by a motor except an electric motor. Violations of this subsection are a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00 together with costs of prosecution or imprisonment in the county jail or such other place of detention as the court may prescribe, for a period not to exceed 90 days, or said fine, costs of prosecution, and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court. 
(3)  Regulation No. 63, Oakland County, R281.763.65: Indianwood Lake; operation of vessel powered by motor; rule 65. On the waters of Indianwood Lake, Sections 3 and 4, T4N, R10E, Orion Township, and Section 34, T5N, R10E, Oxford Township, Oakland County, it is unlawful to operate a vessel powered by a motor except an electric motor. Violations of this subsection are a misdemeanor may be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00 together with costs of prosecution or imprisonment in the county jail or such other place of detention as the court may prescribe, for a period not to exceed 90 days, or said fine, costs of prosecution, and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court. 
(4)  Regulation No. 63, Oakland County WC-63-92-002 Fish Lake and Pine Lake; electric motor only. On the waters of Fish Lake and Pine Lake, Sections 30 and 31, T5N, R9E, Charter Township of Oxford, Oakland County, it is unlawful to operate a vessel powered by a motor except an electric motor. Violations of this subsection are a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00 together with costs of prosecution or imprisonment in the county jail or such other place of detention as the court may prescribe, for a period not to exceed 90 days, or said fine, costs of prosecution, and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 38A, §§ I, II, IV, 7-9-1975; Ord. of 9-10-1975; Ord. No. 49, §§ I, II, IV, 3-14-1979; Ord. No. 57, §§ I, II, IV, 5-10-1982; Ord. No. 87, §§ I, III, 11-4-1992)  
Sec. 66-34. - Vessel license. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by state law, a person shall not operate or give permission for the operation of a vessel of any length on navigable waters unless the fees prescribed by law for the vessel are paid, the certificate of number assigned to the vessel is on board and is in full force and effect, and, except for the following, the identifying number and decal are displayed on each side of the forward half of the vessel in accordance with this section and the rules promulgated by the state: 
(1)  A decal and identifying numbers for a wooden hull and historic vessel as that term is defined in section 80124 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.80124) may be displayed in the manner described in section 80126(2) of such act (MCL 324.80126). 
(2)  A decal for an inflatable boat may be displayed on the transom of the boat. 
(b)  If a vessel is actually numbered in another state of principal use in accordance with a federally approved numbering system, it is in compliance with the numbering requirements of the state while it is temporarily being used in this township. This subsection applies to a vessel for which a valid temporary certificate is issued to the vessel's owner by the issuing authority of the state in which the vessel is principally used. 
(c)  If a vessel is removed to this state as the new state of principal use, a number awarded by any other issuing authority is valid for not more than 60 days before numbering is required by this state. 
(Ord. No. 22, § 2, 6-15-1962)  
Sec. 66-35. - Careful operation required; speed; interference with others. 
A person operating or propelling a vessel upon navigable waters shall operate it in a careful and prudent manner and at such a rate of speed so as not to endanger unreasonably the life or property of any person. A person shall not operate any vessel at a rate of speed greater than will permit him, in the exercise of reasonable care, to bring the vessel to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. A person shall not operate a vessel in a manner so as to interfere unreasonably with the lawful use by others of any waters. 
(Ord. No. 22, § 4, 6-15-1962)  
Sec. 66-36. - Reckless operation. 
(a)  If a person carelessly and heedlessly operates a vessel upon navigable waters in disregard of the rights or safety of others, without due caution and circumspection, or at a rate of speed or in a manner that endangers or is likely to endanger a person or property, that person is guilty of an offense. 
(b)  If a person, while being towed on water skis, a water sled, a surfboard, or a similar contrivance upon navigable waters, carelessly and heedlessly navigates, steers, or controls himself in disregard of the rights or safety of others or without due caution and circumspection and in a manner that endangers or is likely to endanger a person or property, then that person is guilty of an offense. 
(c)  Upon a person's conviction under this section, the court may issue an order prohibiting that person from operating a vessel on navigable waters for a period of not more than two years. Upon a person's subsequent conviction under this section, the court shall order that person to participate in and complete a marine safety educational program approved by the state. An order issued pursuant to this subsection is in addition to any other penalty. 
(Ord. No. 22, § 4, 6-15-1962)  
Sec. 66-37. - Speed near shore. 
A person shall not operate a motorboat on navigable waters at a speed greater than slow—no wake speed or the minimum speed necessary for the motorboat to maintain forward movement when within 100 feet of the shoreline where the water depth is less than three feet, as determined by vertical measurement, except in navigable channels not otherwise posted. 
(Ord. No. 22, § 5, 6-15-1962)  
Sec. 66-38. - Speed limits. 
(a)  Regulation No. 63, Oakland County, R281.763.58: Stringy Lakes (Tan, Clear, Squaw, Second, Spring, Cedar and Long); watercraft speed limit; rule 58. 
(1)  Definitions. All words and phrases used in this subsection (a) shall be construed and have the same meanings as those words and phrases defined in sections 80101—80104 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.80101—324.80104). 
(2)  Prohibition. On the waters of Stringy Lakes, Sections 28 and 29, T5N, R10E, Oxford Township, Oakland County, it is unlawful at any time to operate a vessel in excess of 40 miles per hour (64 kilometers per hour). 
(3)  Penalty. Violations of this subsection (a) are a misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00 together with the costs of prosecution or imprisonment in the county jail or such other place of detention as the court may prescribe, for a period not to exceed 90 days, or such fine, costs of prosecution and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court. 
(b)  Regulation No. 63, Oakland County, WC-63-96-001: Squaw Lake (lagoon) and Mickelson Lake (channel); slow—no wake speed. 
(1)  On the waters of the Squaw Lake (lagoon) and Mickelson Lake (channel), beginning at the mouth of the Squaw Lake (lagoon), thence west to the connecting canal of Mickelson Canal to the mouth of Mickelson Lake, Township 5 North, Range 10 East, Section 29, Oxford Township, Oakland County, it is unlawful for the operator of a vessel to exceed a slow—no wake speed. 
(2)  The boundaries of the area described in subsection (b)(1) of this section shall be marked with signs and with buoys. All buoys must be placed as provided in a permit issued by the Department of Natural Resources and be in conformance with the State Uniform Waterway Marking System. 
(Ord. No. 54, §§ I, II, IV, 5-14-1980; Ord. No. 96, § I, 7-10-1996)  
Sec. 66-39. - Operation of vessels by children. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d) of this section, a person less than 12 years of age shall not operate a motorboat on navigable waters unless all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  He is under the direct supervision of a person on board the motorboat who is 16 years of age or older. 
(2)  The motorboat he operates is powered by a motor or motors totaling no more than 35 horsepower. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d) of this section, a person 12 through 15 years of age may operate a motorboat on navigable waters only if that person complies with either of the following: 
(1)  He is accompanied by at least one person 16 years of age or older. 
(2)  He is in possession of a boating safety certificate issued after he has satisfactorily completed a state-approved course in boating safety. 
(c)  A person 12 through 15 years of age operating a motorboat pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section shall present the boating safety certificate issued to him upon the demand of any peace officer. 
(d)  This section does not apply to the operation of a motorboat that is powered by a motor or motors totaling no more than six horsepower. 
(Ord. No. 22, § 6, 6-15-1962)  
Sec. 66-40. - Littering. 
No person shall throw, place or otherwise discard any bottle, box, paper, garbage, rubbish or similar objects or any type of unsanitary matter, material or fluid into or upon any navigable waters. 
(Ord. No. 22, § 7, 6-15-1962)  
Sec. 66-41. - Water skis, aquaplanes and similar devices. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person shall not operate a vessel on navigable waters if he is towing or otherwise assisting a person on water skis or on a water sled, aquaplane, surfboard, or other similar contrivance unless a person capable of communicating to the vessel operator the condition and needs of the person being towed or assisted is on board the vessel and positioned to observe the person being towed or assisted. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to vessels used by duly constituted ski schools in the giving of instructions or to vessels used in sanctioned ski tournaments, competitions, expositions, or trials. Vessels described in this subsection shall be equipped with a 170-degree wide-angle rearview mirror affixed in a manner that will permit the operator to observe the progress of the person being towed. 
(c)  This section does not apply to motorboats less than 16 feet in length actually operated by the person being towed and so constructed as to be incapable of carrying the operator in or on the motorboat. 
(d)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to a vessel operator who is towing a person preparing for a specific water ski tournament if all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The vessel operator is certified as provided in section 80152(5) of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.80152(5)). 
(2)  The person being towed is certified as provided in section 80152(6) of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.80152(6)). 
(3)  Towing is conducted so that, on average, not more than one vessel approaches within 300 feet of the towing vessel during any five-minute period. 
(4)  The vessel is equipped with all of the following: 
a.  A center-mounted tow pylon. 
b.  A large clear rearview mirror capable of allowing the vessel operator to distinguish hand signals at a distance of 75 feet. 
c.  Markings that identify the vessel as a vessel that is being operated in conformance with this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 22, §§ 8, 9, 6-15-1962)  
Sec. 66-42. - Noise. 
(a)  Subject to subsection (b) of this section, a person shall not operate a motorboat on navigable waters unless the motorboat is equipped and maintained with an effective muffler or underwater exhaust system that does not produce sound levels in excess of 90 dB(A) when subjected to a stationary sound level test as prescribed by SAE J2005 or a sound level in excess of 75 dB(A) when subjected to a shoreline sound level measurement procedure as described by SAE J1970. The operator of a motorboat shall present the motorboat for a sound level test as prescribed by SAE J2005 upon the request of a peace officer. If a motorboat is equipped with more than one motor or engine, the test shall be performed with all motors or engines operating. To determine whether a person is violating this subsection, a peace officer may measure sound levels pursuant to procedures prescribed in SAE J1970, issued 1991-92. 
(b)  If the state has established by rule a motorboat sound level test and set a maximum decibel level permitted for motorboat operation that replace the tests and maximum decibel levels permitted under subsection (a) of this section, all of the following apply: 
(1)  A person shall not operate a motorboat on navigable waters if the motorboat produces sound levels that exceed the maximum decibel level established under this subsection. 
(2)  The operator of a motorboat shall present the motorboat for the sound level test established pursuant to this subsection upon the request of a peace officer. 
(3)  A motorboat equipped with more than one motor or engine shall be tested with all motors or engines operating. 
(c)  A person shall not manufacture, sell, or offer for sale a motorboat for use on the waters of this state unless that motorboat is equipped and maintained with an effective muffler or underwater exhaust system that complies with the applicable sound levels permitted under subsection (a) or (b) of this section. 
(d)  Subsections (a) and (b) of this section do not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  A motorboat tuning up or testing for or participating in official trials for speed records or a sanctioned race conducted pursuant to a permit issued by an appropriate unit of government. 
(2)  A motorboat being operated by a boat or marine engine manufacturer for the purpose of testing or development. 
(3)  A motorboat that qualifies as an historic vessel as defined by state law. 
(e)  As used in this section, the term "dB(A)" means decibels on the "A" scale on a sound meter having characteristics of a general purpose sound meter as defined by American National Standards Institute S1.4-1983. 
(f)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days and a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00. Additionally, before putting the motorboat back in use, a person who violates this section is required to install an effective muffler or underwater exhaust system that meets the requirements of this section on the motorboat in violation at his expense. 
(Ord. No. 22, §§ 10, 11, 6-15-1962)  
APPENDIX A - FRANCHISES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 14; environment, ch. 22; electric and gas supply franchises, § 42-31 et seq.; cable communications franchises, § 54-31 et seq.; zoning, app. B. 
 
ARTICLE I. - CONSUMERS POWER GAS FRANCHISE[2] 
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF OXFORD 
COUNTY OF OAKLAND 
STATE OF MICHIGAN 
ORDINANCE NO. 72 
CONSUMERS POWER COMPANY GAS FRANCHISE ORDINANCE 
An ordinance, granting to Consumers Power Company, its successors and assigns, the right, power and authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and services on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges and other public places, and to do a local gas business in the Charter Township of Oxford, Oakland County, Michigan for a period of 30 years. 
The Charter Township of Oxford, Oakland County, Michigan ordains: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this article is Ordinance No. 72, as adopted on July 12, 1989. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
Section 1. - Grant term. 
The Charter Township of Oxford, Oakland County, Michigan, hereby grants to the Consumers Power Company, a Michigan corporation, its successors and assigns, hereinafter called the "grantee," the right, power and authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and services on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges and other public places, and to do a local gas business in the Charter Township of Oxford, Oakland County, Michigan.  
Section 2. - Consideration. 
In consideration of the rights, power and authority hereby granted, said grantee shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof.  
Section 3. - Conditions. 
No highway, street, alley, bridge or other public place used by said grantee shall be obstructed longer than necessary during the work of construction or repair, and shall be restored to the same order and condition as when said work was commenced. All of grantee's pipes and mains shall be so placed in the highways and other public places as not to unnecessarily interfere with the use thereof for highway purposes.  
Section 4. - Hold harmless. 
Said grantee shall at all times keep and save the charter township free and harmless from all loss, costs and expense to which it may be subject by reason of the negligent construction and maintenance of the structures and equipment hereby authorized. In case any action is commenced against the charter township upon account of the permission herein given, said grantee shall, upon notice, defend the township and save it free and harmless from all loss, cost and damage arising out of such negligent construction and maintenance.  
Section 5. - Extensions. 
Said grantee shall construct and extend its gas distribution system within said charter township, and shall furnish gas to applicants residing therein in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations.  
Section 6. - Franchise not exclusive. 
The rights, power and authority herein granted, are not exclusive. Either manufactured or natural gas may be furnished hereunder.  
Section 7. - Rates. 
Said grantee shall be entitled to charge the inhabitants of said Charter Township of Oxford for gas furnished therein, the rates as approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission, to which commission or its successors authority and jurisdiction to fix and regulate gas rates and rules regulating such service in said charter township, are hereby granted for the term of this franchise. Such rates and rules shall be subject to review and change at any time upon petition therefor being made by either said charter township, acting by its township board or by said grantee.  
Section 8. - Revocation. 
The franchise granted by this ordinance is subject to revocation upon 60 days' written notice by the party desiring such revocation.  
Section 9. - Michigan Public Service Commission, jurisdiction. 
Said grantee shall, as to all other conditions and elements of service not herein fixed, be and remain subject to the reasonable rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission or its successors, applicable to gas service in said charter township.  
Section 10. - Repealer. 
This ordinance, when accepted and published as herein provided, shall repeal and supersede the provisions of the ordinance adopted on December 9, 1989, entitled: 
An ordinance, granting to Consumers Power Company, its successors and assigns, the right, power and authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and services on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges, and other public places, and to do a local gas business in the Township of Oxford, Oakland County, Michigan, for a period of 30 years, and amendments, if any, to such ordinance whereby a gas franchise was granted to Consumers Power Company.  
Section 11. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall take effect upon the day after the date of publication thereof, provided however, it shall cease and by [be] of no effect after 30 days from its adoption unless within said period the grantee shall accept the same in writing filed with the township clerk. Upon acceptance and publication hereof, this ordinance shall constitute a contract between said charter township and said grantee. 
We hereby certify that the foregoing ordinance was duly enacted by the Township Board of the Charter Township of Oxford, Oakland County, Michigan, on the 12th day of July, 1989. 
Moved By: Jacobsen       Supported By: Foster 
Ayes: MacGuire, Sanderson, Clark, Fitchena, Foster, Sera, Jacobsen. 
Nayes: None 
Absent: None 
Effective Date July 20, 1989 
ADOPTED at a regular meeting of the Charter Township of Oxford Board of Trustees held on the 12th day of July, 1989. 
	_____
Rose Ann MacGuire, Supervisor 
Charter Township of Oxford 
	_____
Clara J. Sanderson, CMC, Clerk 
Charter Township of Oxford 
 
STATE OF MICHIGAN 	) 
	) 
COUNTY OF OAKLAND 	) 
 
I, Clara J. Sanderson, Township Clerk of the Charter Township of Oxford, Oakland County, Michigan, do hereby certify that the annexed is a true and correct copy of all of the proceedings of the Township Board of said Charter Township, with reference to the granting of a franchise to Consumers Power Company. 
I further certify that the within acceptance of said franchise is a true and correct copy of the acceptance duly filed in my office; that I have compared the within copies with the original records in my office, and that the same are true and correct transcripts therefrom. 
I further certify that the franchise ordinance was duly published, as appears by proof thereof on file in my office and that all of said proceedings were regular and in accordance with all legal requirements. 
	_____
Clara J. Sanderson, CMC, Clerk 
Charter Township of Oxford 
 
CLERK'S CERTIFICATION OF PUBLICATION 
I, Clara J. Sanderson, CMC, duly elected Clerk for the Charter Township of Oxford, certify that the foregoing ordinance was published in the Oxford Leader, a newspaper published in the County in which the Charter Township of Oxford is located, on the 19th day of July, 1989. 
	_____
Clara J. Sanderson, CMC, Clerk 
Charter Township of Oxford 
 
Dated: July 20, 1989  
APPENDIX B - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The township's zoning ordinance is not published in this Code. Copies of the zoning ordinance may be obtained from the township. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance, pertaining to zoning, including, but not limited to, the basic zoning ordinance, ordinances rezoning property or amending the zoning map and ordinances promulgating zoning text amendments saved from repeal, § 1-11(15); buildings and building regulations, ch. 10; environment, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 42; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 46; telecommunications, ch. 54; waterways, ch. 66; franchises, app. A. 

Charter Township of Oxford i Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ZONING ORDINANCE
Charter Township of Oxford,
Oakland County,
Michigan
Adopted: March 14, 2007
Effective: March 29, 2007
(With Amendments through July 2019)
Township Board Planning Commission
William Dunn, Supervisor Mike Young, Chair
Curtis W. Wright, Clerk Thomas Berger, Vice Chair
Joseph G. Ferrari, Treasurer Ed Hunwick, Secretary
Jack Curtis Jack Curtis
Patti Durr Meg Knauf
Elgin Nichols Jon Nold
Margie Payne Michael Spisz
Township Staff
Deanna Cushing, Deputy Supervisor
Charter Township of Oxford ii Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
[This Page Intentionally Left Blank]
Charter Township of Oxford iii Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article/Section Page No.
Title Page i
Table of Contents ii
Article 1 Title, Purpose, Enabling Authority and Conditions of Enactment 1-1
Section 1.1 Title 1-1
Section 1.2 Purpose 1-1
Section 1.3 Enabling Authority 1-2
Section 1.4 Scope and Construction of Regulations 1-2
Section 1.5 Relationship to Other Ordinances, Regulations and Agreements 1-2
Section 1.6 Vested Right 1-2
Section 1.7 Validity and Severability 1-3
Section 1.8 Repealer 1-3
Section 1.9 Effective Date 1-3
Section 1.10 Adoption 1-3
Article 2 Rules of Construction and Definitions 2-1
Section 2.1 Rules Applying to Text 2-1
Section 2.2 Definitions 2-2
Article 3 Zoning District Regulations 3-1
Section 3.1 Establishment of Zoning Districts 3-1
Section 3.2 Official Zoning Map 3-1
Section 3.3 Application of Zoning District Regulations 3-2
Section 3.4 Intent of Districts 3-4
Section 3.5 Schedule of Use Regulations 3-7
Section 3.6 Determination of Similar Uses 3-27
Section 3.7 Schedule of District Regulations 3-28
Section 3.8 Additional Regulations 3-31
Article 4 Special Land Uses 4-1
Section 4.1 Intent 4-1
Section 4.2 Authority 4-1
Section 4.3 Application 4-1
Section 4.4 Procedures 4-1
Section 4.5 Findings of Fact 4-2
Section 4.6 Conditions and Safeguards 4-3
Section 4.7 Duration of Approval 4-3
Charter Township of Oxford iv Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Section 4.8 Reapplication 4-4
Section 4.9 Appeals 4-4
Article 5 Use Regulations 5-1
Section 5.1 Adult Regulated Uses 5-1
Section 5.2 Agribusiness 5-4
Section 5.3 Automobile Service Stations, Convenience Marts, and Repair Establishments 5-5
Section 5.4 Automobile Washes 5-7
Section 5.5 Bed and Breakfast Establishments 5-7
Section 5.6 Campgrounds, Recreational Vehicle Parks 5-9
Section 5.7 Caretaker’s Quarters 5-11
Section 5.8 Cement and Asphalt Mixing Plants 5-12
Section 5.9 Cemeteries 5-12
Section 5.10 Churches, Houses of Worship 5-13
Section 5.11 Commercial Indoor Recreation 5-13
Section 5.12 Commercial Outdoor Recreation 5-14
Section 5.13 Community Building or Lodge Hall 5-15
Section 5.14 Convalescent or Nursing Home 5-16
Section 5.15 Day Care Facilities, State Licensed 5-16
Section 5.16 Foster Care Facilities, State Licensed 5-18
Section 5.17 Golf Courses, Country Clubs, and Swim Clubs 5-19
Section 5.18 Heavy Vehicle and Equipment Repair Establishment 5-20
Section 5.19 Horse Riding Stables and Sales Barns 5-21
Section 5.20 Hospitals 5-22
Section 5.21 Junk Yard, Auto Salvage, Wrecking Yard, and Recycling Operations 5-22
Section 5.22 Kennels 5-25
Section 5.23 Landfills, Dumping and Sewage Disposal Facilities 5-26
Section 5.24 Large-Format Retail Establishments 5-30
Section 5.25 Mining of Gravel, Sand and/or Other Minerals 5-34
Section 5.26 Motel or Hotel 5-42
Section 5.27 Ponds 5-42
Section 5.28 Private Schools 5-43
Section 5.29 Rooming House or Boarding House 5-43
Section 5.30 Senior Housing Apartments 5-43
Section 5.31 Shooting Ranges, Gun Clubs 5-44
Section 5.32 Wireless Communication Facilities 5-46
Section 5.33 Yard Waste Composting Facilities 5-59
Article 6 General Provisions 6-1
Section 6.1 Application 6-1
Section 6.2 Accessory Buildings and Structures 6-1
Section 6.3 Agricultural Exemption 6-3
Section 6.4 Building Grades 6-3
Charter Township of Oxford v Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Section 6.5 Buildings to Be Moved or Demolished 6-3
Section 6.6 Drive-In/Drive-Thru Businesses 6-4
Section 6.7 Dwellings in Non-Residential Districts 6-4
Section 6.8 Essential Services 6-4
Section 6.9 Garage Sales, Rummage Sales and Similar Activities 6-5
Section 6.10 Home Occupations 6-5
Section 6.11 Impact Assessment 6-6
Section 6.12 One Lot, One Building 6-8
Section 6.13 Open Air Businesses/Outdoor Sales and Display of Products 6-8
Section 6.14 Open Space Preservation 6-9
Section 6.15 Seasonal and Temporary Outdoor Sales Operations 6-13
Section 6.16 Structural Damage 6-15
Section 6.17 Television Satellite Antennas 6-15
Section 6.18 Temporary Dwellings and Construction Offices 6-16
Section 6.19 Temporary Sales Offices 6-17
Section 6.20 Trash 6-21
Section 6.21 Unlawful Buildings, Structures, Site Designs and Uses 6-22
Section 6.22 Unsafe Buildings 6-22
Section 6.23 Water Supply and Sewage Disposal 6-22
Section 6.24 Keeping of Farm Animals 6-22
Section 6.25 Wind Energy Conversion Systems 6-23
Article 7 Landscaping, Screening, Fences and Walls 7-1
Section 7.1 Contents 7-1
Section 7.2 Intent and Scope of Requirements 7-1
Section 7.3 Specific Landscaping Requirements for Zoning Districts 7-5
Section 7.4 General Landscaping Standards 7-10
Section 7.5 Standards for Landscape Materials 7-17
Section 7.6 Installation and Maintenance 7-19
Section 7.7 Treatment of Existing Plant Material and Landscape Improvements 7-21
Section 7.8 Modifications to Landscape Requirements 7-21
Section 7.9 Landscape Plan Submission Requirements 7-21
Section 7.10 Fence and Wall Standards 7-22
Article 8 Access, Circulation, Parking and Loading 8-1
Section 8.1 Required Road Frontage and Access 8-1
Section 8.2 Visibility at Intersections 8-1
Section 8.3 Access Management Standards 8-2
Section 8.4 Traffic Impact Studies 8-5
Section 8.5 General Off-Street Parking Requirements 8-8
Section 8.6 Off-Street Parking Requirements by Use 8-11
Section 8.7 Off-Street Parking Lot Construction and Operation 8-16
Section 8.8 Parking and Storage of Commercial and Recreational Vehicles 8-18
Section 8.9 Off-Street Loading Requirements 8-20
Charter Township of Oxford vi Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Section 8.10 Safety Paths 8-21
Article 9 Signage 9-1
Section 9.1 Contents 9-1
Section 9.2 Purpose 9-1
Section 9.3 Definitions 9-1
Section 9.4 Signs Prohibited in All Districts 9-2
Section 9.5 Signs Allowed without a Permit 9-4
Section 9.6 Schedule of Sign Regulations 9-7
Section 9.7 Signs in Residential Districts 9-9
Section 9.8 Signs in Non-Residential Districts 9-10
Section 9.9 Billboards 9-17
Section 9.10 Temporary Signs 9-18
Section 9.11 Sign Design Standards 9-19
Section 9.12 Sign Permit Review Process 9-22
Section 9.13 Inspection and Maintenance 9-24
Section 9.14 Non-Conforming Signs 9-24
Section 9.15 Removal of Prohibited Signs in Public Places 9-25
Section 9.16 Removal of Unauthorized Signs from Public Rights-of-Way 9-25
Section 9.17 Appeals 9-26
Article 10 Environmental Provisions 10-1
Section 10.1 Environmental Performance Regulations 10-1
Section 10.2 Exterior Lighting 10-4
Section 10.3 Natural Feature Setback 10-9
Section 10.4 Open Dumping 10-11
Section 10.5 Outdoor Storage 10-12
Section 10.6 Safety 10-13
Article 11 Private Roads 11-1
Section 11.1 Intent 11-1
Section 11.2 General Requirements 11-1
Section 11.3 Design and Construction Standards 11-2
Section 11.4 Review and Approval Process 11-4
Section 11.5 Private Road Easement Agreements 11-7
Section 11.6 Private Road Maintenance Agreements 11-8
Section 11.7 Existing Nonconforming Roads 11-9
Section 11.8 Extension of Existing Private Roads 11-9
Section 11.9 Variances and Appeals 11-10
Section 11.10 Fees 11-10
Charter Township of Oxford vii Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Article 12 Site Plan Review 12-1
Section 12.1 Purpose 12-1
Section 12.2 Site Plan Approval Required 12-1
Section 12.3 Review and Approval Procedures 12-2
Section 12.4 Administrative Review and Approval Procedures for Minor Site Plans 12-10
Section 12.5 Criteria for Site Plan Approval 12-11
Section 12.6 Amendment of Approved Site Plans 12-13
Section 12.7 Modifications During Construction 12-13
Section 12.8 Phasing of Development 12-13
Section 12.9 Performance Guarantees 12-13
Article 13 Condominium Development 13-1
Section 13.1 Intent 13-1
Section 13.2 Applicability 13-1
Section 13.3 Definitions 13-1
Section 13.4 Building Condominiums 13-1
Section 13.5 Site Condominiums 13-2
Section 13.6 Projects Having Both Building and Site Condominium Units 13-4
Section 13.7 Conversion Condominiums 13-4
Section 13.8 Standards for Master Deeds 13-4
Section 13.9 Additional Requirements for Condominium Projects 13-6
Article 14 Planned Unit Development 14-1
Section 14.1 Intent 14-1
Section 14.2 Eligibility Criteria 14-1
Section 14.3 Project Design Standards 14-3
Section 14.4 Density Credit for Exemplary Projects 14-18
Section 14.5 Project Approval Criteria 14-18
Section 14.6 Procedures for Review and Approval 14-19
Section 14.7 Phasing and Commencement of Construction 14-30
Section 14.8 Effect of Approval 14-30
Section 14.9 Modifications to Approved Final PUD Plans 14-31
Section 14.10 Recording of Planning Commission and Township Board Actions 14-33
Section 14.11 Costs Associated with PUD Review 14-33
Article 15 Nonconformities 15-1
Section 15.1 Intent 15-1
Section 15.2 Nonconforming Lots 15-1
Section 15.3 Nonconforming Uses of Land 15-2
Section 15.4 Nonconforming Structures 15-2
Section 15.5 Nonconforming Uses of Structures and Land 15-2
Section 15.6 Repairs and Maintenance 15-3
Charter Township of Oxford viii Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Section 15.7 Uses Allowed as Special Land Uses Not Nonconforming Uses 15-4
Section 15.8 Change of Tenancy of Ownership 15-4
Article 16 Administration and Enforcement 16-1
Section 16.1 Zoning Administrator 16-1
Section 16.2 Ordinance Enforcement Officer 16-2
Section 16.3 Zoning Compliance Permits 16-2
Section 16.4 Building Permits 16-5
Section 16.5 Certificates of Occupancy 16-5
Section 16.6 Compliance with Plans 16-7
Section 16.7 Fees 16-7
Section 16.8 Performance Guarantees 16-8
Section 16.9 Notice of Public Hearing 16-10
Section 16.10 Violations and Penalties 16-12
Section 16.11 Completion of Construction 16-13
Article 17 Zoning Board of Appeals 17-1
Section 17.1 Establishment 17-1
Section 17.2 Membership 17-1
Section 17.3 Meetings 17-2
Section 17.4 Voting 17-2
Section 17.5 Minutes 17-2
Section 17.6 Jurisdiction 17-2
Section 17.7 Appeals 17-2
Section 17.8 Variances 17-3
Section 17.9 Appeals from the Zoning Board of Appeals 17-5
Article 18 Amendment 18-1
Section 18.1 Initiating Amendments 18-1
Section 18.2 Amendment Procedure 18-1
Section 18.3 Information Required 18-1
Section 18.4 Publication 18-2
Section 18.5 Conditional Rezoning 18-3
Article 19 Planning Commission 19-1
Section 19.1 Authority of the Planning Commission 19-1
Section 19.2 Jurisdiction of the Planning Commission 19-1
Section 19-3 Rules of Procedure of the Planning Commission 19-1
Section 19-4 Powers and Duties of the Planning Commission 19-1
Charter Township of Oxford 1-1 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ARTICLE 1
TITLE, PURPOSE, ENABLING AUTHORITY AND CONDITIONS OF ENACTMENT
1.1 Title. This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as “The Charter Township of Oxford Zoning Ordinance.”
1.2 Purpose. The purpose of this Ordinance is to provide in Oxford Charter Township for the establishment of districts which regulate the use of land and structures:
A. To meet the needs of the state's citizens for food, fiber, energy, and other natural resources, places of residence, recreation, industry, trade, service, and other uses of land;
B. To insure that use of the land shall be situated in appropriate locations and relationships;
C. To limit the inappropriate overcrowding of land and congestion of population, transportation systems, and other public facilities;
D. To facilitate adequate and efficient provision for transportation systems, sewage disposal, water, energy, education, recreation, and other public service and facility requirements;
E. And to promote public health, safety, and welfare.
For these purposes, the Board by this Ordinance divides the township into districts of such number, shape, and area as it considers best suited to carry out the act by which this Ordinance is authorized, and to achieve specific land management objectives and avert or solve specific land use problems, including the regulation of growth and development and the establishment of districts in areas subject to damage from flooding or erosion. This Ordinance regulating land development is also adopted for designating or limiting the location, height, number of stories, and size of dwellings, buildings, and structures that may be erected or altered, and the specific uses of such dwellings, buildings and structures; and the maximum number of families which may be housed in buildings, dwellings, and structures, erected or altered. The provisions of this Ordinance are intended to be uniform for each class of land or buildings, dwellings, and structure, throughout each district, but the provisions in one district may differ from those in other districts. The Board does not regulate nor control the drilling, completion, or operation of oil or gas wells, or other wells drilled for oil or gas exploration purposes and shall not have jurisdiction with reference to the issuance of permits for the location, drilling, completion, operation, or abandonment of those wells.
Charter Township of Oxford 1-2 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
1.3 Enabling Authority. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Act 110 of 2006, as amended) Township Planning Act (Act 168 of 1959, as amended), the Natural Resources and Environmental Policy Act (Act 451 of 1994, as amended), and the Mobile Home Commission Act (Act 96 of 1987 as amended). The Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, MCL 125.3101 et seq., as amended at this time or as may be amended in the future, is hereby adopted by reference and is made a part of this Zoning Ordinance just as if said Act, as amended at this time or may be amended in the future, were repeated word-for-word herein.
1.4 Scope and Construction of Regulations.
A. This Ordinance shall be liberally construed in such manner as to best implement its purpose. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, the requirements shall be held to be the minimum for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare.
B. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered, and no new use or change shall be made of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except as permitted by the provisions of this Ordinance.
C. Where a condition imposed by a provision of this Ordinance upon the use of any lot, building, or structure is conflicting with a condition imposed by any other provision of this Ordinance, or by the provision of an ordinance adopted under any other law, the provision which is more restrictive shall govern.
D. Nothing within this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent compliance with an order by the appropriate authority to correct, improve, strengthen, or restore to a safe or healthy condition any part of a building or premises declared unsafe or unhealthy.
1.5 Relationship to Other Ordinances, Regulations or Agreements. This Ordinance is not intended to abrogate or annul any ordinance, rule, regulation, permit, easement, covenant or other private agreement previously adopted, issued or entered into and not in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance.
However, where the regulations of this Ordinance are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements that other such ordinances, rules, regulations, permits, easements, covenants or other private agreements, the requirements of this Ordinance shall govern.
1.6 Vested Right. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent vested right in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification or permissible activity therein. Any such use, district, zoning classification or activity is hereby declared to be subject to subsequent
Charter Township of Oxford 1-3 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
amendment, change or modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
1.7 Validity and Severability. This Ordinance and the various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections and clauses it contains are hereby declared to be severable. Should any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause be declared unconstitutional or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction for any reason, such judgment shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
Furthermore, should the application of any provision of this Ordinance to a particular property, building or structure be adjudged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to any other property, building or structure in the Township, unless otherwise stated in the judgment.
1.8 Repealer. The Zoning Ordinance text and map adopted by Oxford Charter Township on November 2, 1988, and all amendments thereto, shall be repealed on the effective date of this Ordinance. The repeal of the above Ordinance and its amendments does not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired, or any liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time enforced, prosecuted or inflicted.
1.9 Effective Date. The effective date of this Ordinance shall depend on whether the Ordinance is requested to be submitted to the Township electors for approval. A notice of intent to make such a request must be filed with the Township Clerk within 7 days of publication of this Ordinance. If such a notice has not been timely submitted, this Ordinance shall take effect on the eighth day following publication. If a notice of intent is timely filed, a petition requesting the submission of this Ordinance to the Township electors must be filed with the Township Clerk within 30 days of the publication. If such a petition has been timely filed, this Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon the final determination by the Township Clerk that it has been approved by a majority of the registered electors in the Township voting thereon. A petition requesting submission of this Ordinance to a vote of the electors must be signed by a number of registered Township electors that is not less than 15% of the total vote cast for all candidates for governor at the last preceding general election at which a governor was elected.
1.10 Adoption. We hereby certify that this Ordinance is a true copy of an ordinance as enacted by the Township Board of Trustees on the 14th day of March, 2007.
A. Date of Public Hearing held by Planning Commission: December 14, 2006.
B. Date of Planning Commission Resolution to Recommend Adoption of Zoning Ordinance Text and Map to Township Board: December 14, 2006.
C. Date of Township Board Resolution to Adopt Zoning Ordinance Text and Map: March 14, 2007.
Charter Township of Oxford 1-4 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
D. Date Ordinance Shall Take Effect: March 29, 2007.
I, Clara J. Sanderson, Clerk of Oxford Charter Township, Oakland County, Michigan, hereby certify that notice of adoption of this Ordinance was published pursuant to the provisions of Section 103 of the Municipal Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended) in a newspaper of general circulation in Oxford Charter Township on the 21st day of March, 2007.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-1 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ARTICLE 2
RULES OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEFINITIONS
2.1 Rules Applying to Text. The following rules of construction apply to the text of this Ordinance:
A. The particular shall control the general.
B. Words used in the present text shall include the future.
C. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural shall include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
D. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive.
E. All measurements shall be to the nearest integer, unless otherwise specified herein.
F. The phrase “used for” includes “arranged for,” “designed for,” “intended for,” “occupied for,” and “maintained for.”
G. The word “building” includes the word “structure.” The word “build” includes the words “erect” and “construct.” A “building” or “structure” includes any part thereof.
H. The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any similar entity.
I. Whenever a word or term defined herein appears in the text of this Ordinance, its meaning shall be construed as defined herein. Words or terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them.
J. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two of more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction “and,” “or,” or “either/or,” the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:
1. “And” indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply.
2. “Or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singularly or in any combination.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-2 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3. “Either/or” indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singularly but not in combination.
K. Catch words and catch lines shall in no way by their presence or absence limit or affect the meaning of this Ordinance.
L. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, where an illustration accompanies any item within this Ordinance, the written text shall have precedence over said illustrations.
2.2 Definitions. Whenever used in this Ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section:
Accessory Building or Structure. A supplementary building or structure on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal building or buildings or part of the principal building occupied by or devoted exclusively to any accessory use.
Accessory Use. A use normally and naturally incidental to, subordinate to, and devoted exclusively to, the principal use of the land or buildings.
Adult Regulated Uses. Includes all of the following, each of which is regulated in Section 5.1.
1. Adult Book or Supply Store. An establishment having twenty percent (20) or more of its stock-in-trade or its sales devoted to the distribution, display, or storage of books, magazines, and other periodicals and/or photographs, drawings, slides, films, video tapes, recording tapes, and/or novelty items which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
2. Adult Motion Picture Theater. An enclosed building used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein. Such establishment is customarily not open to the public generally, but only to one (1) or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age.
3. Adult Motion Picture Theater, Adult Live Stage Performing Theater. An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein. Such establishment is customarily not open to the public generally, but only to one (1) or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-3 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
4. Adult Cabaret. An establishment which features any of the following: topless dancers and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers, male and/or female impersonators or similar entertainers, or topless and/or bottomless waitpersons or employees, or any other form of nude or partially nude service or entertainment.
5. Brand or Branding. The creation of a permanent mark made on human tissue by burning with a hot iron or other instrument.
6. Specified Anatomical Areas. Specified anatomical areas means and includes any one (1) or more of the following: (a) less than completely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or (b) human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
7. Specified Sexual Activities. Specified sexual activities means and includes any one (1) or more of the following: (a) the fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; (b) human sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including but not limited to intercourse, oral copulation, and sodomy; (c) human masturbation, actual or simulated; (d) human excretory functions as part of, or as related to, any one of the activities described above, and (e) physical violence, bondage, mutilation, or rape, actual or simulated, as part of, or as related to, any of the activities described above.
Agribusiness Use. Uses that are frequently found in agricultural districts that have either a retail character, by virtue of customer and off-street parking characteristics, or an industrial character, by virtue of performance characteristics. Agribusiness uses includes, but is not limited to, pick-your-own farms, cider mills, farmers markets, farm dairies, feedlots and other confined operations and similar uses.
Agriculture. The use of land for tilling of the soil, the raising of tree and field crops, or animal husbandry as a source of income.
Aircraft. As defined in the Michigan Aeronautics Code, any contrivance now known, or hereafter invented, used, or designed for navigation of or flight in the air.
Airport. As defined in the Michigan Aeronautics Code, any location, either on land or water, which is used for the landing and take-off of aircraft, which provides facilities for the shelter, supply or care of aircraft, or for receiving or discharging passengers or cargo, and all appurtenant areas used or suitable for airport buildings or other airport facilities, and all appurtenant rights-of-way, whether heretofore or hereafter established.
Alley. A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting properties and not intended for general traffic circulation.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-4 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Altered. Any change in location or use of a building, or any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, joists, girders, and similar components, or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls, or any change in the type of occupancy. The word "altered" also includes the words "reconstructed" and "alteration".
Animal Definitions.
1. Domestic Pets. Animals such as horses which are kept for pleasure riding purposes and ordinary household pets such as dogs, cats and pot-bellied pigs.
2. Exotic or Wild Animal. Any animal not defined as a farm animal or domestic pet.
3. Farm Animal. Livestock, including beef and dairy cattle, goats, hogs, horses, poultry, sheep, llamas, alpacas and other fur-bearing animals.
Animal Shelter. A building supported by a governmental unit or agency or by a nonprofit corporation where domestic pets or other animals are kept because of requirements of public health officials, loss by owner, neglect or violation of a public law or ordinance.
Antique Shop. A place offering primarily antiques for sale. An antique for the purpose of this Ordinance shall be a work of art, piece of furniture, decorative object, or the like, of or belonging to the past, at least thirty (30) years old. Antique shop does not include “secondhand store.”
Apartment. See Dwelling, Multiple-Family.
Appeal. An entreaty or demand for a hearing and/or review of facts and/or actions.
Arcade. A business establishment whose principal function is the offering for public use of any form of game machine, instrument or apparatus operated by coin, token or similar medium, but not including automatic machines for vending food, soft drinks or tobacco.
Architectural Features. Architectural features of a building shall include cornices, eaves, gutters, belt courses, sills, lintels, bay windows, chimneys, and decorative ornaments.
Area, Building. The total area taken on a horizontal plane at the main grade level of the principal buildings and accessory buildings, including uncovered porches, terraces, and steps.
Automobile Convenience Mart. A place where gasoline, motor oil, lubricants, or other minor accessories are retailed directly to the public on the premises or in
Charter Township of Oxford 2-5 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
combination with the retailing of items typically found in a convenience market, carry-out restaurant or supermarket.
Automobile Dealership. A building or premises used primarily for the sale of new or used automobiles not including farm equipment and recreational vehicles.
Automobile Repair Facility. A place where, with or without the sale of engine fuels, the following services may be carried out: general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair; overall painting and vehicle rust-proofing.
Automobile Service Center. A building or premises used primarily for the sale and installation of major automobile accessories, such as tires, batteries, radios, air conditioners and mufflers, plus such services as brake adjustment, wheel alignment and balancing, but excluding any major mechanical repairs, collision work, undercoating or painting. Sale of gasoline (stored only in approved underground tanks) shall be incidental to the above enumerated activities.
Automobile Service Station. A building or structure designed or used for the retail sale of fuel (stored only in underground tanks), lubricants, air, water and other operating commodities for motor vehicles, aircraft or boats, and including the customary space and facilities for the installation of such commodities on or in such vehicles, and including space for facilities for the storage, minor repair, or servicing, but not including bumping, painting, refinishing, major repair and overhauling, steam cleaning, and rust proofing, (where the primary use of the premises is such), or high-speed washing thereof.
Automobile Wash or Car Wash Establishment. A building, or portion thereof, where self-propelled motor vehicles are washed as a commercial enterprise.
Basement. A space having not more than one-half (1/2) of its height above the average level of the adjoining ground. A basement shall be counted as a story for the purposes of height measurement if the vertical distance between the ceiling and the average level of the adjoining ground is more than five (5) feet (See Figure 1).
Charter Township of Oxford 2-6 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Figure 1
Bed and Breakfast Establishments.
1. Bed and Breakfast Residence. A dwelling unit with not more than two (2) guest rooms where:
a. The owner is the occupant of the dwelling unit and the operator of the bed and breakfast establishment;
b. The operator provides overnight accommodations for less than fourteen (14) days to guests in return for payment; and
c. No kitchen facilities are provided for serving or preparing meals for overnight guests which are separate from those for the residence.
2. Bed and Breakfast Inn. A Single-family dwelling unit with not more than four (4) guest rooms where:
a. The owner is the occupant of the dwelling unit and the operator of the bed and breakfast establishment;
b. The operator provides overnight accommodations for less than fourteen (14) days to guests in return for payment; and
c. No kitchen facilities are provided for serving or preparing meals for overnight guests which are separate from those for the residence.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-7 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3. Bed and Breakfast Hotel. A single-family dwelling unit with not more than eight (8) guest rooms where:
a. The operator of the bed and breakfast establishment is the occupant of the dwelling unit;
b. The operator provides overnight accommodations for less than fourteen (14) days to guests in return for payment; and
c. No kitchen facilities are provided for serving or preparing meals for overnight guests which are separate from those for the residence.
Bedroom. A bedroom is a dwelling room used for or intended to be used solely for sleeping purposes, by human beings.
Berm. A landscaped mound of earth which has been contoured to blend with the surrounding terrain.
Block. The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two (2) nearest intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, lake, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development.
Boarding House. A building other than a hotel, where for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, lodging, or lodging and meals are provided for three (3) or more persons, but not exceeding twenty (20) persons.
Bottomland. The land area of an inland lake or stream that lies below the ordinary high-water mark and that may or may not be covered by water.
Buffer. A landscaped area composed of plant material, wall, berm, or combination thereof, established and/or maintained to provide visual screening, noise reduction, and transition between conflicting types of land uses.
Buildable Area, or Gross Buildable Area. That portion of the total land area of a site exclusive of required setbacks and adjacent road rights-of-way and/or easements not encumbered by bodies of open water, streams, 100-year floodplains, and wetlands (as defined by Charter Township of Oxford Ordinance No. 80B).
Building. Any structure, temporary or permanent, having one or more floors and a roof, and intended for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, and/or property.
Building, Accessory. See Accessory Building or Structure.
Building, Principal. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-8 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Building, Temporary. A building which is not permanently affixed to the property, and is permitted to exist for a specific reason for a specified period of time.
Building Envelope. The area of a lot which is defined by the minimum setback requirements within which building construction is permitted by the terms of this Ordinance.
Building Height. The vertical distance measured from the grade plane to the highest point of the roof surface if a flat roof; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gables, hip and gambrel roofs. (See Figure 2).
Building Line. A line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum required front setback.
Building Official. The officer or other authority designated by the Township Board to administer and enforce the Building Code, or their properly qualified designee.
Building Permit. Written authority issued by the Building Official in conformity with the provisions of the Building Code.
Building Setback Line. The line formed by the outer surface of a structure or enclosure wall at or with the finished grade or surface of the ground; pertaining to and defining those minimum (building) setback lines which are established, in general, parallel to the front street or right-of-way, and within which setback area no part of a building shall project or be located, except as otherwise provided for by this Ordinance.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-9 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Figure 2 – Building Height
Bulk. The volume of a structure in cubic feet as determined by the dimensions taken from the outer surfaces of the exterior of the structure.
Bulk Propane Sales and Dispensing Stations: Any area of land, including structures and fixed equipment thereon, used for dispensing liquid propane (LP) gas or other similar alternative fuels into portable containers/cylinders or used for the wholesale storage and/or distribution of such fuels. This definition shall not include accessory cylinder exchange cages with off-site refill.
Caliper. American Nursery and Landscape Association standard for measurement of trunk size of deciduous tree nursery stock. Caliper of the trunk shall be taken 6" above the ground up to and including 4" caliper trees, and 12" above the ground
Charter Township of Oxford 2-10 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
for larger sizes. Plant materials other than deciduous trees shall be measured in accordance with the American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1).
Campground. The temporary short-term resort or recreational uses and activities which take place on a lot or parcel of land in accordance with Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978, Part 125 (MCL 333.12501 et seq., MSA 14.15(12501) et seq.), and the administrative rules promulgated under such Act as administered by the county, district or state public health departments.
Caretaker's Quarters. A dwelling unit for a watchman, caretaker or custodian, which is clearly incidental and accessory to the permitted principal use(s) on the parcel.
Church. A building wherein persons assemble regularly for religious worship, and is maintained and operated by an organized religious body, as well as those structures within a religious complex that, while ancillary to the central location of worship, support regular assembly for worship. Churches include, but shall not be limited to, temples, synagogues and mosques.
Clinic, Medical. An establishment where human patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by a group of physicians, dentists or similar professionals. A medical clinic may incorporate customary laboratories and pharmacies incidental to or necessary for its operation or to the service of its patients, but may not include facilities for overnight patient care or major surgery.
Clinic, Veterinary. An institution which is licensed by the appropriate agencies to provide for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick or injured animals, including those in need of medial or surgical attention. A veterinary clinic may include customary pens and cages for the overnight boarding of animals and such related facilities as laboratories, testing services and offices.
Club or Lodge. An organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of agriculture, sports, arts, science, literature, politics or the like, but not for profit, and generally open only to members and not the general public.
Commercial Use. A use of property in connection with the purchase, sale, barter, display, or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise, or services, and the maintenance or operation of offices.
Commercial Vehicles or Equipment. Commercial vehicles or equipment shall include, but shall not be limited to, tractors (excluding lawn tractors), bulldozers, earth carriers, drag lines, cranes, back hoes, dump trucks, stake trucks, flatbed trucks, panel trucks, cube vans, wreckers, septic tank pumpers, semi-tractors, tanker trucks, well-drilling rigs, welding trucks, semi-trailers, buses, and any other type of commercial or construction equipment, as well as any other motor vehicles not customarily used for passenger transport and/or having a payload of three (3) tons or greater.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-11 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Communication Tower. For purposes herein, the term “communication tower(s)” shall mean and include monopole, lattice, guyed or similar towers attached directly to the ground or to another structure, used for the transmission or reception of radio, telephone, television, microwave, digital or any other form of telecommunication signal.
Condominium. A building or lot governed under Act 59, Public Acts of 1978, as amended. The following condominium terms shall apply in the application of this Ordinance:
1. Building Condominium. A condominium project in which two (2) or more condominium units share a common wall, roof and/or foundation, and/or in which condominium units are comprised of individual buildings and situated within uninterrupted general common elements without limited common elements dedicated to and/or associated with any of the condominium units.
2. Condominium Documents. See Master Deed.
3. Condominium Project. A plan or project consisting of not less than 2 condominium units established in conformance with the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978).
4. Condominium Subdivision Plan. The drawings and information prepared pursuant to section 66 of the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978).
5. Condominium Unit. That portion of the condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed, regardless of whether it is intended for residential, office, industrial, business, recreational, use as a time-share unit, or any other type of use.
6. Contractable Condominium. A condominium project from which any portion of the submitted land or buildings may be withdrawn in accordance with the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978).
7. Conversion Condominium. A condominium project containing condominium units some or all of which were occupied before the filing of a notice of taking reservations under section 71 of the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978).
8. Convertible Area. A unit or a portion of the common elements of the condominium project referred to in the master deed within which additional condominium units or general or limited common elements may be created in accordance with the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978).
9. Co-Owner. A person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust, or other legal entity or any combination of those entities, who owns a condominium unit within the condominium project. Co-owner includes
Charter Township of Oxford 2-12 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
land contract vendees and land contract vendors, except as the recorded master deed provides otherwise.
10. Expandable Condominium. A condominium project to which additional land may be added in accordance with the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978).
11. General Common Elements. The common elements other than the limited common elements.
12. Limited Common Elements. A portion of the common elements reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all of the co-owners.
13. Master Deed. The condominium document recording the condominium project to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the bylaws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan for the project.
14. Mobile Home Condominium Project. A condominium project in which mobile homes, as defined in section 2 of P.A. 96 of 1987, are intended to be located upon separate sites which constitute individual condominium lots or units.
15. Site Condominium. A condominium project in which each building alone is considered a condominium unit and is surrounded by appurtenant limited common elements, or in which individual units are lots.
16. Site Condominium Lot. A condominium unit within a site condominium project, together with any appurtenant limited common elements.
Conflicting Land Use. Any incompatible land uses that abut each other.
Convalescent or Nursing Home. A structure with sleeping rooms where persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing and medical care. Said home shall conform to, and qualify for license under, applicable State laws.
Convenience Store. A one-story, retail store that is designed and stocked to sell primarily food, beverages and other household supplies to customers who purchase a relatively few items (in contrast to a “supermarket”). Convenience stores are designed to attract a large volume of stop-and-go traffic.
Curb Cut. The entrance to or exit from a property provided for vehicular traffic to or from a public or private road.
Day Care Facilities, State Licensed.
1. Adult Day Care Facility.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-13 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
a. Adult Family Day Care Home. A private home in which six (6) or less adults eighteen (18) years of age or older, receive care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. It includes facilities for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped that require supervision on an ongoing basis. An adult day care home does not include alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers, residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities which do not meet the definition of adult day care center.
b. Adult Group Day Care Home. A private home in which more than six (6) but not more than twelve (12) adults eighteen (18) years of age or older, receive care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. It includes facilities for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped that require supervision on an ongoing basis. An adult day care home does not include alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers, residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities which do not meet the definition of adult day care center.
c. Adult Day Care Center. A facility, other than a private residence, receiving one or more persons, eighteen (18) years of age or older, for care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day. It includes facilities for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled or physically handicapped that require supervision on an ongoing basis. An adult day-care center does not include alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers, residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities which do not meet the definition of adult day-care center.
2. Child Day Care Facilities. Includes the following definitions as defined and regulated by Public Act No. 116 of the Public Acts of 1973 as amended:
a. Child Family Day Care Home. A state-licensed, owner-occupied private residence in which one (1) but not more than six (6) minor children are received for care and supervision for periods less than twenty-four (24) hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, excepting children related to an adult member of the owner’s family by blood, marriage or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four (4) weeks in a calendar year.
b. Child Group Day Care Home. A state-licensed, owner-occupied private residence in which seven (7) but not more than twelve (12) minor children are received for care and supervision for periods less
Charter Township of Oxford 2-14 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
than twenty-four (24) hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, excepting children related to an adult member of the owner’s family by blood, marriage or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four (4) weeks in a calendar year.
c. Child Care Center. Also known as “day care center”, a state-licensed facility, other than a private residence, receiving one (1) or more minor children for care and supervision for periods less than twenty-four (24) hours, and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child.
Depth-to-Width Ratio. The ratio of the lot depth to the lot width.
Development. The modification of a parcel, alteration of terrain, or construction, modification or relocation of buildings or structures.
Distribution Center. A use which typically involves both warehouse and office/administration functions, where short and/of long term storage takes place in connection with the distribution operations of a wholesale or retail supply business.
Drive or Driveway. A vehicular passageway designed or used to provide access to or between parking, loading or drop-off areas on a lot from a public or private road.
Driveway, Common or Shared. A driveway providing vehicular access to two (2) lots from an adjacent public or private road.
District. A portion of the Township within which certain uses of land and/or buildings are permitted and within which certain regulations and requirements apply under the provisions of this Ordinance.
Drive-In Establishment. A business establishment so designed that its operation involves providing service to patrons while they are in their car, rather than within a building or structure.
Dwelling or Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms with bathroom and principal kitchen facilities designed as a self-contained unit for permanent or temporary occupancy by one (1) family for living, cooking and sleeping purposes. In no case shall a travel trailer, motor home, mobile home, trailer coach, automobile chassis, tent or other portable building be considered a dwelling in single-, multiple-, or two-family residential areas. In cases of mixed occupancy where a building is occupied in part as a dwelling unit, the part so occupied shall be deemed a dwelling unit for the purpose of this Ordinance and shall comply with the provisions thereof relative to dwellings.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-15 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Dwelling, Multiple-Family. A building used for and designed as a residence for three (3) or more families living independently of each other and each having their own cooking facilities therein, including apartment buildings, townhouses, and apartment hotels, but not including mobile homes.
Dwelling, One-Family. A detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1) family; also known as a single-family dwelling.
Dwelling, Two-Family or Duplex. A detached building designed for, or occupied exclusively by two (2) families living independently of each other; also known as a duplex dwelling.
Efficiency Apartment. A dwelling unit with a bathroom and principal kitchen facilities designed as a self-contained unit for occupancy for living, cooking and sleeping purposes and having no separate, designated bedroom.
Electronic Message Sign (LED). A sign with a fixed or changing message composed of a series of lights, fiber optic, or light-emitting diodes (LED) that may be changed through electronic means. A time and/or temperature sign shall not be considered as an LED sign.
Erected. Includes built, constructed, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the land required for the building. Excavations, fill, drainage and the like shall be considered a part of erection.
Essential Services. The phrase "essential services" means the erection, construction, alteration, operation, or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments or commissions of underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, wires, cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, police call boxes, towers, pools, and other similar equipment or accessories reasonably in connection therewith for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal departments or commissions for the public health or general welfare, but not including buildings other than such buildings as are primarily enclosures or shelters of the above essential services. Essential services shall not include cellular telephone facilities including cellular telephone transmitting towers.
Fairgrounds. Property used for, but not limited to, the following uses: agricultural related office buildings, animal shows and judging; carnivals, circuses, community meeting or recreation buildings and uses; food booths and stands; games, rides, rodeos, sales and auctions, storage, theaters.
Family. A family shall be defined by one (1) of the following:
1. One (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption, or guardianship, plus not more than two (2) persons not so related, who are either domestic employees, caregivers, such as a nurse, nanny, or physical
Charter Township of Oxford 2-16 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
therapist, or persons who occupy rooms for which compensation may or may not be paid, living together as a single housekeeping unit.
2. Two (2) persons and their children by natural birth or adoption, plus not more than two (2) persons not so related, who are either domestic employees, care givers, such as a nurse, nanny or physical therapist, or persons who occupy rooms for which compensation may or may not be paid.
3. A functional family living together as a single housekeeping unit.
Farm. The land, plants, animals, buildings, structures, including ponds used for agricultural or aquacultural activities, machinery, equipment, and other appurtenances used in the commercial production of farm products.
Farm Operation. The operation and management of a farm or a condition or activity that occurs at any time as necessary on a farm in connection with the commercial production, harvesting, and storage of farm products, and includes, but is not limited to:
1. Marketing produce at roadside stands or farm markets.
2. The generation of noise, odors, dust, fumes, and other associated conditions.
3. The operation of machinery and equipment necessary for a farm including, but not limited to, irrigation and drainage systems and pumps and on-farm grain dryers, and the movement of vehicles, machinery, equipment, and farm products and associated inputs necessary for farm operations on the roadway as authorized by the Michigan vehicle code, Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, being sections 257.1 to 257.923 of the Michigan Compiled Laws.
4. Field preparation and ground and aerial seeding and spraying.
5. The application of chemical fertilizers or organic materials, conditioners, liming materials, or pesticides.
6. Use of alternative pest management techniques.
7. The fencing, feeding, watering, sheltering, transportation, treatment, use, handling and care of farm animals.
8. The management, storage, transport, utilization, and application of farm by-products, including manure or agricultural wastes.
9. The conversion from a farm operation activity to other farm operation activities.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-17 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
10. The employment and use of labor.
Farm Product. Those plants and animals useful to human beings produced by agriculture and includes, but is not limited to, forages and sod crops, grains and feed crops, field crops, dairy and dairy products, poultry and poultry products, cervidae, livestock, including breeding and grazing, equine, fish, and other aquacultural products, bees and bee products, berries, herbs, fruits, vegetables, flowers, seeds, grasses, nursery stock, trees and tree products, mushrooms, and other similar products, or any other product which incorporates the use of food, feed, fiber, or fur, as determined by the Michigan commission of agriculture.
Fence. A permanent partition, structure or gate erected as a dividing marker, barrier or enclosure, and not a part of a principal building or structure or other accessory structure.
Floodplain. That area of land adjoining a river, stream, watercourse, or other body of water which will be inundated by a 100-year flood, and where evidence exists that such flood has occurred, or would have occurred in the past given the current land configuration.
Floor Area, Gross (GFA). The sum of the gross horizontal area of the floor or floors measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings. The “gross floor area" of a building shall include the basement (see definition) floor area when more than one-half of the basement height is above the established curb level or finished lot grade, whichever is higher. Any space devoted to off-street parking or loading shall not be included in "gross floor area". Areas of basements, unfinished attics, utility rooms, breezeways, porches (enclosed or unenclosed) or attached garages are not included.
Floor Area, Usable (UFA). The measurement of usable floor area shall be that portion of floor area (measured from the interior face of the exterior walls) used for or intended to be used for services to the public as customers, patrons, clients, or patients; including areas occupied by fixtures or equipment used for display or sale of goods or merchandise, but not including areas used or intended to be used principally for storage of merchandise, utility or mechanical equipment rooms or sanitary facilities. In the case of a half-story area, the usable floor area shall be considered to be only that portion having a clear height above it of four (4) feet or more.
Foster Care Facilities, State Licensed.
1. Adult Foster Care Facility. A state-licensed establishment that provides foster care to adults. It includes facilities and foster care homes for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing basis but who do not require continuous nursing care. An adult foster care facility does not include convalescent or nursing homes, homes for the aged, hospitals,
Charter Township of Oxford 2-18 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers, residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities which have been exempted from the definition of adult foster care facility by the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, Public Act No. 218 of the Public Acts of 1979 as amended. The following additional definitions shall apply in the application of this Ordinance:
a. Adult Foster Care Small Group Home. A facility with the approved capacity to receive twelve (12) or fewer adults who are provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for twenty-four (24) hours a day, five (5) or more days a week, and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks for compensation.
b. Adult Foster Care Large Group Home. A facility with approved capacity to receive at least thirteen (13) but not more than twenty (20) adults who are provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for twenty-four (24) hours a day, five (5) or more days a week, and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks for compensation.
c. Adult Foster Care Family Home. A private residence with the approved capacity to receive six (6) or fewer adults who are provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for twenty-four (24) hours a day, five (5) or more days a week and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks for compensation. The adult foster care family home licensee must be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence.
d. Adult Foster Care Congregate Facility. An adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive more than twenty (20) adults who are provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for twenty-four (24) hours a day, five (5) or more days a week and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks for compensation.
2. Child Foster Care Facility. A state-licensed establishment that provides foster care to minor children. The following additional definitions shall apply in the application of this Ordinance:
a. Child Foster Family Home. A private home in which one (1) but not more than four (4) minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or who are not placed in the household pursuant to the adoption code, Chapter X of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1939, being sections 710.21 to 710.70 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, are given care and supervision for twenty-four (24) hours a day, for four (4) or more days a week, for
Charter Township of Oxford 2-19 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
two (2) or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
b. Child Foster Family Group Home. A private home in which more than four (4) but fewer than seven (7) minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or who are not placed in the household pursuant to Ordinance X of Act No. 288 of Public Acts of 1939, are provided care for twenty-four (24) hours a day, for four (4) or more days a week, for two (2) or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian.
Frontage, Road or Street. The distance for which a lot line of a lot (or combination of lots) adjoins a public road or street, from one lot line intersecting said street to the furthest distant lot line intersecting the same street, excluding any distance where continuous frontage is interrupted by other parcels of land.
Functional Family. A group of no more than four (4) persons, plus their dependent children, having a relationship which is functionally equivalent to a family. The relationship must be of a permanent and distinct character with a demonstrable and recognizable bond characteristic of a cohesive unit. A functional family shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, organization or group of students or other individuals, exceeding four (4) persons in number, where the common living arrangement or basis for the establishment of the housekeeping unit is temporary.
Garage, Commercial. A building or structure designed or used for the storage, care, repair or commercial display of automobiles, tractors, trucks, or other power equipment.
Garage, Private. An accessory building intended or designed to be used for storage of non-commercial motor vehicles.
Gas Station. See Automobile Service Station.
Grade. The degree of rise or descent of sloping surface.
Grade, Finished. The final elevation of the ground surface after development.
Grade, Natural. The elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before man-made alterations.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-20 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Figure 3a – Grade
Figure 3b – Natural and Finished Grade
Grade Plane. A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plan shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six (6) feet from the building, between the building and a point six (6) feet from the building.
Greenbelt. A strip of land of specified width and location reserved for the planting of shrubs and/or trees to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer strip.
Greenway. A linear strip of open space, with or without pedestrian or non-motorized transportation facilities, often following a natural feature of the landscape, railroad right-of-way, or utility easement.
Gross Buildable Area. See Buildable Area, Gross.
Ground Water. Any water found under the surface of the earth.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-21 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Gym or Gymnasium. A room or building equipped for gymnastics, exercise or sport.
Hazardous Substance. Hazardous substances include hazardous chemicals as defined by the Michigan Department of Public Health and the Michigan Department of Labor; flammable and combustible liquids as defined by the Michigan Department of State Police, Fire Marshall Division; hazardous materials as defined by the U.S. Department of Transportation; and critical materials, polluting materials, and hazardous waste as defined by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. Petroleum products and waste oil are subject to regulation under this Ordinance and are also considered hazardous substances.
Home Improvement Center. A facility of more than 30,000 square feet of gross floor area, engaged in the retail sale of various basic hardware lines, such as tools, builder’s hardware, paint and glass, house wares and household appliances, garden supplies and cutlery.
Home Occupation. Any use customarily conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the exterior of the property or affect the residential character of the neighborhood.
Horse Riding Stables and Sales Barns. Any establishment in which, for business purposes, 6 or more horses or ponies are rented, hired, or loaned for riding, or where horses or ponies owned by others are sold or offered for sale.
Hospital. An institution providing health services, primarily for in-patients and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution, such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices.
Hotel. A building containing rooms for sleeping purposes for more than twenty (20) transients and where only a general kitchen and dining room is provided.
Impervious Surface. A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
Indoor Recreation Center. An establishment which provides indoor exercise facilities and indoor court sports facilities, and which may include spectator seating in conjunction with the sports facilities. For the purposes of the Ordinance, a bowling establishment shall be considered a type of indoor recreation center.
Industrial Park. A special or exclusive type of planned industrial area designed and equipped to accommodate a community of industries, providing them with all necessary facilities and services in attractive surroundings among compatible neighbors.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-22 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Institution. An organization having a social, educational or religious purpose established by law, custom, practice or a system to serve a public.
Junk. All rubbish, refuse, waste material, and garbage, including, but not limited to, the following: waste composed of animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable matter, dead animals, putrescible and non-putrescible solid waste (except body wastes), ash, glass, cans, bottles, discarded or abandoned machinery, household appliances, industrial wastes, discarded, inoperative, dismantled or partially dismantled motorized vehicles or parts thereof. This shall not preclude home or farm composting for on-site use.
Junk Yard or Salvage Yard. Any land or building used for abandonment, storage, keeping, collecting, or baling or paper, rags, scrap metals, other scrap or discarded materials, or for abandonment, demolition, dismantling, storage or salvaging of automobiles or other vehicles not in running condition, machinery, or parts thereof.
Kennel, Commercial. Any lot or premises on which five (5) or more dogs, cats or similar domestic pets greater than six (6) months of age are confined, housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained or sold in exchange for remuneration. Commercial kennels shall not be construed to include retail pet stores.
Kennel, Private. An establishment which is accessory and incidental to a single family dwelling where four (4) or more dogs, cats or similar domestic pets greater than six (6) months of age are confined or kept, for boarding purposes only, without remuneration. This definition does not include sales, breeding or training activities.
Laboratory. A place in which the principal use is devoted to experimental, routine or basic study such as testing and analytical operations.
Lake. A permanent natural or man-made body of surface water of at least five (5) acres in area.
Landfill Definitions. Refer to Hazardous Waste Definitions for additional definitions.
1. Ashes. The residue from burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials.
2. Bulky Wastes. Large items of refuse, including but not limited to, appliances, vehicles, furniture, large auto parts, tires, trees and branches, stumps and flotage.
3. Cell. Compacted refuse completely enveloped by cover material.
4. Facility. Any solid waste disposal site, system or process, the operation thereof including, but not limited to personnel, equipment and buildings.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-23 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
5. Garbage. Any putrescible solid and semi-solid animal or vegetable wastes resulting from the production, handling, preparation, cooking, serving or consumption of food or food materials.
6. Impermeable. A hydraulic conductivity of no greater than 1 x (10) - 7 centimeters per second as determined by field and/or laboratory test made according to standard test methods. A medium has a hydraulic conductivity of unit length per unit volume of groundwater at the prevailing viscosity through a cross section of unit area, measured at right angles to the direction of flow, under a hydraulic gradient of unit change in head through unit length of flow.
7. Industrial Solid Waste. Any waste substance or a combination thereof resulting from the operation of or from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade or business or from the development of any agricultural or natural resources.
8. Inert Solid Waste. Wastes including, but not limited to, glass, crockery, brick, plastics, rubber or other materials which are shown through analytical testing to have minimum potential for environmental degradation and leachate production.
9. Landfill. Any disposal area or tract of land, building unit or appurtenance or combination thereof that is used to collect, store, handle, dispose of, bury, cover over, or otherwise accept or retain refuse as herein defined.
10. Leachate. Fluid that has percolated through solid waste and which contains contaminants consisting of dissolved or suspended materials, chemicals and microbial waste products from the solid waste.
11. Lift. A layer of refuse cells which raise the ground elevation to an approximately common level.
12. Other Wastes. Garbage, refuse, decayed wood, sawdust, shavings, bark, lime cinders, offal, oil, tar, dye-stuffs, acids, chemicals and all discarded materials other than sewage or industrial wastes.
13. Refuse. Any putrescible or non-putrescible solid waste, except human excreta, but including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleaning, dead animals, offal and solid agricultural, commercial, industrial, hazardous and institutional wastes and construction wastes resulting from the operation of a contractor.
14. Roads on Site. Roads designated on approved plans and such other areas used by vehicles and/or equipment for travel on a regular basis, other than for travel on an infrequent basis necessitated by the operation of the landfill such as trucks and/or equipment going to and from a regular course of travel to the area which is currently being filled.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-24 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
15. Rubbish. Any non-putrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, such as cardboard, paper, plastic, metal or glass food containers, rags, waste metal, yard clippings, small pieces of wood, excelsior, rubber leather, crockery, and other similar materials.
16. Sewage. Water-carried human or animal wastes from septic tanks, water closets, residences, buildings, industrial and municipal establishments, other places, together with such ground water infiltration, subsurface water, mixtures of industrial wastes or other wastes as may be present.
17. Sludge. A semi-liquid sediment resulting from industrial, municipal establishments, or other places, together with such ground water infiltration, subsurface water, mixtures of industrial wastes or other wastes as may be present.
18. Solid Waste. Any garbage, refuse, rubbish, special solid waste, other waste, or any combination thereof with insufficient liquid content to be free flowing.
19. Special Solid Waste. Hazardous wastes, radioactive wastes, agricultural wastes, industrial wastes or sludges, and sewage residue.
Landscaping Definitions.
1. Conifer; Coniferous. A woody plant, usually evergreen, with cones and needle-shaped or scale-like leaves.
2. Exotic Plant Species. A plant species that has evolved in a country or region other than Oakland County, Michigan, and has been introduced by human activity.
3. Exotic Invasive Plant Species. An exotic plant species that has no natural controls and is able to out-compete and gradually displace native plants.
4. Herbaceous. Refers to a plant with little or no woody tissue that often dies back to its roots each year during winter.
5. Native Plant Species. A native plant species is one that has naturally evolved over thousands of years under certain soil, hydrologic, and other site conditions. Where “native plant species” is used in the text, this means a straight species, not a cultivar of a species.
Large-Format Retail. A singular retail or wholesale user, who occupies no less than 70,000 square feet of gross floor area, typically requires high parking to building area ratios and has a regional sales market. Regional retail/wholesale uses can include, but are not limited to, membership warehouse clubs that emphasize bulk sales, discount stores, and department stores.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-25 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Lighting Definitions.
1. Canopy Structure. Any overhead protective structure which is either extended from a building or free-standing, including an awning.
2. Foot-candle. A standard unit, established as a reference, and used when measuring the quantity of light. A foot-candle equals the total intensity of light that falls upon a one square foot surface that is placed one (1) foot away from one (1) lit candle.
3. Glare. Light that is misdirected into the eye of potential observers or passer-by, potentially impairing their ability to see clearly and compromising public safety and welfare.
4. Lamp. The component of the luminaire that produces the actual light, including luminous tube lighting.
5. Light Fixture. The assembly that holds a lamp and may include an assembly housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror, and a refractor or lens. A light fixture also includes the assembly for luminous tube and fluorescent lighting.
6. Light Pollution. Electric light which may impact the safety and welfare of travelers by impairing their ability to see potential hazards effectively, reduces the enjoyment of the night sky, causes undesirable glare, unnecessary illumination of adjacent properties or causes a detrimental effect on the environment.
7. Light Trespass. The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located.
8. Luminaire. The complete lighting system including the lamp and light fixture.
9. Luminous Tube Lighting. Gas-filled tubing which, when subjected to high voltage, becomes luminescent in a color characteristic of the particular gas used, e.g., neon, argon, etc.
10. Photometric Grid or Study. A graphic illustration of the initial horizontal illuminance of proposed lighting calculated at grade using a grid of points no more than ten feet apart and covering the entire site (excluding buildings) and extending a minimum of ten feet beyond the lot or parcel property line.
11. Shielded Fixture. An outdoor light fixture shielded or constructed in a manner such that its light does not project beyond a certain limit. A luminaire mounted in a recessed fashion under a canopy or other structure such that
Charter Township of Oxford 2-26 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
the surrounding structure effectively shields the light in the same manner is also considered fully shielded for the purposes of this ordinance. Shielded fixtures shall be specified and installed properly to restrict light spillage past the property line.
12. Spill Light. Light that is misdirected and illuminates an object or area that is not intended to be illuminated.
13. Useful Light. Light that is directed to illuminate an object or area for a useful purpose.
Loading Space. An off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and/or unloading merchandise or materials.
Lodging Facility. Any establishment in which individual units are rented to transients for periods of less than thirty (30) days for the purpose of sleeping. The term shall include hotels and motels but shall not include bed-and-breakfasts operations, multiple-family dwellings, or rooming houses.
Lot. A parcel of land, excluding any portion in a road or other right-of-way,. Such lot may consist of:
1. A single lot of record;
2. A portion of a lot of record;
3. Any combination of complete and/or portions of lots of record; or
4. A parcel of land described by metes and bounds.
Lot Area, Gross. The net lot area plus any public road right-of-way or private road easement contained within the property boundary.
Lot Area, Net. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot, exclusive of any public road rights-of-way or private road easements. Net lot area shall be used to determine compliance with minimum lot area requirements.
Lot, Corner. A lot where the interior angle of two (2) adjacent sides at the intersection of two (2) streets is less than one hundred and thirty-five (135) degrees (See Figure 4). A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this Ordinance if the arc is of less radius than one hundred and fifty (150) feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two (2) points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less than one hundred and thirty-five (135) degrees.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-27 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Figure 4
Lot Coverage. That percentage of the net lot area covered by the building area.
Lot Depth. The horizontal distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the midpoint of the rear lot line.
Lot, Double Frontage or Through Lot. A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on two (2) more or less parallel streets. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, one street will be designated as the front street for all lots in the plat and in the request for a zoning compliance permit. If there are existing structures in the same block fronting one or both of the streets, the required front yard setback shall be observed on those streets where structures presently front (See Figure 5).
Lot, Interior. An interior lot is a lot other than a corner lot with only one (1) lot line fronting on a street.
Lot, Lakefront. See Lot, Waterfront.
Lot Lines. Any line dividing one lot from another or from a right-of-way, and thus constitutes the property lines bounding a lot.
Lot Line, Front. In the case of an interior lot, abutting upon one (1) public or private street, the front lot line shall mean the line separating the lot from such street right-of-way. In the case of corner or double frontage lots, the front lot line shall be that line separating said lot from that street which is designated as the front street in the plat and/or in the request for a zoning compliance permit (see Lot, Double Frontage), subject to the approval of the Planning Commission.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-28 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Figure 5
Lot Line, Rear. Ordinarily, that lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line of the lot. In the case of an irregular or triangular shaped lot, a line ten (10) feet in length entirely within the lot parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line of the lot shall be considered to be the rear lot line for the purpose of determining depth of rear yard. In cases where none of these definitions is applicable, the planning commission shall designate the rear lot line (see Lot, Double Frontage).
Lot Line, Side. Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. In the case of a corner lot, however, all lot lines which abut a public or private road right of way shall be considered front lot lines.
Lot of Record. A lot, the dimensions of which are shown on a map recorded in the office of the register of deeds for Oakland County, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the accuracy of which is attested to by a professional engineer
Charter Township of Oxford 2-29 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
or registered surveyor, so designed by the State of Michigan, and said description so recorded or on file with the county.
Lot, Waterfront. Any lot which is abutting a lake or other watercourse. The water side of such a lot shall be considered a rear yard.
Lot Width. In the case of parallel side lot lines, lot width shall be the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at the building line. Where the side lot lines are not parallel, lot width shall be the length of a straight line perpendicular to the lot axis, measured where the lot axis crosses the building line. The lot axis shall be a straight line joining the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines, (see Figure 6).
Figure 6 – Lot Width
Lot, Zoning. A single tract of land, located within a single block which, at the time of applying for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control and which tract satisfies the applicable requirements of this Ordinance in every respect. A zoning lot may, therefore, not coincide with a lot of record, but may include one (1) or more lots of record.
Major Thoroughfare. A paved arterial street which is designated as a County Primary Road by the Road Commission for Oakland County.
Building Line
Building Line
90°
90°
90°
90°
Lot Width
Lot Width
Building Line
Building Line
Lot Axis
Lot Axis
Charter Township of Oxford 2-30 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Master Plan. The Plan prepared and adopted by the Township Planning Commission in accordance with Public Act 168 of 1959, as amended, consisting of graphic and written materials which indicate the Township’s desired arrangement of land uses and future development.
Mini-Warehouse or Self-Storage Facility. A building or group of buildings, each of which contains several individual storage units, each with a separate door and lock and which can be leased on an individual basis.
Manufactured Housing Unit or Mobile Home. A dwelling unit manufactured in one (1) or more sections, designed for year-round, temporary or transient dwelling purposes, capable of being transported upon its own or a separate wheeled chassis, not motorized or self-propelled, built for the purpose of being located in a licensed manufactured housing community or mobile home park, meets the requirements of the FHA Standards of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) or the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), if built prior to 1976. Such dwellings do not include recreational vehicles such as travel trailers, motor coaches, campers and the like.
Manufactured Housing Community or Mobile Home Park. A specifically designated parcel of land constructed and designed to accommodate three (3) or more manufactured housing units for residential dwelling use, and licensed by the State of Michigan in accordance with Act No. 96 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1987 (MCL 125.2301 et seq., MSA 19.855(101) et seq.), the Mobile Home Commission Act.
Mezzanine. An intermediate level or levels between the floor and ceiling of any story with an aggregate floor area not more than one-third of the area of the room or space in which the level of levels are located.
Motel. A business comprised of a dwelling unit or a group of dwelling units so arranged as to furnish overnight lodging accommodations for transient guests, open to the traveling public for compensation.
Natural Resources. Natural Resources shall include land, soils, wetlands, floodplains, surface and groundwater, topography, trees and other types of vegetative cover, subsurface strata, geological formations, animal life, and naturally-occurring substances and living organisms that can be useful to people. Natural resources are of two types: renewable (e.g., plants and trees) and nonrenewable (e.g. mineral resources). Natural resources may also be referred to as “natural features” in this Ordinance.
Nonconforming Building or Structure,. A building, structure, or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of this Ordinance, or amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the provisions of the Ordinance in the zoning district in which it is located.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-31 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Nonconforming Lot. A lot that was lawfully created at the effective date of this Ordinance, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the lot requirements of the zoning district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Use. A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of this Ordinance, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
Non-residential Uses. Shall mean commercial, industrial, office and other non-residential uses which may or may not be allowed in residential zoning districts. This can also include schools, country clubs, churches and other institutional uses.
Nuisance. An offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or adversely affect a human being.
Nursery, Plant Material. A space, building, and/or structure, or any combination thereof, where live trees, shrubs, and other plants used for gardening and landscaping are propagated, stored, and/or offered for sale on the premises, but not including any space, building or structure used for the sale of fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees.
Nursing Home. See Convalescent Home.
Occupied. The word "occupied" includes arranged, designed, built, altered, converted to, rented or leased, or intended to be inhabited; not necessarily for dwelling purposes.
Off-Street Parking Lot. A facility providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles. Adequate maneuvering space shall be provided which allows unrestricted ingress and egress plus on-site parking space for more than three (3) vehicles.
Open-Air Business Uses. A business use operated for profit, usually without buildings or structures, including uses such as the following:
1. Bicycle, utility truck or trailer, motor vehicle, boats or home equipment sale or rental services.
2. Outdoor display and sales of garages, motor homes, mobile homes, snowmobiles, farm implements, swimming pools and similar products.
3. Retail sale of trees, fruit, vegetables, shrubbery, plants, seeds, topsoil, humus, fertilizer.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-32 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
4. Tennis courts, archery courts, shuffleboard courts, horseshoe pits, rifle ranges, miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges, children's amusement parks or similar recreation uses (transient or permanent).
Open Space. Any parcel or area of land or water that is generally free of structures and that is set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space. Open space may be required for recreation, conservation, aesthetic, or other purposes.
Open Space Uses. Any principal or accessory use of a lot or parcel not involving the use of buildings or structures which are required to meet the Building Code or any construction requirement of the Township Ordinances, rules or regulations, except as provided in this Ordinance.
Open Storage. All outdoor storage of building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, equipment, and other supplies.
Ordinary High-Water Mark. The line between upland and bottomland which persists through successive changes in water levels, below which the presence and action of the water is so common or recurrent that the character of the land is distinguished from the upland as evidenced in the soil, the configuration of the surface of the soil and vegetation.
Owner. The person or persons, firm, or corporation having legal or equitable title to a lot or parcel of land, or their lessees or agents with respect to such land.
Parcel. A piece of land created by a partition, subdivision, deed, or other instrument recorded with the appropriate recorder. This includes a lot, lot of record, site condominium lot, or a piece of land created though other methods.
Parking Space. An area of definite length and width as designated in this Ordinance for parking an automobile or other vehicle, and which is fully accessible for such purposes.
Pawnshop. Any business that loans money on deposit of personal property or deals in the purchase or possession of personal property on condition of selling the same back again, or loans or advances money on personal property.
Pedestrian walkway. Any facility designed to safely move pedestrians that is physically separated from a public street or service drive. Pedestrian walkways may be open, covered, or enclosed and include such terms as "sidewalks" and "safety path."
Performance Guarantee. A cash deposit, certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit acceptable to the Township covering the estimated cost of improvements associated with a project for which Township approval is sought, deposited with the Township in order to insure faithful completion of the improvements.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-33 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Personal Service Establishment. A business where professional or personal services are provided for gain and where the retail sale of goods, wares, merchandise, articles or things is only accessory to the provision of such services, including but not limited to barber shops, beauty shops, tailor shops, shoe repair shops and the like.
Pet. Only such animals as may commonly be housed within domestic living quarters.
Planned Unit Development. A special zoning district intended to permit mixed uses, flexibility and innovation in accordance with Article 14 of this Ordinance.
Planned Unit Development Agreement. A written agreement between a developer and the Township which specifies the terms and conditions of Planning Unit Development pursuant to Article 14 of this ordinance.
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission of Charter Township of Oxford, Oakland County, Michigan.
Pond. A small body of surface water more than one quarter (¼) of an acre but less than five (5) acres which exists in a natural state or is established by either the damming of surface water or by excavation of soil to expose groundwater.
Porch, Enclosed. A covered entrance to a building or structure which is totally enclosed, and projects out from the main wall of such building or structure and has either a separate roof or a roof that is integral with that of the principal building or structure to which it is attached.
Porch, Open. A covered entrance to a building or structure which is unenclosed except for columns supporting the porch roof, and projects out from the main wall of said building or structure and has either a separate roof or a roof that is integral with that of the principal building or structure to which it is attached.
Principal Building. The building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is located. Lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings.
Private Driveway. Shall mean any piece of privately-owned and maintained property which is used for access by vehicular traffic to a single parcel of private property but is not open or normally used by the public.
Public Utility. Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing, and under federal, state or municipal regulations, to the public; electricity, gas, steam, communications, telegraph, transportation or water. A public utility shall not however include cellular telephone operations.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-34 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Recreational Vehicle. These uses shall be defined as follows:
1. Travel Trailer. A portable vehicle on a chassis, not exceeding thirty-six (36) feet in length or nine (9) feet in width, which is designed to be used as a temporary dwelling during travel, recreational, and vacation uses, and which may be identified as a "travel trailer" by the manufacturer. Travel trailers generally contain sanitary, water, and electrical facilities.
2. Motor Home. A recreational vehicle intended for temporary human habitation, sleeping and/or eating, mounted upon a chassis with wheels and capable of being moved from place-to-place under its own power. Motor homes generally contain sanitary, water, and electrical facilities.
3. Pickup Camper. A structure designed to be mounted on a pickup or truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling during the process of travel, recreational, and vacation uses.
4. Folding Tent Trailer. A canvas folding structure mounted on wheels and designed for travel and vacation use.
5. Boats and Boat Trailers. Includes boats, floats, rafts, canoes, plus the normal equipment to transport them on the highway.
6. Other Recreational Equipment. Includes snowmobiles, all-terrain or special terrain vehicles, utility trailers, plus the normal equipment to transport them on the highway.
Recreational Vehicle Park (RV Park). A recreation-oriented facility for the overnight or short-term parking of travel trailers, recreation vehicles or tents, but not including mobile homes. May also be known as a campground.
Refuse. All rubbish, refuse, waste material, and garbage, including, but not limited to, the following: waste composed of animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable matter, dead animals, putrescible and solid waste (except body wastes), ashes, glass, cans, bottles, discarded or abandoned machinery, household appliances, industrial wastes, discarded, inoperative, dismantled or partially dismantled motorized vehicles or parts thereof.
Restaurant. Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose method of operation is characteristic of a carry-out, drive-in, drive-through, fast food, sit-down restaurant, bar/lounge, combination thereof, as defined below.
1. Carry-Out Restaurant. Any restaurant whose method of operation involves sale of food, beverages and/or frozen desserts in disposable or edible containers or wrappers in a ready-to-consume state for consumption primarily off the premises.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-35 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
2. Drive-In Restaurant. Any restaurant designed to permit or facilitate the serving of meals, sandwiches, ice cream, beverages or other food served directly to, or permitted to be consumed by, patrons in cars or other vehicles parked on the premises, or permitted to be consumed by patrons elsewhere on the site outside the main building.
3. Drive-Through or Drive-Thru Restaurant. Any restaurant whose method of operation involves the delivery of prepared food to the customer in a motor vehicle, typically through a drive-through window, for consumption off of the premises.
4. Fast-Food Restaurant. Any restaurant whose method of operation involves minimum waiting for delivery of ready-to-consume food to the customer at a counter or cafeteria line for consumption at the counter where it is served, or at tables, booths, or stands inside or outside of the structure, or for consumption off the premises, but not in a motor vehicle at the site.
5. Sit-Down Restaurant. Any restaurant whose method of operation involves either the delivery of prepared food by waiters and waitresses to customers seated at tables within a completely enclosed building, or the prepared food is acquired by customers at a cafeteria line and is subsequently consumed by the customers at tables within a completely enclosed building.
6. Bar/Lounge. Any restaurant that is operated primarily for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages, although the sale of prepared food or snacks may also be permitted. If a bar or lounge is part of a larger dining facility, it shall be defined as that part of the structure so designated or operated.
Right-of-Way. A road, street, alley, or other thoroughfare or easement permanently established for passage of persons or vehicles.
Road, County Primary. A public road designated as a primary road by the Road Commission for Oakland County.
Road or Street. Any public or private thoroughfare or right-of-way, other than a public or private alley, parking lot, or driveway, dedicated to or designed for travel and access to any land, lot or parcel whether designated as a thoroughfare, road, avenue, highway, drive, land, place, court, or any similar designation.
Road, Private. Any road which is to be privately maintained and has not been accepted for maintenance by the Road Commission for Oakland County, the State of Michigan or the federal government.
Road, Public. Any road which has been dedicated to and accepted for maintenance by the Road Commission for Oakland County, the State of Michigan or the federal government.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-36 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Road Right-of-Way Line. The line which forms the outer limits of a road right-of-way or easement, and which forms the line from which all front setbacks and yards are measured, unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance.
Roadside Stand. A temporary or existing permanent structure containing not more than two hundred (200) square feet of enclosed floor area and operating for the purpose of selling agricultural, dairy or poultry products raised or produced only by the proprietor of the stand or by his family.
Rooming House. A building where lodging only is provided for compensation.
Safety Path. A non-motorized, pedestrian pathway, as regulated under Ordinance No. 117.
Secondary Access Drive. A road that is generally parallel to and adjacent to an arterial road and that is designed to provide access to abutting properties so that these properties are separated from the through traffic on the arterial road and so that the flow of traffic on the arterial road is not impeded by direct driveway access from a large number of abutting properties.
Service Drives. Internal private streets and drives providing ingress to, egress from, access or circulation within a development. Service drives may include such terms as loading drives, internal drives and the like.
Setback. The minimum horizontal required distance measured from a front, side, or rear lot line. The required setback area is that area encompassed by the respective lot lines and setback lines.
Shopping Center. More than one (1) commercial establishment, planned, developed, and managed as a unit, with off-street parking provided on the property.
Signage Definitions.
1. Animated Sign (See Flashing Sign). Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict or create a special effect or scene. This definition shall not include electronic signs displaying only time, temperature and stock market information.
2. Awning Sign. (See Canopy Sign). A sign which is printed or otherwise affixed to an awning which may be rolled or folded up against the wall to which it is attached.
3. Balloon Sign. Any air or gas-filled object used as a temporary sign to direct attention to any business or profession , or to a commodity or service sold, offered or manufactured, or to any festival or entertainment.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-37 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
4. Banner Sign. Temporary signs produced on cloth, paper, fabric or other natural or synthetic material of any kind, with or without frames. National, state or municipal flags or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners.
5. Billboard. A surface whereon advertising matter is set in view conspicuously and which advertising does not apply to premises or any use of premises wherein it is displayed or posted (an off-site sign) and is regulated in accordance with regulations governed by the Highway Advertising Act, P.A. 106 of 1972 as amended.
6. Business Sign. An accessory sign related to the business, activity or service conducted on the premises upon which the sign is placed.
7. Canopy Sign (See Awning Sign). Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.
8. Changeable Copy Sign. A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the structural integrity of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this ordinance. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time, temperature or stock market information shall be considered a "time, temperature and stock market" portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this ordinance.
9. Commercial Message. Any sign wording, logo or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.
10. Construction Sign. A temporary sign that bears the names and addresses of the project, contractors, architects, developers, planners, financial institutions, or engineers engaged in the construction project.
11. Development Entranceway Sign. A sign, depicting the name of a residential, office, or industrial development, including, but not limited to, residential, office or industrial subdivisions or condominium subdivisions, apartment complexes, senior housing complexes, and mobile home parks, located at the entrance of such development.
12. Flag. Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, corporation, or other entity.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-38 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
13. Flashing Sign (See Animated Sign). Any sign, which, by method or manner of illumination, flashes on or off, winks, or blinks with varying light intensity, shows motion, or creates the illusion of motion or revolves in a manner to create the illusion of being on or off.
14. Freestanding Or Ground Sign. A sign supported directly by the ground or with support provided by uprights, braces, pylons or poles anchored in the ground that are independent from any building or other structure. For purposes of this ordinance, freestanding or ground signs shall include: billboards, incidental signs, monolith, subdivision entranceway, and business signs.
15. Illuminated Sign. A sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial light source.
16. Incidental Sign. A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no parking", "loading only", "telephone", and similar directives. No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the lot on which the sign is located shall be considered incidental.
17. Integral Sign. A sign that may contain the name of the building, date of erection, or take the form of a monumental citation or commemorative tablet. The sign is often carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type construction and made an integral part of the structure.
18. Marquee. Any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather.
19. Marquee Sign. Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee.
20. Monolith Sign. A three-dimensional, self-supporting, base-mounted, freestanding sign, consisting of two (2) or more sides extending up from the base, and upon which a message is painted or posted. A monolith sign may also consist of a base-mounted cylindrical structure upon which a message is painted or posted.
21. Neon Sign. A sign consisting of visible glass tubing, filled with neon gas, which glows when electric current is sent through it.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-39 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
22. Non-Conforming Sign. Signs which are prohibited under the terms of this Ordinance but were in use and lawful prior to the enactment of this Ordinance, or subsequent amendment thereof that enacted the prohibition.
23. Obsolete Sign. Signs that advertise a product that is no longer made or that advertise a business that has closed.
24. Off-Premises Sign. See Billboard.
25. Pennant Sign. A sign or display consisting of long, narrow, usually triangular flags of lightweight plastic, fabric, or other materials, that may or may not contain a message, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
26. Political Sign. A temporary sign relating to the election of a person to public office or relating to a political party or relating to a matter to be voted upon at an election called by a public body.
27. Portable Sign. A temporary sign which is not permanently affixed to a building face or to a pole, pylon, or other support that is permanently anchored in the ground. A portable sign is capable of being moved from one location to another. Portable signs include, but are not limited to: signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T- frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
28. Projecting Sign. Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends beyond the surface of the building or wall. The nominal projection (up to two (2) inches) of wall signage affixed flat upon a wall surface shall not be construed as a projecting sign.
29. Real Estate Sign. A temporary sign placed upon property for the purpose of advertising to the public the sale or lease of said property.
30. Roof Sign. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, and supported by the roof structure.
31. Sandwich Sign. A temporary, portable sign consisting of two advertising boards laid back-to-back and at least partially supported by each other.
32. Sign. The display of any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs or trademarks to make known an individual, firm, profession, business, product or message and which is visible to the general public.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-40 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
33. Street Furniture Sign. A sign structure which by its design invites, entices, encourages or makes itself convenient or available to use by the general public for something more than mere visual attraction to its message. Street furniture signs include but are not limited to signage on benches and on table umbrellas used for outdoor, cafe-style dining.
34. Suspended Sign. A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
35. Temporary Sign. A sign which is used only temporarily and advertises a private or public seasonal or special event, function or sale. Temporary signs are not permanently mounted. For purposes of this ordinance, temporary signs shall include: balloon, banner, construction, political, portable and real estate signs.
36. Wall Sign. A sign fastened to or painted on the wall area of a building or structure that is confined within the limits of the wall with the exposed face of the sign in a plane approximately parallel to the plane of such wall.
37. Window Sign. Any sign that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
Site Plan. A plan showing all relevant features of a proposed development, so that it may be evaluated in order to determine whether it meets the provisions of this Ordinance.
Special Land Use or Special Use. A use which is subject to special land use approval by the Planning Commission. A special land use may be granted only when there is a specific provision in this Ordinance. A special land use is not considered to be a nonconforming use.
Stable, Private. An accessory building for the keeping of horses for non-commercial use of the residents of the principal building on the lot.
State Construction Code or Building Code. The latest edition of the Michigan Building Code adopted by the State of Michigan in R408.30401 of the Michigan Administrative Code.
Story. That portion of a building, other than a mezzanine, included between the surface of any floor and the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
Story, Mezzanine. See Mezzanine.
Story, Basement. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a basement shall be counted as a story if over fifty percent (50) of its height is above the level from which the height of the building is measured.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-41 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Story, One-Half. The story under the gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than two (2) feet above the floor of such story and the floor area shall not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the area of the floor below.
Story Height. The vertical distance from the top surface of one floor to the top surface of the next above. The height of the top most story is the distance from the top surface of the floor to the ceiling above it.
Structure. Any constructed or erected material, the use of which requires locations on the ground or attachment to something on the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, towers, sheds, smokestacks, overhead transmission lines, fences and signs, but excluding walks, drives, pavements, and similar access or circulation facilities.
Structural Alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial changes in the roof and exterior walls.
Substantial Portion. Substantial portion means a use or activity accounting for more than twenty (20) percent of any one (1) or more of the following: stock-in-trade, display space, floor space, or viewing time, movie display time, or entertainment time measured per month.
Swimming Pool. Any structure intended for swimming, recreational bathing or wading that contains water over twenty-four (24) inches deep. This includes in-ground, aboveground and on-ground pools; hot tubs; spas and fixed-in-place wading pools.
Township. Charter Township of Oxford, Oakland County, Michigan.
Township Board. The Supervisor, Clerk, Treasurer and Trustees of Charter Township of Oxford, Oakland County, Michigan.
Transition Zone. Any zoning district, arrangement of lots or land uses, landscaped area, or similar means used to provide a buffer between land uses or districts.
Travel Trailer. A vehicle, self-propelled or non self-propelled, so designed and constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance on the public streets and duly licensable as such, and of a nature that will permit nonpermanent occupancy as a dwelling unit or rooming unit by one or more persons.
Unbuildable Land. Land encumbered by bodies of open water, streams, 100-year floodplains, and wetlands (as defined by Charter Township of Oxford Ordinance No. 80B).
Upland. The land area that lies above the ordinary high-water mark.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-42 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Use. The purpose for which land or premises or a structure or building thereon is designed, arranged, intended or for which is occupied, maintained, let or leased.
Variance. A modification of the literal provisions of the Zoning Ordinance granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with Article 17 of this ordinance.
Veterinary Hospital. See Clinic, Veterinary.
Wall. An obscuring structure of definite height and location, constructed of masonry, concrete or similar approved material.
Watercourse. As defined in the Charter Township of Oxford Wetlands & Watercourses Ordinance No. 80B, as amended.
Warehouse. A building used primarily for storage of goods and materials. See also Distribution Center.
Wetland. As defined in the Charter Township of Oxford Wetlands & Watercourses Ordinance No. 80B, as amended.
Wind Energy Conversion System (WECS). Any such device such as a wind charger, windmill, or wind turbine that converts wind energy into a form of electrical energy greater than one (1) kilowatt.
1. Agricultural WECS. Any WECS that is accessory to a permitted farm or agricultural operation, and is designed to serve the needs of the farm or agricultural operation.
2. Authorized Factory Representative. An individual with technical training of a WECS who has received factory installation instructions and is certified in writing by the manufacturer of the WECS.
3. Commercial WECS. Any WECS that is designed and built to provide electricity to the electric utility’s power grid as an ongoing commercial enterprise and/or profit.
4. Facility Abandonment. Out of production for a period of time not less than one (1) year.
5. Manual and Automatic Controls. Gives protection to power grids and limit rotation of WECS blades to below the designed limits of the conversion system.
6. Private WECS. Any WECS that is accessory to a principal non-farm, non-agricultural use located on the same lot, and is designed and built to serve the needs of the principal use which may provide some electricity back to the power grid when needs of the principal use are exceeded.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-43 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
7. Professional Engineer. Any licensed engineer registered in the State of Michigan.
8. Temporary WECS. Any WECS not permanently affixed to a structure or the ground and will serve a need for no more than 365 days.
9. Utility Scale. All wind farms that are rated to produce greater than fifty (50) kilowatts of energy.
Wireless Communication Facilities. Includes all structures and accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may include, but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone devices and exchanges, microwave relay towers, telephone transmission equipment buildings and commercial mobile radio service facilities. Not included within this definition are citizen band radio facilities, short wave facilities, ham amateur radio facilities, satellite dishes, and governmental facilities which may be subject to state or federal law or regulations which preempt municipal regulatory authority. For purposes of this Ordinance, the following additional terms are defined:
1. Wireless Communications Facilities, Attached. Wireless communication facilities that are affixed to existing structures, such as existing buildings, towers, water tanks, utility poles, and the like. A wireless communication support structure proposed to be newly established shall not be included within this definition.
2. Wireless Communication Support Structures. Structures erected or modified to support wireless communication antennas. Support structures within this definition include, but shall not be limited to, monopoles, lattice towers, light poles, wood poles and guyed towers, or other structures which appear to be something other than a mere support structure.
3. Collocation. The location by two (2) or more cellular communication providers of cellular communication facilities on a common structure, tower or building
Yard. A general term applied to the space on a lot or parcel, which lot or parcel contains a building or group of buildings, lying between the building or group of buildings and the nearest respective lot or property line facing each building.
Yard, Front. A required front yard is an open space extending the full width of a lot and of a uniform depth (setback) measured horizontally at right angles to the front lot line and unoccupied from the ground upward except as hereinafter specified (see Figure 7).
Yard, Rear. A required rear yard is an open space extending the full width of a lot and of a uniform depth (setback) measured horizontally at right angles to the rear
Charter Township of Oxford 2-44 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
lot line and unoccupied from the ground upward as herein otherwise specified (see Figure 7).
Yard, Required. An open space of prescribed width or depth adjacent to a lot or property line on the same land with a building or group of buildings, which open space lies in the area between the building or group of buildings and the nearest lot line and is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein.
Yard, Side. A required side yard is an open space extending from the front to the rear yard and of a uniform width (setback) measured horizontally at right angles to the side lot line; and unoccupied from the ground upward except as herein otherwise specified (see Figure 7).
Figure 7
Zoning Administrator or Enforcement Officer. The person appointed by the Township Board to administer and enforce the standards of this Ordinance.
Zoning Compliance Permit. A permit issued by the Zoning Administrator or Enforcement Officer prior to construction, enlargement or alterations of property in accordance with Section 16.3 of this Ordinance.
Charter Township of Oxford 2-45 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Charter Township of Oxford 3-1 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ARTICLE 3
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
3.1 Establishment of Zoning Districts. For the purposes of this Ordinance, Oxford Charter Township is hereby divided into the following districts:
AG Agriculture (20 acres)
SF-3 Suburban Farms (10 acres)
SF-2 Suburban Farms (5 acres)
SF-1 Suburban Farms (2.5 acres)
R-3 Single-Family Residential (1 acre)
R-2 Single-Family Residential (25,000 sq. ft.)
R-1 Single-Family Residential (12,000 sq. ft.)
R-1A Single-Family Residential (6,000 sq. ft.)
RM Multi-Family Residential
MHC Manufactured Housing Community
C-1 Local Commercial
C-2 General Commercial
O Office
RO Research-Office
I-1 Light Industrial
I-2 General Industrial
R Recreation G Gravel and Sand Overlay
3.2 Official Zoning Map.
A. Identification. The zoning districts as provided in Section 3.1 are bounded and defined as shown on the map entitled "Zoning District Map of the Charter Township of Oxford." The Zoning District Map, along with all notations, references, and other information shown thereon shall accompany and be made a part of this Ordinance.
B. Authority. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Zoning District Map, which may be published, a true and current copy of the Zoning District Map available for public inspection shall be located in and maintained by the Office of the Township Clerk. The Clerk's copy shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of any land, parcel, lot, district, use, building, or structure in the Township.
C. Interpreting Zoning District Boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the districts indicated on the Zoning District Map, the following rules shall apply:
Charter Township of Oxford 3-2 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
1. A boundary indicated as approximately following the centerline of a highway, alley, or easement shall be construed as following such centerline.
2. A boundary indicated approximately following a recorded lot line or the line bounding a parcel shall be construed as following such line.
3. A boundary indicated as approximately following a municipal boundary line of a city, village, or township shall be construed as following such line.
4. A boundary indicated as following a railroad line shall be construed as being located midway in the right-of-way.
5. A boundary indicated as following a shoreline shall be construed as following such shoreline, and in the event of change in the shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline.
6. A boundary indicated as following the centerline of a stream or river, canal, lake or other body of water shall be construed as following such centerline.
7. A boundary indicated as parallel to, or an extension of, features in items (1) through (6) preceding shall be so construed.
8. A distance not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
9. Where a physical or cultural feature existing on the ground is at variance with that shown on the Official Zoning District Map or any other circumstances not covered by items (1) through (8) preceding, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall interpret the location of the zoning district boundary.
D. Amendment. In accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and Michigan Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended, changes made in district boundaries and other matters portrayed on the Zoning District Map shall be entered on the Zoning District Map after the amendment has been approved by the Township Board and has taken effect pursuant to Michigan Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended. No changes shall be made to the Zoning District Map except in conformity with the provision of Article 18.
3.3 Application of Zoning District Regulations. The regulations herein established within each zoning district shall be the minimum regulations for promoting and protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare and shall be uniform for each class of land, buildings, structure, or uses throughout each district. Wherever the requirements of this Ordinance are at variance with the requirements of any other adopted rules or regulations, ordinances, deed restrictions, or covenants, the
Charter Township of Oxford 3-3 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
most restrictive or those imposing the higher standards shall govern. Except as hereinafter provided, district regulations shall be applied in the following manner:
A. No building shall hereafter be erected, altered, or moved, nor shall any building or premises hereafter be used for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which said building or premises is located, subject to the following:
1. Permitted Uses. Uses shall be permitted by right only if specifically listed as principal permitted uses in the various zoning districts or are similar to such listed uses. All other uses not listed are prohibited.
2. Accessory Uses and Buildings. Accessory uses and buildings are permitted only if such uses are clearly incidental to the permitted principal uses.
3. Special Land Uses. Special land uses may be permitted as listed or if similar in density, intensity, traffic generation or environmental impact to the listed special uses.
B. No building shall hereafter be erected or altered which
1. Deviates from any of the requirements of Section 3.7, Schedule of District Regulations, for the district in which such building is located.
2. Exceeds the height limit specified for the district in which such building is located.
3. Occupies a greater percentage of lot area than is specified for the district in which such building is located.
4. Intrudes upon the required front, rear, or side yards, as specified for the district in which such building is located.
5. Accommodates or houses a greater number of families than is specified for the district in which such building is located.
6. Provides less living space per dwelling unit than is specified for the district in which such building is located.
C. No lot area shall be so reduced or diminished that yards and other open spaces shall be smaller than specified, nor shall the density of lots or units be increased in any manner except in conformity with the area regulations, nor shall the area of any lot be reduced below the minimum requirements herein established for the district in which such lot is located.
D. No part of a yard or other open space required for any building for the purposes of compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be
Charter Township of Oxford 3-4 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building.
E. Every building erected, altered, or moved shall be located on a lot of record as defined herein, and except in the case of approved multiple dwelling, commercial, office and industrial developments, there shall be no more than (1) principal building and its permitted accessory structures located on each lot in any district.
F. Whenever any street, alley or other public way within the Charter Township of Oxford shall have been vacated by official governmental action or operation of law and when the lands within the boundaries thereof attach to and become a part of lands adjoining such street, alley, or public right-of-way, such lands shall automatically and without further governmental action thenceforth acquire and be subjected to the same zoning regulations as are applicable to lands to which same shall attach, and the same shall be used for the same use as is permitted under this Ordinance for such adjoining lands.
G. Whenever any fill is placed in any lake or stream, the land thus created shall automatically and without further governmental action thenceforth acquire and be subjected to the same zoning regulations as are applicable to lands to which the same shall attach or be adjacent, and the same shall be used for the same purposes as are permitted under this Ordinance for such adjoining lands. No use of the surface of any lake or stream shall be permitted for any purpose not permitted on the land from which the use emanates.
3.4 Intent of Districts. The intent and purpose of each district is set forth as follows:
A. AG, Agriculture. The Agricultural Districts are intended to provide areas where farming, dairying, raising of animals, forestry, raising of nursery stock, and similar rural activities can coexist with rural residential development on acreage homesites. These areas are not expected to be serviced by public utilities, such as sanitary sewers, and their preservation will enhance the Township's overall character and prevent premature, scattered development.
B. SF-1, 2 and 3, Suburban Farms. The Suburban Farms districts are intended to have a low population and development density in order to protect areas that have significant topography, scenic beauty or other unique natural resources that should be preserved and enhanced. It is further the intent of the Suburban Farms districts to foster a residential environment for individuals and families that is more open and rural, and at a lower density than the Single-Family Residential districts. Sanitary sewer service is not anticipated to be available within the Suburban Farms districts.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-5 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
C. R-1A, 1, 2 and 3, Single-Family Residential. The intent of the Single-Family Residential districts is to provide districts in which the principal land use is single-family residential, along with those uses which are compatible with a single-family residential environment and are customarily accessory to or supportive of such uses. A reasonable range of lot sizes is envisioned which will provide a variety of desirable and economically feasible housing opportunities for all members of the general public. Certain other private and public uses are also intended for these districts, subject to conditions which will insure their compatibility with the main use and character of these districts.
D. RM, Multiple-Family Residential. The intent of the Multiple-Family Residential district is to provide sites for two-family and multiple-family residential land use, along with those uses which are compatible with a multiple-family residential environment and are customarily accessory to or supportive of such uses. These districts are intended to serve the Township’s limited needs for higher density residential land use. Such districts shall serve as zones of transition between non-residential districts and lower density single-family districts, and shall have access to major thoroughfares and centralized sewer and water facilities. Certain other private and public uses are also intended for these districts, subject to conditions which will insure their compatibility with the main use and character of these districts.
E. MHC, Manufactured Housing Community. The intent of the Manufactured Housing Community district is to provide districts of such size and location as will encourage the development of quality manufactured housing communities, in areas of the Township having access to major thoroughfares and centralized sewer and water facilities, and otherwise protecting the health, safety and welfare of manufactured housing community residents in the Charter Township Oxford.
F. C-1, Local Commercial. The Local Commercial districts are intended to provide a limited number of locations for clusters of retail stores and personal service establishments for the everyday convenience of the nearby residential neighborhoods. In order to protect nearby residential areas, all C-1 uses must be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
G. C-2, General Commercial. The General Commercial districts are intended to provide sites for more intensive and more diversified business types that would typically serve community and regional trade areas and might have a negative impact on adjoining residential areas because of intensity or outdoor activities.
H. O, Office. The intent of the Office districts is to provide locations in the Township for professional offices and related uses of a lower-intensity
Charter Township of Oxford 3-6 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
nature than those found in the Township’s commercial and industrial districts, developed in a fashion that is compatible with neighboring land uses. Such districts shall serve as zones of transition between commercial/industrial districts and residential areas. It is intended that such uses have access to major thoroughfares and centralized sewer and water facilities.
I. RO, Research-Office. The Research-Office districts are intended to provide sites for uses which combine research, office, manufacturing, and/or educational activities within the same building or group of buildings in a campus or planned development atmosphere. All activities within the Research-Office Districts are intended to occur within completely enclosed buildings to that there will be no external physical effects on adjoining properties in other districts.
J. I-1, Light Industrial. The Light Industrial districts are intended to accommodate certain industrial, research and warehousing activities whose external physical effects are minimal, plus wholesale and intensive service activities of a nature that does not justify their inclusion in any commercial use district. It is also the intent of this Article to encourage the development of planned industrial parks characterized by principal uses which are located in a building on a landscaped site, served by adequate off-street parking, loading, and screening of adjacent districts.
K. I-2, General Industrial. The General Industrial districts are intended to accommodate large scale assembly and fabrication activities, including specialized industrial operations whose external physical effects could adversely affect surrounding uses and districts in the absence of special review and discretionary approval by The Planning Commission. The General Industrial districts are also intended to permit manufacturing, compounding, and processing of products from raw materials only by special approval.
L. R, Recreation. The Recreation districts are intended to allow, with regulation, public and private recreational use of lands with such amenities as lakes, streams, pronounced topography, woodlands, wetlands, flood plains and similar natural features. It is further the intent of these districts that any use, improvement, or development of these lands should be designed to safeguard, preserve, and protect the natural features.
M. G, Gravel and Sand Overlay. The Gravel and Sand Overlay districts are intended for those lands that have significant gravel and/or sand deposits and which will be mined and reclaimed under the provisions of this Article in a manner that protects the public health, safety and welfare, and in accordance with a reclamation plan consistent with the underlying, principal zoning classification and the Township's adopted Master Plan for the particular geographic area. It is the intent of this district that all gravel and
Charter Township of Oxford 3-7 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
sand mining operations reclaim the mining sites in a fashion that preserves the value of the property and facilitates reuse of the land consistent with the Township's adopted Master Plan.
3.5 Schedule of Use Regulations. Permitted and special land uses are set forth by zoning district as follows:
Charter Township of Oxford 3-8 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
A. AG, Agriculture.
1. Permitted Uses.
a. Agricultural uses in compliance with the Right to Farm Act, P.A. 93 of 1981.
b. Roadside stand for sale of agricultural products raised or grown on the premises, subject to Section 6.15.
c. Public or private conservation area, forest preserve, game refuge, wildlife preserve, or park.
d. Single-family dwelling, detached.
e. Keeping of Farm Animals, subject to Section 6.24.
f. Child or Adult Family Day Care Home.
g. Adult Foster Care Family Home.
h. Home occupations, subject to Section 6.10.
i. Essential services, subject to Section 6.8.
j. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are customarily incidental to those uses listed above, subject to Section 6.2.
2. Special Uses.
a. Agribusiness use, such as:
i. Cider mill;
ii. Demonstration farm open to the public;
iii. Farm implement sales or repair operation;
iv. Fertilizer, feed or seed sales facility;
v. Livestock auction yard;
b. Bed and Breakfast Establishment, Subject to Section 5.5.
c. Campground, subject to Section 5.6.
d. Cemetery.
e. Church, subject to Section 5.10.
f. Commercial kennel, subject to Section 5.22.
g. Commercial, non-farm nursery or greenhouse.
h. Commercial outdoor recreation, subject to Section 5.12.
i. Country club.
j. Domestic radio, television broadcast station, receiving or broadcasting towers, excluding wireless / cellular towers / facilities.
k. Golf course or driving range, subject to Section 5.17.
l. Horse Riding Stable and Sales Barn, subject to Section 5.19.
m. Oil or gas extraction.
n. Private airport.
o. Private elementary, middle, or secondary school; college or university.
p. Private Kennel, subject to Section 5.22.
q. Recreational vehicle storage, subject to Section 8.8.
r. Temporary housing for seasonal labor.
s. Veterinary clinic, large animal.
t. Wireless communication facilities, subject to Section 5.32.
u. Yard Waste Composting Facilities, subject to Section 5.33.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-9 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
B. SF-3, Suburban Farms.
1. Permitted Uses.
a. Agricultural uses in compliance with the Right to Farm Act.
b. Roadside stand for sale of agricultural products raised or grown on the premises, subject to Section 6.15.
c. Public or private conservation area, forest preserve, game refuge, wildlife preserve, or park.
d. Single-family dwelling, detached.
e. Keeping of Farm Animals subject to Section 6.24.
f. Child or Adult Family Day Care Home.
g. Adult Foster Care Family Home.
h. Home occupations, subject to Section 6.10.
i. Essential services, subject to Section 6.8.
j. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are customarily incidental to those uses listed above, subject to Section 6.2.
2. Special Land Uses.
a. Bed and Breakfast Establishment, Subject to Section 5.5.
b. Cemetery.
c. Church, subject to Section 5.10.
d. Commercial kennel, subject to Section 5.22.
e. Commercial, non-farm nursery or greenhouse.
f. Commercial outdoor recreation, subject to Section 5.12.
g. Country club.
h. Domestic radio, television broadcast station, receiving or broadcasting towers, excluding wireless / cellular towers / facilities.
i. Golf course or driving range, subject to Section 5.17.
j. Horse Riding Stable and Sales Barn, subject to Section 5.19.
k. Oil or gas extraction.
l. Private airport.
m. Private elementary, middle, or secondary school; college or university.
n. Private Kennel, subject to Section 5.22.
o. Recreational vehicle storage, subject to Section 8.8.
p. Veterinary clinic, large animal.
q. Wireless communication facilities, subject to Section 5.32.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-10 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
C. SF-2, Suburban Farms
1. Permitted Uses.
a. All permitted uses in the SF-3 district.
2. Special Land Uses.
a. All special land uses in the SF-3 district.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-11 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
D. SF-1, Suburban Farms.
1. Permitted Uses.
a. All permitted uses in the SF-2 and SF-3 districts.
2. Special Land Uses.
a. All special land uses in the SF-2 and SF-3 districts.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-12 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
E. R-3, Single -Family Residential.
1. Permitted Uses.
a. Single-family dwelling, detached.
b. Child or Adult Family Day Care Home.
c. Adult Foster Care Family Home.
d. Home occupations, subject to Section 6.10.
e. Essential services, subject to Section 6.8.
f. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are customarily incidental to those uses listed above, subject to Section 6.2.
2. Special Uses.
a. Adult Foster Care Group Home, subject to Section 5.16.
b. Child or Adult Group Day Care Home, subject to Section 5.15.
c. Child Day Care Center, subject to Section 5.15.
d. Church.
e. Private elementary, middle, or secondary school; college or university.
f. Private Kennel, subject to Section 5.22.
g. Community swimming pool.
h. Libraries, museums or similar non-commercial cultural facilities.
i. Convalescent/Nursing Home, subject to Section 5.14
j. Public or private parks and recreation activities and conservation areas.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-13 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
F. R-2, Single-Family Residential.
1. Permitted Uses.
a. Single-family dwelling, detached.
b. Child or Adult Family Day Care Home.
c. Adult Foster Care Family Home.
d. Home occupations, subject to Section 6.10.
e. Essential services, subject to Section 6.8.
f. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are customarily incidental to those uses listed above, subject to Section 6.2.
2. Special Uses.
a. Adult Foster Care Group Home, subject to Section 5.16.
b. Child or Adult Group Day Care Home, subject to Section 5.15.
c. Child Day Care Center, subject to Section 5.15.
d. Church.
e. Private elementary, middle, or secondary school; college or university.
f. Private Kennel, subject to Section 5.22.
g. Community swimming pool.
h. Libraries, museums or similar non-commercial cultural facilities.
i. Convalescent/Nursing Home, subject to Section 5.14.
j. Public or private parks and recreation activities and conservation areas.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-14 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
G. R-1, Single-Family Residential.
1. Permitted Uses.
a. Single-family dwelling, detached.
b. Child or Adult Family Day Care Home.
c. Adult Foster Care Family Home.
d. Home occupations, subject to Section 6.10.
e. Essential services, subject to Section 6.8.
f. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are customarily incidental to those uses listed above, subject to Section 6.2.
2. Special Uses.
a. Adult Foster Care Group Home, subject to Section 5.16.
b. Child or Adult Group Day Care Home, subject to Section 5.15.
c. Child Day Care Center, subject to Section 5.15.
d. Church.
e. Private elementary, middle, or secondary school; college or university.
f. Community swimming pool.
g. Libraries, museums or similar non-commercial cultural facilities.
h. Public or private parks and recreation activities and conservation areas.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-15 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
H. R-1A, Single-Family Residential.
1. Permitted Uses.
a. Single-family dwelling, detached.
b. Child or Adult Family Day Care Home.
c. Adult Foster Care Family Home.
d. Home occupations, subject to Section 6.10.
e. Essential services, subject to Section 6.8.
f. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are customarily incidental to those uses listed above, subject to Section 6.2.
2. Special Uses.
a. Adult Foster Care Group Home, subject to Section 5.16.
b. Child or Adult Group Day Care Home, subject to Section 5.15.
c. Child Day Care Center, subject to Section 5.15.
d. Church.
e. Private elementary, middle, or secondary school; college or university.
f. Community swimming pool.
g. Libraries, museums or similar non-commercial cultural facilities.
h. Public or private parks and recreation activities and conservation areas.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-16 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
I. RM, Multiple-Family Residential.
1. Permitted Uses.
a. Multiple-family dwelling.
b. Single-family dwelling, attached.
c. Public or private parks and recreation activities and conservation areas.
d. Child or Adult Family Day Care Home.
e. Adult Foster Care Family Home.
f. Municipal buildings not requiring outdoor storage.
g. Police, fire or emergency medical station.
h. Home occupations, subject to Section 6.10.
i. Essential services, subject to Section 6.8.
j. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are customarily incidental to those uses listed above, subject to Section 6.2.
2. Special Uses.
a. Adult Foster Care Group Home, subject to Section 5.16.
b. Child or Adult Group Day Care Home, subject to Section 5.15.
c. Child Day Care Center, subject to Section 5.15.
d. Church.
e. Community swimming pool.
f. Golf course.
g. Funeral home.
h. Private elementary, middle, or secondary school; college or university.
i. Libraries, museums or similar non-commercial cultural facilities.
j. Convalescent/Nursing Home, subject to Section 5.14
Charter Township of Oxford 3-17 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
J. MHC, Manufactured Housing Community.
1. Permitted Uses.
a. Manufactured Housing Community developments subject to all minimum requirements and standards as established in the Mobile Home Commission Act, Act 96 of 1987 as amended, and all rules promulgated pursuant to Act 96, as may be amended, and further subject to Section 3.8(C).
b. Recreational facilities for the residents of manufactured housing communities.
c. Accessory buildings required for normal operation of the mobile home development. Such uses as stores, mechanical dispensers, equipment storage, and coin operated laundry facilities, subject to Section 3.8(C).
d. Administration building for conducting the operation and maintenance of Manufactured Housing Community developments.
e. Family Day Care Home.
f. Adult Foster Care Family Home.
g. Essential services, subject to Section 6.8.
2. Special Uses.
a. Adult Foster Care Group Home, subject to Section 5.16.
b. Child or Adult Group Day Care Home, subject to Section 5.15.
c. Child Day Care Center, subject to Section 5.15.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-18 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
K. C-1, Local Commercial
1. Permitted Uses.
a. Retail use of up to 10,000 square feet in gross floor area, including but not limited to, convenience stores, bakeries, butchers, specialty grocers, pharmacies, etc.
b. Financial or business service establishment, including but not limited to, banks, credit unions, insurance offices, etc..
c. Personal service establishment.
d. Dry cleaning drop-off center.
e. Laundromat.
f. Professional office for doctors, dentists, lawyers, architects, engineers, or other similar professions.
g. Post offices or other similar governmental office serving nearby residential areas.
h. Police, fire or emergency medical station.
i. Club or lodge.
j. Essential services and structures, transmission and distribution lines, pipelines, telephone repeaters and related structures, subject to Section 6.8.
k. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are customarily incidental to those uses listed above, subject to Section 6.2.
l. Uses which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are similar to the above permitted uses.
2. Special Land Uses.
a. Automobile Service Station, subject to Section 5.3.
b. Automobile Convenience Mart, subject to Section 5.3.
c. Day Care Center, subject to Section 5.15.
d. Funeral home.
e. Commercial indoor or outdoor recreation, subject to Sections 5.11 and 5.12.
f. Restaurant, Sit-Down or Carry-Out.
g. Bulk propane sales and dispensing stations, subject to state licensing regulations.
h. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are customarily incidental to those uses listed above, subject to Section 6.2.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-19 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
L. C-2, General Commercial
1. Permitted Uses.
a. All uses permitted by right in the C-1 district.
b. Retail uses of up to 70,000 square feet in gross floor area, including but not limited to, supermarkets, pharmacies, etc.
c. Restaurant, Sit-Down or Carry-Out.
d. Day Care Center, subject to Section 5.15.
e. Health and fitness club.
f. Funeral home.
g. Theater, excluding drive-in theater.
h. Public or private college.
i. Essential services and structures, transmission and distribution lines, pipelines, telephone repeaters and related structures, subject to Section 6.8.
j. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are customarily incidental to those uses listed above, subject to Section 6.2.
k. Commercial Indoor Recreation, subject to Section 5.11.
l. Uses which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are similar to the above permitted uses.
2. Special Land Uses.
a. All special uses permitted in the C-1 district, excepting those that are permitted by right in the C-2 district.
b. Retail uses of more than 70,000 square feet (GFA), including but not limited to, supermarkets, pharmacies, discount stores, membership warehouses, etc.
c. Automobile Repair Establishment, subject to Section 5.3.
d. Automobile Wash Establishment, subject to Section 5.4.
e. Automobile or RV Sales Establishment, subject to Section 6.13.
f. Assembly or dance hall.
g. Bar or lounge.
h. Commercial kennel, subject to Section 5.22.
i. Motel or hotel, subject to Section 5.26.
j. Equipment and/or vehicle rental.
k. Drive-in/drive-thru business associated with permitted use, subject to Section 6.6.
l. Open air business, subject to Section 613.
m. Outdoors sale and display of products, subject to Section 6.13.
n. Veterinary clinic
o. Transient, temporary amusements, subject to Section 5.12.
p. Domestic radio, television broadcast station, receiving or broadcasting towers, excluding wireless / cellular towers / facilities.
q. Wireless Communication Facilities, subject to Section 5.32.
r. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are customarily incidental to those uses listed above, subject to Section 6.2.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-20 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
M. O, Office.
1. Permitted Uses.
a. Administrative or professional office, including, but not limited to, doctors, lawyers, dentists, engineers, architects, tax or financial consultants, realtors, insurance agents, or brokers.
b. Medical or dental office, excluding veterinarian establishments and medical facilities permitting overnight patients.
c. Office of local, state or federal governmental agency.
d. Office of non-profit organizations, including, but not limited to, labor unions; civic, social or fraternal associations; or political or religious organizations, excluding those requiring large meeting or assembly halls.
e. Data processing or computer center, including sales, service and maintenance of electronic data processing equipment.
f. Police, fire or emergency medical station.
g. Essential services and structures, transmission and distribution lines, pipelines, telephone repeaters and related structures, subject to Section 6.8.
a. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are customarily incidental to those uses listed above, subject to Section 6.2.
b. Uses which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are similar to the above permitted uses.
2. Special Land Uses.
a. Laboratory and office for industrial, scientific, or business research, development and testing, including limited manufacturing operations incidental to these uses equal to no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total usable floor area.
b. Prototype development and testing facility, including limited manufacturing operations incidental to these uses equal to no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total usable floor area.
c. Motel or hotel, subject to Section 5.26.
d. Day Care Center, subject to Section 5.15.
e. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are customarily incidental to those uses listed above, subject to Section 6.2.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-21 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
N. RO, Research-Office.
1. Permitted Uses.
a. Laboratory and office for industrial, scientific, or business research, development and testing, including limited manufacturing operations incidental to these uses equal to no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total usable floor area.
b. Prototype development and testing facility, including limited manufacturing operations incidental to these uses equal to no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total usable floor area.
c. Any use whose principal function is technical training.
d. Universities, and similar institutions, providing technical education.
e. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are customarily incidental to those uses listed above, subject to Section 6.2.
f. Uses which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are similar to the above permitted uses.
2. Special Land Uses.
a. Pharmaceutical manufacturing and similar or related uses, excluding retail sales.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-22 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
O. I-1, Light Industrial.
1. Permitted Uses.
a. All permitted uses in the O district.
b. The manufacture, assembly, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment from previously prepared materials, or repair of products, including, but not limited to:
i. Textile goods;
ii. Apparel or leather goods;
iii. Sporting goods;
iv. Light sheet metal products, including heating or ventilating equipment, siding, and the like;
v. Electric or neon signs;
vi. Furniture or fixtures;
vii. Glass products (using purchased glass);
viii. Converted paper or paper products;
ix. Printing or publishing;
x. Jewelry, silverware or plated ware;
xi. Office or artists supplies and materials;
xii. Professional or scientific instruments, photographic and optical equipment and supplies;
c. Wholesale or warehouse establishment.
d. Contractor establishment, equipment and material storage yard, subject to Section 10.5.
e. Self-storage facility.
f. Scientific research facility or testing laboratory.
g. Automobile Repair Establishment, subject to Section 5.3.
h. Truck or Heavy Equipment Sales Establishment, subject to Section 6.13.
i. Equipment and/or vehicle rental.
j. Agricultural wholesale or retail facility, including bulk storage of commodities in elevators or other transfer structures.
k. Police, fire or emergency medical station.
l. Municipal equipment or material storage yard.
m. Radio TV broadcasting, transmitting or receiving towers.
n. Commercial indoor recreation, subject to Section 5.11.
o. Essential services, subject to Section 6.8.
p. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are customarily incidental to those uses listed above, subject to Section 6.2.
q. Uses which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are similar to the above permitted uses.
2. Special Uses.
a. All special uses permitted in the O district, except those that are permitted by right in the I-1 district.
b. Cartage, trucking or distribution center.
c. Bulk storage of refined petroleum products above or below ground.
d. Bulk Propane Sales and Dispensing Stations, subject to state licensing regulations.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-23 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
e. Building material or lumber supply (sales and/or storage).
f. Private airport
g. Central dry cleaning plant.
h. Recycling collection center.
i. Commercial outdoor storage, subject to Section 10.5.
j. Fabrication of metal products, excepting heavy machinery and transportation equipment.
k. Junk yard or salvage operation, subject to Section 5.21.
l. Lumber mill or saw mill.
m. Manufacture of monuments, cut stone, stone or clay products.
n. Municipal water or waste water treatment facility.
o. Radio, television, telephone, transmitter tower.
p. Recreational vehicle storage, subject to Section 10.5.
q. Sales, leasing, or storage of contractor's equipment or supplies.
r. Heavy Vehicle Repair Establishment, including, trucks, farm and construction equipment, subject to Section 5.18.
s. Wireless Communication Facility, subject to Section 5.32.
t. Retail sales of goods assembled on the premises, provided the building floor area devoted to retail sales comprises no more than twenty-five (25) percent of principal building usable floor area and the outdoor sales area comprises no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the minimum required lot area.
u. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are customarily incidental to those uses listed above, subject to Section 6.2.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-24 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
P. I-2, General Industrial.
1. Permitted Uses.
a. All permitted uses in the I-1 and RO District.
b. Any manufacturing or other industrial-type or related use including but not limited to the following:
i. The manufacturing, fabrication and assembling of motor vehicle equipment and parts, farm machinery and equipment, heavy industrial machinery and equipment;
ii. Production, manufacturing, processing and packaging of such products as cereals, dog foods, soft drinks, and distillation of grains and fruits;
iii. Drop forges, heavy stamping, fabricating, assembly and other manufacturing processes, except tanneries, slaughter houses, stock yards, oil refineries, or soap factories;
iv. Lumber mill or saw mill;
v. Manufacturing or processing of wood, concrete, cinder block and brick;
vi. Manufacture of major appliances;
vii. Pressing, stamping or forming of major sheet metal parts; and
viii. Manufacture of iron, aluminum, bronze and other castings.
c. Cartage, trucking or distribution center.
d. Certain uses, which, by their nature, would be dangerous in a community with large residential areas, are prohibited;
e. Essential services and structures, transmission and distribution lines, pipelines, telephone repeaters and related structures, subject to Section 6.8;
f. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are customarily incidental to those uses listed above, subject to Section 6.2;
g. Uses which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are similar to the above permitted uses.
2. Special Uses.
a. All special uses in the I-1 and RO Zoning District.
b. Production, processing or packaging of such products as cosmetics, toiletries, and pharmaceuticals.
c. Landfill, subject to Section 5.23.
d. Materials recycling facility.
e. Commercial composting.
f. Slaughterhouses.
g. Adult Regulated Uses, subject to Section 5.1.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-25 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Q. G, Gravel and Sand Overlay.
1. Permitted Uses.
a. Plants for processing, transportation and marketing of sand, gravel and/or stone together with accessory buildings, equipment and facilities.
b. Storage and stockpiling of the sand, gravel and/or stone being mined.
c. Outdoor recreation uses, subject to Section 5.12.
2. Special Uses.
a. Mining of sand, gravel, and/or stone, subject to Section 5.25.
b. Private Aircraft Landing Strips.
c. Temporary, Open-Air Uses of an Industrial character.
d. Yard Waste Composting Facilities, subject to Section 5.33.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-26 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
R. R, Recreation.
1. Permitted Uses.
a. Public or private conservation area, forest preserve, game refuge, wildlife preserve, or park, but excluding motorized, off-road vehicles of all types.
b. Golf course or driving range, subject to Section 5.17.
c. Boat liveries and marinas.
d. Caretaker’s Quarters, subject to Section 5.7.
e. Uses which, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, are similar to the above permitted uses.
f. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are customarily incidental to those uses listed above, subject to Section 6.2.
2. Special Uses.
a. Campground, subject to Section 5.6.
b. Commercial outdoor recreation, subject to Section 5.12.
c. Clubs, lodge halls, rental or catering halls, and similar uses.
d. Hotels and motels.
e. Restaurants and Concession Stands.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-27 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3.6 Determination of Similar Uses. In recognition that every potential use cannot be listed in this Zoning Ordinance, the Planning Commission is authorized to determine if a use not listed within a particular zoning district is sufficiently similar to other uses to permit that use within the zoning district without requiring an amendment to this Zoning Ordinance. The Planning Commission shall make a determination of such a similar use according to the following standards:
A. A finding that the proposed use is not listed as a permitted principal use or special land use in any other zoning district shall be made.
B. The Planning Commission shall select the use listed in this Zoning Ordinance which most closely resembles the proposed use, using criteria such as the potential impact on property values, traffic generated, aesthetics, noise, vibration, dust, smoke, odor, glare and other objectionable impacts in terms of the health, safety and welfare of the City. The Planning Commission may request documentation or studies from the applicant or Township staff or consultants to evaluate potential impacts associated with the use, or they may decide there is no similar use.
C. If a similar use is determined, the proposed use shall comply with any special conditions or standards that apply to the similar use.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-28 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3.7 Schedule of District Regulations. District Minimum Lot Area A,B Min. Lot Width C, D Minimum Yard Setback E Maximum Bldg. Height F, G Maximum Lot Coverage H Additional Regulations Front I, J Side J Rear Feet Stories
AG, Agriculture
20 acres
600 ft.
50 ft.
60 ft.
75 ft.
35 ft. K
2½
10%
See §3.8(A)
SF-3, Suburban Farms
10 acres
330 ft.
50 ft.
50 ft.
60 ft.
35 ft.
2½
15%
See §3.8(A)
SF-2, Suburban Farms
5 acres
300 ft.
40 ft.
50 ft.
50 ft.
35 ft.
2½
15%
See §3.8(A)
SF-1, Suburban Farms
2.5 acres
200 ft.
40 ft.
50 ft.
50 ft.
35 ft.
2½
20%
See §3.8(A)
R-3, Single-Family Residential
1 acre
150 ft.
35 ft.
15 ft.
30 ft.
35 ft.
2½
25%
See §3.8(A)
R-2, Single-Family Residential
25,000 s.f.
120 ft.
30 ft.
12.5 ft.
25 ft.
35 ft.
2½
30%
See §3.8(A)
R-1, Single-Family Residential
12,000 s.f.
80 ft.
25 ft.
10 ft. N
20 ft.
35 ft.
2½
35%
See §3.8(A)
R-1A, Single-Family Residential
6,000 s.f.
60 ft.
25 ft.
7.5 ft. N
20 ft.
35 ft.
2½
40%
See §3.8(A)
RM, Multiple-Family Residential
See §3.8(B)
200 ft.
35 ft.
20 ft.
40 ft.
45 ft. L
3
40%
See §3.8(B)
MHC, Manufactured Housing Community
10 acres
330 ft.
40 ft.
20 ft.
35 ft.
25 ft. L
2
35%
See §3.8(C)
C-1, Local Commercial
10,000 s.f.
100 ft.
35 ft.
20 ft. M
25 ft.
35 ft.
2
30%
–
C-2, General Commercial
1 acre
150 ft.
35 ft.
30 ft. M
30 ft.
35 ft.
2
30%
–
O, Office
10,000 s.f.
100 ft.
35 ft.
20 ft.
25 ft.
45 ft.
3
30%
–
RO, Research Office
1 acre
150 ft.
50 ft.
25 ft.
50 ft.
40 ft.
2
30%
I-1, Light Industrial
1 acre
150 ft.
50 ft.
25 ft.
50 ft.
40 ft.
2
35%
–
I-2, General Industrial
2 acres
200 ft.
75 ft.
50 ft.
75 ft.
50 ft.
2
40%
–
R, Recreation
5 acres
330 ft.
50 ft.
50 ft.
50 ft.
35 ft.
2½
10%
G, Gravel and Sand Overlay
See Section
5.25
Charter Township of Oxford 3-29 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Footnotes to the Schedule of District Regulations
A. Net Lot Area, as defined in Section 2.2, shall be used to determine compliance with Minimum Lot Area requirements.
B. When the parcel is not serviced by a centralized sanitary sewer system, the minimum parcel area shall be determined by the ability to provide an adequately sized septic system as approved by the Oakland County Health Division or other governing agencies having jurisdiction.
C. The ratio of the lot depth to lot width shall not exceed the following:
Parcel Size
Maximum Lot Depth-to-Width Ratio
One (1) acre or less
2.5 to 1
1.01 - 10.0 acres
3.5 to 1
10.01 - 20 acres
4.5 to 1
> 20 acres
5.0 to 1
D. Lot width shall be measured as defined in Section 2.2 to determine compliance with Minimum Lot Width requirements. A structure shall not be erected on a lot where the lot axis (used to determine lot width) falls outside of the boundaries of the lot.
E. Permitted Yard Encroachments. Chimneys, fire escapes, balconies, bay windows, roofed porches and similar projections shall be considered integral parts of the building to which they are attached, and shall be subject to all yard and setback requirements. The items listed below may be permitted to encroach upon required yards, according to the standards provided for each, however all other applicable standards of this or any other ordinance shall remain in effect.
1. Terraces, Patios. Terraces, patios, and similar accessory structures that are not attached to a principal or accessory building and are unroofed and without walls or other continuous enclosure may encroach upon required side or rear yards, but shall be no closer than five (5) feet from the side or rear lot line. Such structures may have open railings or fences not exceeding four (4) feet in height and may have non-continuous windbreaks or visual screens not exceeding six (6) feet in height. Such structures are not permitted to encroach into the required front yard.
2. Unenclosed, Unroofed Porches. Unenclosed and unroofed porches and decks, that are attached to a principal or accessory building may encroach upon a required rear yard, but shall be no closer to the rear lot line than one-half (½) the distance of the required rear yard setback. Such structures may have open railings or fences not
Charter Township of Oxford 3-30 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
exceeding four (4) feet in height and may have non-continuous windbreaks or visual screens not exceeding six (6) feet in height. Such structures are not permitted to encroach into the required front or side yards.
3. Architectural Features. Eaves, gutters, sills, pilasters, cornices, belt courses, leaders, and similar architectural features may project into any required yard a maximum of twenty-four (24) inches.
4. Outdoor Residential Mechanical Equipment. Outdoor residential mechanical equipment such as air conditioning equipment and generators may encroach into required side or rear yards but shall be no closer than five (5) feet from the side or rear property line. Such structures are not permitted to encroach into the required front yard.
5. Encroachments Permitted in All Yards. Fences, landscaping, arbors, trellises, driveways and similar items may encroach upon any required yard.
F. Building Height shall be measured in accordance with the definition for Building Height provided in Section 2.2.
G. Exemptions from Building Height Regulations. The following structures and appurtenances shall be exempt from the height regulations of this ordinance: cupolas, spires, belfries, mechanical penthouses, and domes; chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, windmills, public utility transmission and distribution lines and related structures; radio and television broadcasting and receiving antennae; barns, agricultural wind energy conversion systems, silos, grain storage bins and associated equipment; parapets, and other appurtenances usually required to be placed above roof level and not intended for human occupancy. Where exemption from the height regulations of this ordinance for such structures and/or appurtenances is necessary to preserve the function of a particular, the height shall be no greater than that which is minimally necessary to accomplish the intended function. Wireless and/or cellular towers and/or facilities shall not be exempt from the height restrictions of this ordinance.
H. Lot coverage shall be measured as the percentage of Net Lot Area covered by Building Area, as defined in Section 2.2.
I. Minimum Front Yard Setback shall be measured from the Front Lot Line, as defined in Section 2.2.
J. Corner lots shall maintain the Minimum Front Yard Setback from all lot lines fronting on a public or private road.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-31 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
K. The maximum height of barns shall be 50 feet, unless exempt from zoning requirements pursuant to Section 6.3.
L. Detached accessory buildings (clubhouses, maintenance buildings, etc.) in the RM and MHC districts shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
M. Interior side yards are not required, subject to any regulations of the Building Code and adequate access for parking, delivery, and emergency services.
N. Exemptions for Non-Conforming R-1 and R-1A Lots. For existing lots of record within the R-1 or R-1A zoning districts with legally non-conforming lot widths, the required side-yard setback for principal and accessory structures may be reduced to five (5) ft.; however, the sum of the side yards must equal at least twelve and a half (12.5) ft.
3.8 Additional Regulations.
A. Single-Family Residential Regulations. No single-family dwelling (site built), manufactured housing unit, mobile home, modular housing or prefabricated housing located outside of a licensed manufactured housing community shall be permitted unless said dwelling unit conforms to the following standards:
1. Building Permit Required. No single-family dwelling unit shall be constructed without the prior issuance of all necessary Township and/or County building permits.
2. Minimum Floor Area. The minimum floor area provided for a single-family dwelling unit shall be as follows:
Stories
Minimum Gross Floor Area Required
1
960 sq. ft.
1½
1,200 sq. ft., with a 900 sq. ft. first floor
2
1,500 sq. ft., with a 900 sq. ft. first floor
3. Minimum Building Width. The minimum width of the front elevation of a single-family dwelling shall be twenty (20) feet.
4. Elevation of First Floor. All single-family dwellings shall be constructed so that the finish floor elevation of the first floor is no less than twelve (12) inches nor greater than thirty-six (36) inches above the centerline of the road upon which the lot fronts, except as follows:
a. Where the existing elevation of the of the land upon which the dwelling is proposed is greater than twelve (12) inches above the centerline of the road, the finish floor elevation of the first
Charter Township of Oxford 3-32 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
floor shall not exceed eighteen (18) inches above the existing ground elevation.
b. If the finish floor elevation of the first floor of a dwelling is requested to be more than thirty-six (36) inches above the centerline of the road upon which it fronts, a detailed drainage plan, prepared by a civil engineer or landscape architect, shall be provided, demonstrating the following:
i. how the lot will drain;
ii. that the filling of the lot will not disrupt the natural flow of surface water through or across the parcel of land; and,
iii. that there will be no additional flow of water onto adjoining parcels of land.
5. Side-Entry Garage Driveway. Where a side-entry garage is proposed, the minimum width of the portion of the driveway perpendicular to the garage door shall be twenty-five (25) feet (See Figure 1).
6. Driveway Setback. Private driveways shall be set back a minimum of four (4) feet from side and rear property lines. This standard shall not apply to lots with a shared or common driveway (See Figure 1).
Charter Township of Oxford 3-33 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Figure 1 – Side-Entry Garage Driveway Width and Setbacks
7. Foundation.
a. All single-family dwelling units (including premanufactured housing) shall be firmly attached to a permanent foundation constructed on the site in accordance with the Michigan Residential Code.
b. All premanufactured dwelling units shall be installed with the wheels removed. Additionally, no dwelling unit shall have any exposed towing mechanism, undercarriage or chassis.
8. Roof.
a. Roofs on single-family dwelling units shall be double pitched, having a slope of no less than six (6) feet of rise for each twelve (12) feet of run over the majority of the dwelling unit. Additions or repairs to existing dwelling units may involve roof pitches compatible with existing roof pitches.
b. All single-family dwelling units shall have at least a twelve (12) inch roof overhang on the eave sides and gable ends of the building. Such overhang shall be exclusive of gutters.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-34 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
c. Roofs on single-family dwelling units shall be covered in either asphalt, fiberglass, shake or slate shingles.
9. Quality of Workmanship. All rooms and other additions to a dwelling unit shall be of a similar or superior quality of construction as the original portion of the principal structure.
10. Applicable Codes. All single-family dwelling units, including all alterations and additions thereto, shall comply with applicable building and fire codes. In the case of mobile homes or manufactured housing units, all construction, plumbing, electrical systems, and insulation within and connected to said mobile home or manufactured housing unit shall be of a type and quality conforming to the standards promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, being 24 CFR 3280 or 24 CFR 3282, respectively, and as from time to time may be amended. Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable snow load and strength requirements.
11. Sanitary Service and Water Supply. All dwelling units shall be connected to public sanitary sewer and water service, or a private septic system and well, in accordance with all applicable codes and ordinances.
12. Storage. All dwelling units shall include a storage area equal to at least 10% of the gross floor area of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever is less. Such storage area shall be accommodated via basements, attics, closets, or a separate structure of similar construction to that of the principal dwelling.
B. Multiple-Family Residential District Regulations. The following regulations shall apply to all development in the RM district:
1. Unit Density. The maximum permitted density of multiple-family dwelling units shall be based upon the total number of bedrooms. The maximum number of bedrooms permitted shall be equal to the gross buildable area of the subject parcel or development site (in square feet) divided by 1,800. For the purposes of this calculation, efficiency units shall be considered to have one (1) bedroom.
2. Minimum Lot Area. The minimum lot area required per dwelling unit, in square feet, in the RM district shall be based on the following schedule:
Efficiency or 1 bedroom unit
3,000
2 bedroom unit
4,000
3 bedroom unit
5,000
4 or more bedroom unit
6,000
Charter Township of Oxford 3-35 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
For purposes of the above calculations, a den, library, or other extra room shall be counted as a bedroom. In addition to the above requirements, no RM development shall exceed an overall density of ten (10) dwelling units per acre.
Sites containing only two-family dwellings shall have a minimum lot area of 17,000 square feet.
3. Building Length. Multiple-family buildings shall not exceed 200 feet in overall length.
4. Setbacks Adjacent to Single-Family Residential. No multiple family dwelling shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to property zoned or used for single-family residential purposes, including AG, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, R-1A, R-1, R-2, and R-3.
5. Building Spacing. In addition to required yard setbacks provided elsewhere in this Ordinance, where two (2) or more multiple-family dwelling structures exist on the same parcel, the following minimum separation distances shall be maintained:
a. Where buildings are front-to-front or front-to-rear, a minimum separation of 70 feet shall be provided;
b. Where buildings are side-to-side, a minimum separation of 20 feet shall be provided;
c. Where buildings are front-to-side, rear-to-side or rear-to-rear, a minimum separation of 45 feet shall be provided.
6. Side-Entry Garage Driveway. Where a side-entry garage is proposed, the minimum width of the portion of the driveway perpendicular to the garage door shall be twenty-five (25) feet. In the case of a shared/common driveway, the minimum width of the portion of the driveway between the side-entry garages shall be no less than fifty-five (55) feet (See Figure 2).
Charter Township of Oxford 3-36 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Figure 2 – Multi-Family Side-Entry Garage Driveway Width
7. Access. Multiple-family developments shall have paved access to a major collector or arterial road.
8. Internal Streets, Drives and Parking. All internal parking and circulation areas shall meet the standards provided in Article 8.
9. Pedestrian Facilities. Sidewalks at least five (5) feet in width shall be provided on both sides of internal public and private streets within multiple-family residential developments. In instances where new sidewalks will not promote adequate pedestrian linkages/circulation, the Planning Commission may waive this sidewalk requirement. Sidewalks shall also connect building entrances, parking areas, and recreational areas found on-site to one another and to sidewalks or safety paths found within the adjacent road right(s)-of-way. Such sidewalks shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the Safety Paths and Sidewalks Ordinance (Article III of Chapter 42 of the Code of Ordinances). Safety paths shall also be provided pursuant to Article III of Chapter 42 of the Code of Ordinances.
C. Manufactured Housing Community Regulations. Manufactured housing communities shall be developed in accordance with the Mobile Home Commission Act, P.A. 96 of 1987, as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
Charter Township of Oxford 3-37 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Charter Township of Oxford 4-1 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ARTICLE 4
SPECIAL LAND USES
4.1 Intent. In addition to permitted uses specified in each zoning district, there are certain other uses which may be necessary or desirable to allow in certain locations in certain districts. However, due to their impacts on neighboring uses or public facilities, there is a need to carefully regulate them with respect to their location for the protection of the community. These uses may have to be established in a district where they cannot be reasonably allowed as a permitted use without meeting certain specified conditions. It is the intent of this Section to provide the necessary regulations to address such uses, to be referred to as "special land uses." It is further the intent to provide the Planning Commission with a set of standards upon which to make decisions with respect to special land uses.
4.2 Authority. The Planning Commission shall have the power to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove, all special land uses.
4.3 Application. A request for special land use approval shall be made to the Planning Commission upon an application form provided by the Building Department. Said application for the approval of a special land use shall be made by an owner, lessee or other person with a legal interest in the property and who has the owner's consent, in writing, to file the application.
4.4 Procedures. An application for a special land use shall be processed as follows:
A. The applicant may request a pre-application conference with Township staff.
B. The applicant submits completed application form and a site plan prepared in accordance with Article 12.
C. The Zoning Administrator reviews the proposed application to determine if all required information has been supplied, and then distributes the submitted material to appropriate departments and consultants for review.
D. The submitted material and Township staff and consultant reports are simultaneously distributed to the Planning Commission and Township Board.
E. The Zoning Administrator shall provide notice of a public hearing in accordance with Section 16.9.
F. Review Comments from the Township Board shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission prior the scheduled public hearing.
Charter Township of Oxford 4-2 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
G. The Planning Commission shall conduct a public hearing.
H. The Planning Commission shall review the special land use request in consideration of the general standards listed in Section 4.5.
I. The Planning Commission, in its sole discretion, shall take one of the following actions:
1. Approve the special land use.
2. Approve the special land use with conditions. Such conditions shall be reasonable and related to the impacts of the proposed use, considered necessary to insure compliance with the standards of this Zoning Ordinance and the criteria for findings of fact listed under Section 4.5, and are hereby determined to be a valid exercise of the police power to protect the health, safety and welfare of adjacent property owners and the Township overall.
3. Table the request and direct the applicant to provide any additional information necessary to make a decision, or direct Township staff to conduct any additional analysis.
4. Deny the special land use request if the Planning Commission determines that the special land use request does not meet the standards of this Zoning Ordinance or the criteria for findings of fact listed under Section 4.5, or will tend to be injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or to the orderly development of the Township.
5. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be incorporated in a statement of conclusions, or “findings of fact”, relative to the special land use under consideration. The statement of conclusions, or “findings of fact”, shall be incorporated in the Planning Commission’s motion, and recorded in the official meeting minutes. Any decision which denies a request or imposes conditions upon its approval shall specify the basis for the denial or the conditions imposed.
4.5 Findings of Fact. The Planning Commission shall review each case individually and make findings of fact relative to the following criteria and, as applicable, the standards contained in Article 5.
A. The proposed special land use must be compatible with adjacent uses of land in terms of location, size and character and will have no negative impact on adjacent property or the surrounding neighborhood; and,
1. Will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and will not change the
Charter Township of Oxford 4-3 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
essential character of the area.
2. Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing uses or uses reasonably anticipated in the future.
3. Will be an improvement in relation to property in the immediate vicinity and to the Township as a whole.
B. The proposed special land use must be consistent with and promote the intent and purpose of this Zoning Ordinance and other applicable codes.
C. The proposed special land use must not pose an unreasonable impact upon the natural environment;
D. The proposed special land use must be compatible with the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the proposed use; and,
1. Will be served adequately by essential public services and facilities or that the persons responsible for the establishment of the proposed use will provide adequately any such service or facility.
2. Will not create excessive additional public costs and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the Township.
E. The proposed special land use must be consistent with vehicular turning patterns, traffic flow, intersections, view obstructions, ingresses and egresses, off-street parking and other existing conditions in the district;
F. The proposed special land use must be designed located, planned, and operated, so that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected; and,
G. The proposed special land use must be consistent with the goals, objectives and future land use plan described in the Charter Township of Oxford Master Plan.
4.6 Conditions and Safeguards. The Planning Commission may impose such additional conditions and safeguards deemed necessary for the general welfare, for the protection of individual property rights, and for insuring that the purposes of this Ordinance and the general spirit and purpose of the district in which the special use is proposed will be observed. Such conditions shall conform to the standards found in Section 405 of P.A. 110 of 2006, as the same may be amended or superseded from time to time. The Planning Commission shall summarize the conditions of approval on a form issued by the Zoning Administrator which shall be signed by the Chairperson of the Planning Commission and the applicant.
Charter Township of Oxford 4-4 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
4.7 Duration of Approval
A. A special land use approval shall be contingent upon the approval of the site plan for the proposed special land use, and the duration of the special land use approval shall be the duration of the site plan approval for the proposed use under Article 12.
B. The Zoning Administrator may suspend or revoke a special land use approval prior to the expiration of its associated site plan approval if the special land use approval had been issued erroneously on the basis of incorrect information supplied by the applicant or his agent and the use is in violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance or of any other ordinances or regulations of the Township.
4.8 Reapplication. No application for a special use permit which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted until the expiration of one (1) year or more from the date of such denial, except on grounds of newly discovered evidence or change of conditions found to be sufficient to justify reconsideration by the Planning Commission.
4.9 Appeals. Decisions rendered on special land use permits pursuant to any non-discretionary standard or requirement of this Ordinance may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals, however decisions rendered pursuant to the discretionary standards of Section 4.5 shall not be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-1 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ARTICLE 5
USE REGULATIONS
5.1 Adult Regulated Uses.
A. Findings and Purpose. The Planning Commission and Township Board of the Township find that adult regulated uses, as defined under Section 2.2 of this ordinance, pose the risk of imposing adverse secondary effects upon the Township and its residents, including but not limited to: increased crime within and in the vicinity of such uses, and the spread of communicable diseases. The Planning Commission and Township Board base this determination upon a review and consideration of the issues concerning adult regulated uses, including, but not limited to, the review and consideration of the experience of the City of Seattle as described in Northend Cinema v. Seattle, 585 P.,2d 1153 (Wash. 1978). Special control of these uses is necessary to insure that the adverse secondary effects of these uses will not interfere with the stable growth and development of the surrounding areas because of their potential disruptive and deleterious effect on adjacent properties, especially when constructed near residential uses and zones. These special controls are itemized in this section. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose of preventing a concentration of these uses in any one (1) area (i.e., not more than two (2) such uses within one thousand (1,000) feet of each other), due to the finding that the concentration of such uses can exacerbate the negative secondary effects of such uses and impair the health, safety, and welfare of surrounding communities and the uses therein.
B. Uses Constituting an Adult Regulated Use. Applicable uses considered under this section are as defined in Section 2.2 of this Ordinance.
C. Special Land Use Approval. All adult regulated uses shall be subject to special land use approval, pursuant to Article 4 of this Ordinance, and as modified by subsection 5.1(G).
D. Required Spacing. Adult regulated uses shall meet all of the following space requirements, measured horizontally between the nearest point of each property line:
1. At least one-thousand (1000) feet from any other adult regulated use;
2. At least five-hundred (500) feet from all churches, convents, temples and similar religious institutions;
Charter Township of Oxford 5-2 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3. At least five-hundred (500) feet from all public, private or parochial nurseries, primary or secondary schools, playgrounds, licensed child care facilities, and hospitals;
4. At least five-hundred (500) feet from any one-family or multiple-family residential district or use; and
5. At least five-hundred (500) feet from any pool or billiard hall, coin-operated amusement center, indoor and outdoor recreation, dance club catering primarily to teenagers, movie theaters, and similar uses frequented by children and teenagers.
E. Special Site Design Standards.
1. Maximum size of the building shall be three thousand (3,000) square feet.
2. The building and site shall be designed, constructed and maintained so material such as a display, decoration, or sign depicting, describing, or relating to activities or merchandise within the structure cannot be observed by pedestrians, motorists on a public right-of-way or from an adjacent land use.
3. Adult regulated uses shall be located within a free-standing building. A shared or common wall structure or shopping center is not considered to be a free-standing building.
4. The style, shape and color of the building materials shall be subject to approval by the Planning Commission and Township Board in consideration of the similarity and compatibility of said structure with other structures within a reasonable proximity.
5. Either a landscape screen or a four and one-half (4-1/2) foot high brick or masonry wall shall be constructed to screen the parking lot from the adjacent public rights-of-way.
6. No person shall reside in or permit any person to reside in the premises of an adult regulated use.
7. No person operating an adult regulated use shall permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) to be on the premises of said use either as an employee or customer.
8. Adult regulated uses shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local licensing regulations. Initial and annual proof of such compliance shall be a condition of special use approval and the continuance thereof.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-3 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
F. Conditions. Prior to the granting of approval for the establishment of any adult use, the Planning Commission and Township Board may impose any such conditions or limitations upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance, or operation of the controlled use as in its judgment may be reasonably necessary for the protection of the public interest. A performance guarantee may be required, to ensure that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith will be fulfilled.
G. Review Procedures.
1. Except as modified in this Subsection 5.1(G), the review and approval of proposed adult regulated uses shall be governed by the provisions set forth in this ordinance for the review and approval of any other special land use.
2. Standards for Approval. An application for the approval of an adult regulated use shall be governed by a consideration of the following factors, none of which shall be in isolation determinative except as provided herein:
a. The standards for the approval of a special land use under Article 4.
b. Whether the requirements of Subsections 5.1(D) and (E) are met. These requirements must be met in order for an adult regulated use to be approved and are, accordingly, determinative in isolation.
c. Whether the presence of an adult regulated use at the proposed location would alter the fundamental nature of the neighborhood.
d. Whether the proposed location of the proposed adult regulated use would make the proposed adult regulated use uniquely prone to present negative secondary effects, based on factors including but not necessarily limited to:
1. Whether the physical nature of the surrounding area renders it vulnerable to criminal activity based upon dense vegetation, broken sightlines, erratic lighting, or other factors.
2. Whether the proposed location is situated within or near an area of documented inordinate criminal activity.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-4 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3. Whether the proposed location is served by pedestrian access systems that present a risk of spillover effects from inside the proposed adult regulated use, without providing enough consistent foot traffic to counteract any such effects.
e. Whether the proposed layout or configuration of the proposed adult regulated use would make the proposed adult regulated use uniquely prone to present negative secondary effects, based on factors including but not necessarily limited to:
1. Whether the proposed configuration would facilitate the movement of individuals in and out of the proposed use without detection, so as to enable discretely-performed criminal activity.
2. Whether the proposed configuration would tend to facilitate the interaction of persons within the proposed adult regulated use with persons outside the proposed adult regulated use.
f. Whether the proposed adult regulated use would present an undue burden on public services and/or infrastructure, and in particular whether the proposed adult regulated use, in the proposed location, would be prone to create undue traffic congestion after events which are likely to “feed” traffic to an adult regulated use, such as concerts and sporting events. The Planning Commission may require a traffic study as provided in this ordinance.
3. The Township shall review all applications under this Subsection within 30 days of the Township’s receipt of a complete application for approval.
4. Any appeal of a Planning Commission decision under this Subsection to the Zoning Board of Appeals, and any request for a variance, shall be heard by the Zoning Board of Appeals within 30 days of the Township’s receipt of a complete appeal and/or application.
5. The Township shall take all reasonable efforts to ensure the prompt judicial review of any Zoning Board of Appeals decision regarding an application made under this subsection.
5.2 Agribusiness. Agribusiness uses, such as but not limited to, cider mills, farmers markets (not including roadside stands for products grown on the same property),
Charter Township of Oxford 5-5 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
farm dairies, pick-your-own farms, commercial greenhouses, private hunting clubs and game shooting preserves shall be subject to the following standards:
A. All such uses shall be located on a paved, major or secondary thoroughfare unless the use is seasonal in nature and has no permanent buildings for use by the public.
B. All buildings, any equipment, materials or produce being stored or for sale shall be set back from all property lines in accordance with the Schedule of Regulations of Section 3.7 for the district in which the use is located.
C. One (1) non-illuminated sign, not exceeding a total of thirty-two (32) square feet and eight (8) feet in height, is permitted per parcel in single ownership and for all agribusiness uses on that same parcel.
D. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided to serve the expected number of patrons and shall have at least a gravel surface properly graded and dust-free at all times. In determining the adequacy of the number of spaces being proposed, the Planning Commission shall compare the proposed use to similar uses.
E. Whenever the proposed use is adjacent to a district which permits residential uses, a ten (10) foot wide landscaped greenbelt shall be provided along the entire property line between the residential zoning district and the agribusiness use.
5.3 Automobile Service Stations, Convenience Marts, and Repair Establishments. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for automobile service stations, convenience marts and repair establishments to insure that access is managed adequately and to minimize negative impacts on neighboring properties. Such facilities shall not include service or repair of semi’s and other heavy trucks, RVs, farm equipment, construction equipment, and the like (See Section 5.18). Automobile service stations, convenience marts, and repair establishments are subject to the following conditions:
A. Such facilities shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of any school.
B. The minimum lot area for such facilities shall be one (1) acre, with a minimum frontage along the principal street of one hundred-fifty (150) feet. The property shall be so arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are required to wait for services.
C. Access.
1. Ingress and egress points shall be no less than fifty (50) feet from a street intersection (measured from the road right-of-way) or from an adjacent residential property line.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-6 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
2. The curb cuts for ingress and egress to a service station shall not be permitted at such locations that tend to create traffic hazards on the streets immediately adjacent thereto.
3. All driveways providing ingress to or egress from a filling or service station shall be not more than thirty (30) feet wide at the property line.
4. No more than one curb opening shall be permitted for every hundred (100) feet of frontage or major fraction thereof along any street.
D. Pump islands shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any public right-of-way or lot line and shall be arranged so that motor vehicles do not park upon or overhang any public sidewalk, street or right-of-way while waiting for or receiving fuel service. Overhead canopies shall be setback at least fifteen (15) feet from the public right-of-way.
E. Retail sale items such as soda pop, windshield solvent, landscape mulch or other merchandise shall not be displayed or sold outside.
F. Outdoor storage or parking of vehicles, except for two (2) private automobiles per indoor stall or service area of the facility, shall be prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Vehicles which are awaiting service shall remain on-site for not more than seventy-two (72) hours. No outside storage of tires and other parts and accessories and partly dissembled or junked vehicles shall be allowed.
G. All outdoor areas used for the storage of motor vehicles waiting for service shall be effectively screened from view from abutting properties and public streets. Such screening shall consist of a solid masonry screen, with an opaque gate. Such screening device shall not be less than six (6) feet in height. Parking areas for employees and customers shall be separate and apart from the storage area.
H. Any work including repairs, servicing, greasing and/or washing motor vehicles shall be conducted within an enclosed building.
I. Storage or parking of vehicles within the front setback shall be prohibited.
J. Storage of vehicles without current license plates shall be prohibited.
K. Tow trucks or other commercial vehicles that are on the premises for reasons other than typical customer activity shall be parked in non-required parking spaces and should not be parked in such a manner to be used as an advertisement.
L. The exterior of the main building shall be harmonious with its surroundings and shall include some brick, stone, wood, or other masonry finished building materials other than glass and metal. The canopies shall be
Charter Township of Oxford 5-7 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
designed within a minimum height of twelve (12) feet, and a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet, and the building materials and architectural style of the canopy shall be related to or directly match that of the main building.
M. The outdoor use of any electronic or enhanced sound or public announcement system shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Such a system shall not be directed toward adjacent residentially zoned or used property, and shall generally not present an unreasonable disturbance to the neighborhood in which it is located.
N. The installation and use of an oil-water separator with monitoring capabilities in the facility’s stormwater management system may be required.
O. Separation shall be made between the pedestrian sidewalk and vehicular parking and maneuvering areas with the use of curbs, greenbelts and/or traffic islands.
P. Vehicle sales shall not be permitted on the premises.
5.4 Automobile Washes. Vehicle washes facilities shall conform to the following conditions:
A. All washing facilities shall be within an enclosed building.
B. Vacuuming and drying areas may be located outside the building but shall not be in the required front yard and shall not be closer than one hundred (100) feet from any residential district. Noise from vacuuming or blow drying equipment shall be controlled by appropriate enclosures or sound barrier walls. All noise from such equipment shall comply with Township noise regulations.
C. Adequate waiting spaces shall be provided for vehicle stacking, in accordance with Section 8.7(H).
D. Ingress and egress points shall be no less than fifty (50) feet from a street intersection (measured from the road right-of-way) or from an adjacent residential property line.
E. Exit lanes shall be sloped to drain water back toward the wash building and into drainage gates.
F. A masonry screen wall of at least four (4) feet but no more than six (6) feet in height shall be provided where such facilities abut a residential district.
5.5 Bed and Breakfast Establishments. Bed and breakfast establishments are subject to the following conditions:
Charter Township of Oxford 5-8 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
A. There shall be no exterior alterations to the dwelling that are not customary for other principal single family residences in the Township. If guest rooms are not part of the original structure but are proposed to be added, plans prepared by a Registered Architect shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for approval which demonstrate the following:
1. The addition is compatible in style and design with the original structure; and
2. The rooms proposed to be added could be incorporated into the structure for single family residential use in the future, if the owner chooses to terminate the use of the dwelling as a Bed & Breakfast Establishment.
B. Two (2) off-street parking spaces for the dwelling and one (1) for each double-occupancy room shall be provided. All off-street parking shall be located in the side or rear yard and designed to maintain the Residential character of the principal use. To that end, parking "lots" are to be avoided and the use of grass pavers or similar materials is encouraged.
C. One (1) non-illuminated sign, not to exceed four (4) square feet and stating only the name of the Bed and Breakfast establishment, may be displayed flat against the wall of the building.
D. The maximum length of stay of any guest(s) shall be fourteen (14) days.
E. The applicant shall submit proof of the health department's evaluation of the adequacy of the on-site sewage disposal system, in relation to the number of guest rooms proposed, in addition to the principal residential use.
F. All requirements of this ordinance and any conditions imposed by the Planning Commission shall apply equally to the original applicant and any subsequent owner(s). The owner of a bed and breakfast establishment shall notify the Township in writing thirty (30) days in advance of the proposed sale of the bed and breakfast establishment. The name, address, and phone number of the new owner(s) shall be provided with the notice of proposed sale.
G. All bed and breakfast establishments shall be inspected by the Township Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, and Fire Chief. A report from each shall be submitted to the Planning Commission identifying all zoning, building, fire, and safety code issues.
H. No accessory building or garages are to be utilized for sleeping rooms.
I. Kitchen facilities shall be used for food preparation for consumption on the site by the owner, operator, residents and overnight bed and breakfast
Charter Township of Oxford 5-9 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
guests only. No food shall be prepared which is taken off-site or which is served to persons other than residents and overnight guests.
J. No cooking facilities are permitted for use by the guests.
K. A fire escape plan shall be developed and graphically displayed in each guest room.
L. Bed and Breakfast Residences and Inns, in addition to standards outlined above shall meet or exceed the following:
1. When combined with the owner's residence, the Bed and Breakfast Residence or Inn shall be clearly subordinate to the use of the building as the owner/operator's principal residence; and
2. Not more than forty (40) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling may be devoted to guest rooms.
M. Bed and Breakfast Hotels, in addition to the standards outlined above, shall meet or exceed the following:
1. Site plan review by the Planning Commission shall be required in accordance with Article 12; and
2. Required parking shall be exempt from required paving. However, all parking areas shall be gravel or crushed stone and shall be located in the side or rear yard behind the front building setback line.
5.6 Campgrounds, Recreational Vehicle Parks. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for publicly or privately-owned and operated campgrounds and camp buildings providing temporary living quarters for campers on a daily, weekly or seasonal basis subject to the following conditions:
A. The minimum site area shall be twenty (20) acres.
B. The site shall have direct access to a public road.
C. A minimum one hundred (100) feet setback shall be established around the perimeter of the property for the purpose of buffering a private campground or recreational vehicle park in relation to adjacent residentially zoned or used properties. The perimeter buffer shall be kept in its natural state. Where natural vegetation or land contour are insufficient to buffer a private campground or recreational vehicle park in relation to surrounding properties, the Township may require additional setbacks, landscaping and/or berming.
D. Temporary campgrounds are strictly prohibited.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-10 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
E. Manufactured (mobile) homes shall not be permitted to be located within a campground.
F. The use and occupancy of a campground shall be in strict compliance with the current laws and requirements of the State of Michigan governing such uses.
G. Any proposed sound system shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission to ensure that it does not impact adjacent land uses. In no case shall outdoor speakers be directed towards residentially zoned or used property.
H. Each site on a lot designated for camping use may accommodate a travel trailer or tent or recreational vehicle and shall be provided with individual electrical outlets. Animal-proof waste containers shall be provided at each site.
I. Adequate public sanitary facilities housed in all-weather structures containing adequate water outlet, toilet and waste containers, shall be provided uniformly throughout the campground at ratio of not less than one (1) such station per each twenty (20) camping sites.
J. Each campground containing more than sixty (60) sites shall provide a masonry building containing machine laundry (wash and dry facilities) and showers.
K. No commercial enterprises shall be permitted to operate on the lot, except that a convenience goods shopping building may be provided on a lot containing more than eighty (80) sites.
L. Each lot shall provide a hard surfaced, dust-free vehicle parking area for site occupant and guest parking. Such parking area shall be located within four hundred (400) feet of the site it is intended to serve (except in the case of sites specifically designated only for tent camping). Each parking space shall be two hundred (200) square feet in area and guest parking shall be provided at the ratio of not less than one (1) space per each two (2) sites. Occupant parking space for two (2) vehicles shall be provided on each site.
M. Each site shall contain a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet, except that the minimum size for sites specifically designated for tents shall be three thousand (3,000) square feet. Each site shall be set back from any right-of-way or property line at least seventy-five (75) feet, and from any private street at least forty (40) feet.
N. A common use area shall be provided on each lot at a ratio of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of such area per each site. This common area shall be developed by seeding, landscaping and provided with picnic tables, barbecue stands and passive recreation equipment (i.e., swings,
Charter Township of Oxford 5-11 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
horseshoe pits, shuffleboard courts and the like) for the general use of all occupants of the entire lot.
O. Each travel trailer site shall have direct access to a hard surfaced, dust-free roadway at least twenty-four (24) feet in width for two-way traffic and twelve (12) feet in width for one-way traffic. Parking shall not be allowed on any roadway. Interior streets shall be hard surfaced. Sites specifically designated for, and only used for tent camping need not have direct vehicular access to any street or road, but shall be provided with adequately cleared and marked pedestrian pathway access which originates at a point on a street or road within two hundred (200) feet of the parking area mentioned in sub-section (L).
P. Any open drainage-ways must have seeded banks sloped at least three to one (3:1) and designed to properly drain all surface waters into the county drain system, subject to approval by the Oakland County Drain Commissioner.
Q. All sanitary facilities shall be designed and constructed in strict conformance to all applicable Oakland County Health Department Regulations.
R. A minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet shall be provided between all travel trailers or tents or recreational vehicles.
S. Fences and greenbelts may be required by the Planning Commission. The location of common use areas, roadways, streets and building shall be subject to approval by the Planning Commission.
T. There will be no permanent storage of tents, campers, or travel trailers.
5.7 Caretaker’s Quarters. One (1) caretaker's residence may be permitted in the SF-3, AG, R, I-1 and I-2 zoning districts subject to the following:
A. Where a caretaker's residence will be located within or attached to a permitted agricultural building, it shall not be constructed prior to a permanent residence on the same parcel.
B. Where a caretaker's residence will be located as a separate building on the property, it shall meet all requirements of Sections 3.7 and 3.8(A) for lot size, house size, setbacks, and height limits. This shall be construed to require a minimum parcel size of ten (10) acres where a caretaker's residence will be a separate building on agricultural property.
C. Caretaker's residences shall be used solely for a watchman, caretaker or custodian of the facility or use on the same site.
D. The caretaker's residence shall be clearly incidental and accessory to the permitted principal use(s) on the same parcel. If the use(s) to which the
Charter Township of Oxford 5-12 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
caretaker's residence is accessory change or cease, the applicant shall demonstrate the need to continue the caretaker's residence for the new use or convert the caretaker's residence into a permitted principal use.
E. In the case of industrial properties, the caretaker's residence shall be detailed clearly on all site plans and building plans and attached to a primary building structure.
F. The Zoning Official may require periodic inspections to ensure conformance with the provisions of the special land use permit.
5.8 Cement and Asphalt Mixing Plants. Cement and asphalt mixing plants shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following conditions:
A. All such uses shall be located on a paved public road capable of carrying class A loadings, as defined by the Oakland County Weighmaster, on a year-round basis.
B. All such uses shall keep internal roads and operations areas dust free at all times. No dust or other particulate emissions shall be permitted beyond the property line.
C. All site access roads, drives and employee parking areas shall be paved with asphalt or concrete. Internal haul roads which access bulk storage areas may be unpaved.
D. All bulk material storage areas shall be screened from view of adjoining residential zoned property in accordance with Section 7.4(E)(1) wherever the proposed use abuts residential zoned parcels and adjacent public rights of way.
E. All such uses shall conform with the Environmental Performance Standards of Article 10.
F. All outdoor bulk storage areas and truck storage areas shall be setback a minimum one hundred (100) feet from any property line. All mixing plants shall be set back a minimum two hundred fifty (250) feet from any property line.
5.9 Cemeteries.
A. All new cemeteries and expansions of existing cemeteries shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable regulations of the State of Michigan and the following standards:
Charter Township of Oxford 5-13 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Site Size
Minimum Setback From Any Property Line To:
Burial Plots
Service Buildings / Mausoleums
Outdoor Storage / Service Yards
< 5 Acres
10’
50’
50’
5-20 Acres
20’
75’
75’
>20 Acres
25’
100’
100’
B. All service and storage yards shall be screened from view by an obscuring wall or fence, or a landscaped buffer, as approved by the Planning Commission in accordance with Section 7.4(E)(1).
C. On all sides abutting property in a zoning district that permits residential uses, there shall be a landscaped greenbelt at least equal to the width of the setback required for burial plots in sub-section A., above.
D. Parking shall be provided in parking lots, parking bays, or along interior roadways. No cemetery parking shall be permitted in public or private road rights-of-way.
5.10 Churches, Houses of Worship. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for churches and other houses of worship which are subject to the following:
A. The site shall have direct access to a County Primary Road.
B. Ancillary Facilities. Whenever facilities such as community halls, fellowship or social halls, recreation facilities and other similar uses are proposed as incidental to the principal church or worship facility use, such secondary facilities shall not be constructed or occupied in advance of the sanctuary or principal worship area of the church complex.
1. The seating capacity of such incidental use areas shall not exceed that of the sanctuary or principal worship area of the church complex.
2. Such incidental facilities must be used for church, worship, or religious education purposes, in a manner which is consistent with residential zoning and compatible with adjacent residential property. They shall not be used, leased, or rented for commercial purposes.
5.11 Commercial Indoor Recreation. Indoor commercial recreational uses include, but are not limited to: bowling alleys, ice or roller blade rinks, firearm ranges, indoor soccer facilities and racquet courts, and athletic clubs. Such uses are subject to the following regulations:
Charter Township of Oxford 5-14 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
A. The site shall be located on, or shall have principal access from a major thoroughfare, or county primary road.
B. New buildings shall be not be located within fifty (50) feet of a lot line of adjoining residentially zoned or used property. The setback does not apply to commercial indoor recreational uses that may be located in existing buildings.
C. Required parking must be provided on site. Whenever parking areas are adjacent to residentially zoned or used land, a masonry screen wall of at least four (4) feet and no more than six (6) feet in height shall be provided along the side of the parking area adjacent to the residentially zoned or used land.
D. Based on the nature of the use and nuisance potential to adjoining property owners, the Planning Commission may stipulate noise standards beyond those stipulated otherwise in this Ordinance.
E. Operating hours for all uses shall be determined by the Planning Commission based on the nature of the use and the nuisance potential to adjoining property owners.
5.12 Commercial Outdoor Recreation. Outdoor commercial recreation uses shall include, but not be limited to: archery, miniature golf, animal racing, go-cart, automobile or motorcycle racing, off-roading or mud bogging, amusement and water parks, drive-in theaters, golf driving range, fairgrounds, batting cages, and skateboard parks. Outdoor shooting ranges, gun clubs, and paintball or survival games are intentionally excluded from the preceding list, and are regulated separately under Section 5.31. Commercial outdoor recreational uses are subject to the following conditions:
A. The site shall be located on, or shall have principal access from a county primary road or other major thoroughfare.
B. All points of entrance or exit shall be no closer than two hundred (200) feet from the intersection of any two streets or highways.
C. No drive shall be closer to another drive by less than seventy-five (75) feet and the maximum number of drives shall be two (2).
D. Minimum site area shall be based on the underlying district. However, the Planning Commission may increase the minimum required site area depending upon the described use and anticipated extraneous impacts on adjacent properties. Such an increase will be for the purposes of buffering, screening and otherwise negating or limiting the potential nuisance to adjacent properties caused by noise, dust, odor and the like. To this end, the Planning Commission and Township Board may require additional information concerning the proposed use and the potential for nuisance.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-15 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
E. No building or spectator seating area shall be located within one hundred (100) feet of a lot line of an adjoining residentially zoned or used property.
F. A landscaped buffer strip of no less than one hundred (100) feet shall be provided along the property lines of all residentially zoned or used land. However, the Planning Commission may reduce such requirement by up to fifty (50) percent if it is determined that the potential for off-site nuisance is limited, such as in the case of a miniature golf course.
G. Whenever parking areas are adjacent to residentially zoned or used land, a masonry screen wall of at least four (4) feet and no more than six (6) feet in height shall be provided along the side of the parking area adjacent to the residentially zoned or used land.
H. Race tracks of any sort shall be enclosed around the entire periphery with an obscuring wall of at least eight (8) feet in height.
I. Golf driving ranges shall be at least two hundred (200) feet from any residential building, and site size shall be sufficient to retain errant balls within the site. Netting shall be prohibited unless the Planning Commission determines the netting would be compatible with surrounding uses. The maximum height of any approved netting shall be thirty (30) feet, set back at least sixty (60) feet from a property line.
J. Central loudspeakers/paging systems are prohibited within two hundred (200) feet of residentially planned, zoned or used property. Such systems shall not be directed toward a residential area even if outside the two hundred (200) foot setback.
K. Accessory retail or commercial facilities, such as food and beverage facilities or equipment shops, shall be designed to serve only the patrons of the outdoor recreation facility, unless otherwise listed as a permitted use in the district in which the facility is located.
L. Operating hours for all uses shall be determined by the Planning Commission and Township Board based on the nature of the use and the nuisance potential to adjoining property owners.
M. An outdoor lighting plan shall specify the type of fixtures to be used, light intensity, and method of shielding the fixtures so that light does not project onto adjoining properties or interfere with driver visibility on any public or private street or public right-of-way.
5.13 Community Building or Lodge Hall. A community building or lodge hall of a social or civic club or organization shall be subject to the following standards:
A. The use shall have direct access to a County Primary Road.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-16 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
B. All parking areas shall be screened from an abutting district that permits residential dwellings by a four (4) foot six (6) inch high masonry screen wall.
C. If the community building or lodge hall will be made available to private groups or individuals on a rental or other basis, the Planning Commission shall determine that the surrounding area will be protected from adverse impacts with regard to the following criteria:
1. Hours of operation.
2. Capacity of the facility and anticipated traffic volumes to be generated in relation to the hours of operation.
3. Location and method of screening outdoor trash storage areas and provisions to control odors.
4. Location and arrangement of the building on the site in relation to the need to control excessive noise within the neighborhood.
5.14 Convalescent or Nursing Home. A convalescent or nursing home is subject to the following conditions:
A. All vehicular ingress and egress shall be directly onto a County Primary Road.
B. The minimum land area per person cared for shall be three thousand (3,000) square feet.
C. All buildings shall be set back at least seventy-five (75) feet from all property lines.
5.15 Day Care Facilities, State Licensed. All state-licensed day care facilities, shall meet the following standards:
A. Child Care and Adult Day-Care Centers (see definition of Daycare Facilities, State Licensed). Child care centers and adult day care facilities shall be subject to the following minimum standards:
1. A site plan, prepared in accordance with Article 12 shall be required to be submitted.
2. Outdoor play/recreation areas shall be required as follows:
a. For each person cared for, there shall be provided and maintained a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) square feet of outdoor recreation area, except as provided below under Section 5.15(A)(2)(b).
Charter Township of Oxford 5-17 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
b. The required outdoor play area shall have a total minimum area of not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet, but in no case shall the Township require the outdoor play area to be greater than the total square footage of the proposed building.
c. The outdoor play area shall be located in the side or rear yard, shall be fenced and shall be made and kept safe by the care-givers.
3. The facilities shall not exceed sixteen (16) hours of operation during a twenty-four (24) hour period. Unless good cause is otherwise provided to the Planning Commission, a day care facility’s hours of operation shall be limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
4. Operator must be licensed by the Michigan Department of Social Services.
5. A compliance permit must be obtained from the Building Department before operation commences, compliance must be continuous.
6. A child care and adult day-care center shall comply with all fire and traffic safety standards set by the Michigan Department of Social Services and the Charter Township of Oxford Fire Department and Oakland County Sheriff.
7. Care-givers shall maintain control of noise to protect the surrounding neighborhood.
8. All day care centers shall be currently registered with the 911 Dispatch Center on forms provided by said Center.
9. License holder and all employees shall be subject to a background check and approval by the Oakland County Sheriff.
B. Adult and Child Group Day Care Homes Centers (see definition of Daycare Facilities, State Licensed). Adult and child group day care homes are subject to the following minimum standards, in accordance with Section 206 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, P.A. 110 of 2006, as amended:
1. A site plan, prepared in accordance with Article 12 shall be required to be submitted.
2. A group day care home shall not be located closer than one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet to any of the following:
a. Another licensed group day care home.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-18 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
b. An adult foster care small group home or large group home licensed by the State of Michigan.
c. A facility offering substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation service to seven (7) or more people licensed by the State of Michigan.
d. A community correction center, resident home, halfway home or other similar facility that houses an inmate population under the jurisdiction of the Department of Corrections.
3. Outdoor play/recreation areas shall be securely fenced, located in the side or rear-yard, and shall be made and kept safe by the care-givers.
4. The property must be maintained consistent with the visible characteristics of the neighborhood.
5. Signage shall be allowed in accordance with the standards for home occupation contained in Section 9.7(C).
6. Drop-offs and loading shall be arranged to allow maneuvers without affecting traffic flow on the public street.
7. The facilities shall not exceed sixteen (16) hours of operation during a twenty-four (24) hour period. Unless good cause is otherwise provided to the Planning Commission, a group day care’s hours of operation shall be limited to between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
5.16 Foster Care Facilities, State Licensed.
A. Adult Foster Care Group Homes Centers (see definition of Foster Care Facilities, State Licensed). Adult foster family small and large group homes are subject to the following minimum standards:
1. A site plan, prepared in accordance with Article 12 shall be required to be submitted.
2. A minimum outdoor area of five hundred (500) square feet shall be provided on the same premises as the facility shall be provided. This open space shall be securely fenced and screened, located in the side- or rear-yard, and shall be made and kept safe by the care-givers.
3. The property shall be maintained in a manner that is consistent with the character of the neighborhood.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-19 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
4. One (1) parking space per employee and/or caregiver at the peak shift shall be provided.
5. Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan shall be maintained.
6. The property and facilities shall be so constructed, arranged, and maintained as to provide adequately for the health and safety and welfare of all occupants.
7. A group foster care home shall be inspected and approved for fire safety prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit and shall be inspected at least annually.
8. Signage shall be allowed in accordance with home occupation standards of Article 9.
B. Adult Foster Care Congregate Facilities Centers (see definition of Daycare Facilities, State Licenced). Adult foster care congregate facilities are subject to the following minimum standards:
1. A site plan, prepared in accordance with Article 12 shall be required to be submitted.
2. Parking requirements as required for convalescent homes and similar facilities, set forth in Article 8 shall be met.
3. All landscape requirements set forth in Section 7.3(A) or (C), as appropriate, shall be met.
4. Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan shall be maintained.
5.17 Golf Courses, Country Clubs, and Swim Clubs. The following conditions shall apply to all golf courses, country clubs, and swim clubs:
A. Golf courses may also include accessory clubhouses, driving ranges, pro shops and maintenance buildings.
B. Country clubs and swim clubs may also include accessory clubhouses, restaurant facilities, and maintenance buildings.
C. The location of structures, such as the clubhouse and accessory buildings, and their operations shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission to insure minimum disruption of the adjacent properties. In no case shall any structure be located any closer than fifty (50) feet from adjacent residentially zoned or used property.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-20 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
D. All storage, service and maintenance areas, when visible from adjoining residentially zoned or used land, shall be screened from view in accordance with Section 7.4(E)(1).
E. Proposed loudspeaker systems shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission to ensure that it does not impact on adjacent land uses. In no case shall outdoor speakers be directed towards residentially zoned or used property.
F. The site plan shall illustrate expected trajectory or ball dispersion patterns along fairways and for driving ranges where adjacent to residential uses, buildings, parking lots or public streets to demonstrate the design will comply with accepted design practices and ensure public safety to a reasonable degree.
G. Site size shall be sufficient to retain errant balls within the site. Netting shall be prohibited unless the Planning Commission determines the netting would be compatible with surrounding uses. The maximum height of any approved netting shall be thirty (30) feet, set back at least sixty (60) feet from a property line.
H. The Planning Commission may restrict lighting and hours of operation for a driving range in consideration of surrounding land uses and zoning. A lighted driving range is prohibited if the site abuts land zoned or used for residential purposes.
I. Any accessory driving range shall be at least two hundred (200) feet from any residential building.
J. Tee areas for a driving range shall be clearly distinguished either by separated walls or the ground elevated between one and one-half (1/2) inches to six (6) inches.
5.18 Heavy Vehicle and Equipment Repair Establishment. Heavy vehicle and equipment repair establishments include those businesses where service and repair is the primary activity and includes the servicing and repair of semi’s and other heavy trucks, RVs, farm equipment, construction equipment, and the like, and shall not apply such activities performed on automobiles (See Section 5.3). In addition to other regulations set forth in this Ordinance, all heavy vehicle and equipment repair establishments shall conform to the following requirements:
A. Such facilities shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of any school.
B. The minimum lot area for such facilities shall be one (1) acre, with a minimum frontage along the principal street of one hundred-fifty (150) feet.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-21 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
C. The portion of the property used for vehicular traffic, including parking, shall be separated from landscaped areas and sidewalks by a curb.
D. The entire area used for vehicle service shall be paved.
E. Hydraulic hoist, service pits, lubricating, greasing, washing and repair equipment and operations shall be located within a completely enclosed structure.
F. Access.
1. Ingress and egress points shall be no less than fifty (50) feet from a street intersection (measured from the road right-of-way) or from an adjacent property line.
2. The curb cuts for ingress and egress to a service station shall not be permitted at such locations that tend to create traffic hazards on the streets immediately adjacent thereto.
3. All driveways providing ingress to or egress from a filling or service station shall be not more than thirty (30) feet wide at the property line.
4. No more than one curb opening shall be permitted for every hundred (100) feet of frontage or major fraction thereof along any street.
G. The distance between curb cuts shall be no less than forty (40) feet, measured between the tangent points of the drive edges and the street curb returns.
H. Outdoor storage of trash, including new or discarded vehicle parts, shall be contained within a solid, unpierced enclosure.
I. Outdoor storage or parking of vehicles, except for three (3) vehicles per stall or service area of the facility, shall be prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Vehicles which are awaiting service shall remain on-site for not more than seven (7) days.
J. Storage or parking of vehicles within the front setback shall be prohibited.
K. Storage of vehicles without current license plates shall be prohibited.
L. Vehicle and equipment sales, new or used, shall not be permitted on the premises.
M. The installation and use of an oil-water separator with monitoring capabilities in the facility’s stormwater management system shall be required, as well as the use of best management practices for pollution
Charter Township of Oxford 5-22 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
prevention for vehicle service operations, in order to protect surface water and groundwater quality.
5.19 Horse Riding Stables and Sales Barns. Horse riding stables and sales farms (as defined in Section 2.2) shall conform to the following provisions, unless exempted pursuant to the Right to Farm Act:
A. All buildings, corrals, or other enclosures for animals shall be set back at least 250 feet from off-site residential structures.
B. The entire area of the site used for riding shall be fenced to prevent horses and riders from entering adjoining properties.
C. There shall be no storage of customers' trailers or other vehicles for transporting horses except in a completely enclosed building.
D. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for customers in the ratio of one space for every horse boarding stall. All parking areas shall be screened from view of an abutting residential use by either a greenbelt, obscuring fence, or masonry wall, whichever is determined by the Planning Commission to be the most appropriate and effective.
E. Lighting associated with such facilities shall conform to the lighting requirements of Section 10.2.
F. Central loudspeaker systems are prohibited within two hundred fifty (250) feet of residentially planned, zoned or used property. Such systems shall not be directed toward a residential area even if outside the two hundred fifty (250) foot setback.
G. The site shall be located on a County road.
5.20 Hospitals. The following conditions shall apply to all hospitals and similar facilities:
A. All hospitals shall be developed on sites consisting of at least five (5) acres for the first one hundred (100) beds or less plus one (1) acre for each additional twenty-five (25) beds.
B. The proposed site shall have frontage on and vehicular access to a paved County Primary Road.
C. The site plan shall show that a proper relationship exists between the major thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, driveways and parking areas to insure pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety.
5.21 Junk Yard, Auto Salvage, Wrecking Yard, and Recycling Operations. In addition to other regulations set forth in this ordinance, all automobile junk yards,
Charter Township of Oxford 5-23 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
auto salvage operations, wrecking yards, recycling facilities and similar uses shall conform to the following requirements:
A. Minimum lot size shall be five (5) acres.
B. Direct ingress and egress shall be from a paved road.
C. Travel routes for trucks entering and leaving the yard shall be shown on a map of the Township at the time of application for the special use permit. Such routes except arterial streets or their equivalent shall not pass through residential areas.
D. The required site plan shall also contain a description of the location and nature of any materials processing operations to be conducted within the yard, and the location and nature of equipment for such operations.
E. Yard materials shall be stored in organized rows with open intervals at least twenty (20) feet wide between rows for purposes of fire protection, emergency access and visitor safety.
F. Yard materials shall not be stored in piles higher than the top of the fence surrounding the yard. Automobiles, trucks, and other vehicles shall not be stacked to a height or in a manner that prohibits fire protection, emergency access or does not protect the safety of visitors.
G. The yard shall be maintained in such a manner as to prevent the breeding or harboring of rats, insects, or other vermin.
H. The yard, when established and located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any existing residential district or land being used for residential purposes, as measured on a straight line distance, shall not be open for business and shall not operate at any time other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays; between 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Saturdays.
I. All flammable liquids contained in automobiles and other vehicles shall be drained from the same immediately after such vehicles are brought to the yard. Such liquids shall be temporarily stored in containers approved by the local fire authority until properly disposed of according to law. The applicant shall provide a written procedure for draining, storage and disposal.
J. All drives, parking areas, and loading/unloading areas shall be paved, watered, or treated so as to limit nuisances caused by dust on neighboring properties and public roads.
K. No portion of the building, yard or other site elements shall project into the required front yard setback.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-24 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
L. There shall be not more than one (1) entranceway from each public street that adjoins the yard.
M. Fencing shall be required as follows:
1. A solid, screen-type fence or wall, seven (7) feet in height, shall be provided along each public street frontage. The fence or wall shall be located at or behind the required front setback line. Gates shall also be made of solid, opaque material. The front yard shall be landscaped and continuously maintained as a lawn.
2. Where the yard is adjacent to non-industrially used or zoned property, a solid, screen type fence or wall, seven (7) feet in height, shall be provided on any side or rear property line or portion thereof, adjoining such lots.
3. Where the yard is adjacent to any lot within an industrial district, a chain-link fence six (6) feet in height shall be provided on any side or rear property line or portion thereof, adjoining such lots.
4. Strips of metal, plastic or other materials inserted into wire fences shall not be permitted in any fence enclosing a yard.
5. All gates, doors, and access ways through said fence or wall shall be of solid, unpierced materials matching the required fencing.
N. Wrecking and processing operations are permitted in a yard but shall be described in the application for the site plan approval or special use permit so that the Planning Commission and Township Board can implement standards and conditions to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community.
O. To protect groundwater resources in Oxford Township, all areas for dismantling shall be fully enclosed, and situated on a paved surface that includes a system for collecting spills of automotive and automotive-type fluids to be contained and recycled or disposed of in accordance with State and Local Law.
There shall be no burning of anything permitted on-site.
5.22 Kennels.
A. Commercial Kennels. Commercial kennels shall adhere to the following standards:
Charter Township of Oxford 5-25 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
1. Pens and runs shall be located no closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet to any property line abutting a zoning district that permits residential dwellings.
2. All runs and breeding areas shall be enclosed by a fence, and screened from view from the public road right-of-way and adjacent residentially zoned or used properties.
3. All animals shall be adequately housed, fenced and maintained so as not to constitute a public or private nuisance. The premises shall be maintained in such a manner so as not to be harmful to surrounding properties, or create any hazard or detriment to public health, safety, or general welfare.
4. Commercial kennels housing more than ten (10) animals shall provide one (1) off-street parking space for each five (5) kennel runs. At a minimum, two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for any commercial kennel.
5. All noise shall be controlled in accordance with the noise standards of Section 10.1(J) of this ordinance.
6. Any use permitted by the Township under this section shall terminate immediately when the lot area requirements herein set forth are decreased in any manner or the provisions of this ordinance violated.
7. The site plan submitted for approval of a proposed kennel shall detail all existing and proposed buildings, runs, pens or other outdoor use areas and clearly label the proposed use of each.
8. Commercial kennels shall abut a County Primary road.
9. All commercial kennels shall be operated in accordance with all applicable County and State regulations.
C. Private Kennels. Private kennels shall adhere to the following standards:
1. All runs and breeding areas shall be enclosed by a fence, and screened from view from the public road right-of-way and adjacent residentially zoned or used properties.
2. All animals shall be adequately housed, fenced and maintained so as not to constitute a public or private nuisance. The premises shall be maintained in such a manner so as not to be harmful to surrounding properties, or create any hazard or detriment to public health, safety, or general welfare.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-26 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3. All noise shall be controlled in accordance with the noise standards of Section 10.1(J) of this ordinance.
4. Any use permitted by the Township under this section shall terminate immediately when the lot area requirements herein set forth are decreased in any manner or the provisions of this ordinance violated.
5. The site plan submitted for approval of a proposed kennel shall detail all existing and proposed buildings, runs, pens or other outdoor use areas and clearly label the proposed use of each.
5.23 Landfills, Dumping and Sewage Disposal Facilities.
A. General Requirements.
1. Design and Operation Standards. Any such use shall conform to current standards established by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, Michigan Department of Agriculture, and other regulatory agencies, in addition to other regulations of the Township.
2. Environmental Impact Statement. An environmental impact statement shall be prepared in accordance with Section 6.10, and submitted for Planning Commission review.
B. Landfills and Dumping.
1. Intent. These regulations are established to control the storage, piling, placing or dumping of garbage, sewage, refuse, trash, debris, rubbish, or other waste in the Township, including landfills.
2. Scope of Application. No person shall pile, place, store, dump, bury, dispose of, or keep in open containers on any land within the Township any garbage, sewage, refuse, trash, debris, rubbish or other solid waste, including cans, bottles, waste paper, cartons, boxes, crates, or other offensive or obnoxious mater, except in strict conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
3. Exceptions. These provisions shall not prevent the reasonable use of fertilizers, manure and similar materials for improvement of land being lawfully utilized for farming purposes, provided that such use is carried out in a healthy and sanitary manner without creating a nuisance to the surrounding area.
C. Permit Requirements for Landfills and Dumping.
1. Issuance. A permit shall be required in all instances where landfill or dumping activity is proposed in the Township.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-27 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
2. Review Procedures. Applications for landfill or dumping permits shall be reviewed in accordance with the procedures for review of special land uses in Article 4. Permits for such uses shall be issued by the Township for a one (1) year period. Permits may be renewed for one (1) year periods unless the owner or operator violates any conditions of approval.
3. Performance Guarantee.
a. To assure conformance with the requirements specified herein, the Township may require the applicant or owner to provide a performance guarantee, in accordance with Section 16.8. The performance guarantee shall be held in escrow, and may be released to the applicant in proportion to the work completed on the various restoration activities, provided an inspection report has been submitted to the Township Engineer and approved by the Township Board. No more than ninety percent (90%) of the performance guarantee shall be returned until all work has been completed and inspected.
b. The amount of the performance guarantee shall be reevaluated on an annual basis when the permit is renewed to insure that it is adequate to complete the project as proposed, based on current construction costs.
c. The Township Board may approve a performance guarantee that covers less than the total site, provided that no excavation or dumping may take place in an area until a performance guarantee has been submitted to assure proper completion of the activities proposed for the area.
4. Application Requirements. The following information shall be provided on an application for a landfill or dumping permit:
a. Aerial Photography. Vertical aerial photography of the site, enlarged to a scale of one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet. The aerial photograph shall include all land included in the application, all contiguous land which is proposed to be used or has been used by the owner or operator, and all surrounding public roads.
b. Survey. A metes and bounds survey of the subject site, prepared by a registered land surveyor and drawn to a scale of one (1) inch equals two hundred (200) feet. The survey shall include the boundary of the entire site and topography of the site at two (2) foot contour intervals.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-28 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
c. Engineering Report. Report by a qualified soil scientist, soils engineer, or geologist regarding the effect of the proposed operation on the watershed of the area. Particular attention should be focused on the potential pollution or contamination of groundwater.
d. Master Plan. A detailed plan for the landfill, including a timetable for various stages of the operation. A specific timetable for dumping and restoration shall be included with each annual permit request.
e. Restoration Plan. A restoration plan indicating how the area will be re-used in a manner compatible with the Township Master Plan. The restoration plan shall include the proposed use of the restored area and the proposed topography drawn at two (2) foot contour intervals.
f. Operating Specifications. A detailed description of the operating procedures, so as to demonstrate conformance with the standards of sub-section D., below.
D. Standards. All landfill and dumping activity shall be subject to the following standards:
1. Limits of approval. All landfill and dumping activities shall be carried on within the boundary limits approved for such activities.
2. Setbacks.
a. Landfilling, dumping, and stockpiling shall not be conducted closer than one hundred (100) feet to the approved outer boundary for the operation, and not closer than three hundred (300) feet to any dwelling. The required setback area may be used only for access roads and greenbelt plantings and landscaping.
b. All equipment for sorting, processing, storing, weighing, and other operations shall be located at least three hundred (300) feet from any public street right-of-way line or adjacent property line.
3. Noise, Dust, Debris. All processing equipment and activities and all storage areas shall be treated, covered, muffled, or otherwise controlled to prevent excessive noise dust, debris, or other impacts beyond the property line. Any trucks hauling material to or from the site shall be enclosed or covered to prevent materials from blowing or falling out of the trucks.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-29 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
4. Road Treatment. All private access roads shall be treated to create a dust-free surface. The operator shall work with the Township to minimize dust on public access roads serving the site.
5. Frontage and Access. The subject site shall have a minimum frontage of 250 feet on a major or secondary thoroughfare having an existing or proposed right-of-way of at least 86 feet. However, a proposed dumping operation may be approved without frontage on a thoroughfare if it is located adjacent to an approved dumping operation which has sufficient frontage, provided that the proposed operation is granted access across the existing operation.
6. Fencing. Landfill and dumping operations shall comply with the following fencing requirements:
a. Where slopes steeper than thirty (30) degrees exist for a period of one (1) month or more, the proposed operation shall be enclosed with a six (6) foot high cyclone fence or similarly effective barrier located at least fifty (50) feet outside the edge of the excavation area.
b. Where collection of water greater than one (1) foot in depth occurs for a period of one (1) month or more in an area occupying two hundred (200) square feet or more, fencing shall be required as previously noted.
7. Slopes. Finished slopes shall not exceed four to one grade (4 feet horizontal per 1 foot vertical). There requirements shall be complied with as each phase of the excavation or dumping proceeds. The finished slopes shall be achieved within twelve (12) months after work has begun on any section.
8. Topsoil and Seeding. Sufficient topsoil shall be stockpiled so that a minimum of three (3) inches of topsoil will be placed on the top of the finished operation. The topsoil shall be planted immediately with grass or other groundcover, subject to approval of the Township.
9. Berms. Minimum ten (10) foot high berm with side slopes of no greater than four on one grade shall be required around any active cell which is adjacent to a public thoroughfare or exterior property line. This requirement may be waived when topographic or other screening exists that would accomplish the purpose of the berm.
E. Violations. To insure compliance with these regulations, the Zoning Official, or their designee, shall conduct periodic inspections. In the event that a violation is found, the Zoning Official shall send written notice to the permit holder. Failure to correct the violation within thirty (30) days shall
Charter Township of Oxford 5-30 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
automatically void the permit. No new permits shall be issued until the violation has been corrected.
5.24 Large-Format Retail Establishments.
A. Intent. It is the intent of this section to regulate large-format retail establishments, whether located as an individual use on a single site or as part of a shopping center with a grouping of attached and/or detached buildings. While it is recognized that large-format retail establishments may provide goods and services to Township residents, such stores are primarily focused on attracting consumers from a market area larger than the Township. Therefore, specific standards are required to ensure that large-format retail stores can be adequately served by and do not create an inordinate impact upon roads, utilities, storm drainage and police and fire services.
It is further intended by this section that large-format retail establishments be designed in a manner that is compatible with the primarily residential character of the Township.
B. Location. Large-format establishments shall be located C-2 District on sites having direct frontage on a State highway or trunkline or abutting property which will provide a site with direct access to such roads.
C. Minimum Area and Width. large-format retail stores developed individually or in combination shall have a minimum area of ten (10) acres. Sites of less than ten (10) acres may be approved, in the sole discretion of the Planning Commission, when it is demonstrated by the applicant that the following conditions are met:
1. All design standards set fourth in sub-section D are met.
2. Sufficient area is available to meet all landscaping and buffering standards set forth in Section 7.3(A).
D. Design Standards. The applicant shall demonstrate in the submission of a site plan and supportive material that the following design standards are met:
1. Aesthetic Character.
a. Facades and Exterior Walls:
i. Facades greater than one hundred (100) feet in length, measured horizontally, shall incorporate projections or recesses extending at least twenty (20) percent of the length of the facade. No uninterrupted length of any facade shall exceed one hundred (100) horizontal feet.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-31 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ii. Ground floor facades that face public streets shall have arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings or other such features along no less than fifty (50) percent of their horizontal length.
iii. Building facades must include a repeating pattern that includes no less than two (2) of the following elements:
• color change;
• texture change; and
• an expression of architectural or structural bays through a change in plane no less than twelve (12) inches in width, such as an offset, reveal or projecting rib.
b. Roofs. Roofs shall exhibit one (1) or more of the following features depending upon the nature of the roof and building design:
i. Flat Roofs: parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment such as HVAC units from public view are required. Parapets shall not exceed one-third (1/3) of the height of the supporting wall at any point.
ii. Pitched Roof:
• overhanging eaves, extending no less than three (3) feet past the supporting walls;
• an average slope greater than or equal to one (1) foot of vertical rise for every three (3) feet of horizontal run and less than or equal to one (1) foot of vertical rise for every one (1) foot of horizontal run; and
• three (3) or more roof slope planes.
c. Materials and colors.
i. Predominant exterior building materials shall be high quality materials, including, but not limited to, brick, stone, and integrally tinted/textured concrete masonry units.
ii. Facade colors shall be low reflectance, subtle, neutral or earth tone colors. The use of high-intensity colors,
Charter Township of Oxford 5-32 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
metallic colors, black or fluorescent colors shall be prohibited.
iii. Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors, including primary colors, but neon tubing shall not be an acceptable feature for building trim or accent areas.
iv. Exterior building materials shall provide texture to at least fifty (50) percent of the facade and shall not be completely made up of smooth-faced concrete block, tilt-up concrete panels or prefabricated steel panels.
d. Entryways. Each principal building on a site shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances featuring no less than three (3) of the following:
i. canopies or porticos;
ii. overhangs;
iii. recesses/projection
iv. arcades;
v. raised corniced parapets over the door;
vi. peaked roof forms;
vii. arches;
viii. outdoor patios;
ix. display windows;
x. architectural details such as tile work and moldings which are integrated into the building structure and design;
xi. integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting; and
xii. Pavement/material changes at drive crossings to better define pedestrian cross walks.
2. Site Design.
a. Parking lot location. No more than fifty (50) percent of the off-street parking area devoted to the large-format retail
Charter Township of Oxford 5-33 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
establishment shall be located between the front facade of the principal building and the abutting streets.
b. Connectivity. The site design must provide direct connections and safe street crossings to adjacent land uses. Pavement/material changes at drive crossings shall be installed to better define pedestrian cross walks.
c. Pedestrian Circulation.
i. Sidewalks at least eight (8) feet in width shall be provided along all sides of the lot that abut a public street.
ii. Internal pedestrian walkways, no less than six (6) feet in width, shall be provided connecting the public sidewalk to the principal customer entrance of all principal buildings on the site. At a minimum, walkways shall connect focal points of pedestrian activity such as, but not limited to, transit stops, street crossings, building and store entry points, and shall feature adjoining landscaped areas that include trees, shrubs, benches, flower beds, ground covers or other such materials for no less than fifty (50) percent of the length of the walkway.
iii. Sidewalks, no less than eight (8) feet in width, shall be provided along the full length of the building along any facade featuring a customer entrance, and along any facade abutting public parking areas. Such sidewalks shall be located at least ten (10) feet from the facade of the building to provide planting beds for foundation landscaping, except where features such as arcades or entryways are part of the facade.
iv. All internal pedestrian walkways which cross or are incorporated with vehicular driving surfaces shall be distinguished from such driving surfaces through the use of durable, low maintenance surface materials such as pavers, bricks or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort, as well as the attractiveness of the walkways. Surface materials used for internal pedestrian walkway shall be designed to accommodate shopping carts.
d. Central Features and Community Space. Each large-format retail establishment subject to these standards shall
Charter Township of Oxford 5-34 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
contribute to the establishment or enhancement of community and public spaces by providing at least two (2) of the following: patio/seating area, pedestrian plaza with benches, transportation center, window shopping walkway, outdoor playground area, kiosk area, water feature, clock tower or other such deliberately shaped area and/or a focal feature or amenity that, in the judgment of the Township, adequately enhances such community and public spaces. Any such areas shall have direct access to the public sidewalk network and such features shall not be constructed of materials that are inferior to the principal materials of the building and landscape.
e. Delivery/Loading Operations. Loading docks, trash collection, outdoor storage and similar facilities and functions shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building and the landscaping so that the visual and acoustic impacts of these functions are fully contained and out of view from adjacent properties and public streets. Use of screening materials that are different from or inferior to the principal materials of the building and landscape is prohibited. No delivery, loading, trash removal or compaction, or other such operations shall be permitted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the applicant submits evidence that sound barriers between all areas for such operations effectively reduce noise emissions to a level of forty-five (45) dB, as measured at the lot line of any adjoining property. Delivery/loading operations shall be setback a minimum of fifty (50) feet from adjacent residentially zoned property.
E. Traffic Impact. The applicant shall submit a detailed traffic study in a form that is acceptable to the Township, prepared by a recognized and independent traffic engineer, demonstrating the impact of the large-format retail establishment on the transportation network. Based on the results of the traffic impact study, the applicant shall propose methods of mitigating any adverse impacts to the transportation network and show to what degree the proposed methods maintain or improve the operating levels of the impacted streets and intersections.
5.25 Mining of Gravel, Sand and/or Other Minerals. All mining operations shall be required to comply with the following requirements, standards, and regulations, including making application for and obtaining an operating permit, if the operator will remove more than 1,000 cubic yards in any year.
A. Permit Application. An application for a mining special land use permit shall include the following detailed information and plan drawings:
Charter Township of Oxford 5-35 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
1. Name of the owner, or owners, of land from which removal is to be made.
2. Name and address of applicant making a request for such permit.
3. Name and address of the person, firm, or corporation that will be conducting the actual removal operation.
4. Location, size, and description of the area from which the removal is to be made.
5. Location of the processing plant.
6. Type of materials or resources to be removed.
7. Proposed method of removal, general haul route, and whether blasting or other use of explosives will be required.
8. General description of equipment to be used.
9. The estimated number of years to complete operations.
10. A statement that a performance guarantee satisfactory to the Township, will be furnished. Upon submission of a topographical survey by a Registered Civil Engineer or registered Land Surveyor showing completion of the reclaimed areas, the performance guarantee shall be released, in accordance with the amount of security per acre.
11. As part of the application, the applicant shall submit a topographic survey of the existing parcel drawn to scale and prepared by a Registered Civil engineer or Registered Land Surveyor with minimum five (5) foot contour intervals based upon U.S.G.S. datum. The drawing shall also clearly show the area to be mined, areas for stockpiling, processing plant locations, maintenance areas, and similar use areas. The applicant shall also prepare a Plan of Reclamation which depicts the final elevations referenced to U.S.G.S. datum and prepared by a Registered Civil Engineer and or Registered Land Surveyor. The applicant will propose a certain plan of operation and will be expected to comply with such a plan during the full term of the permit. The Plan of Reclamation shall be designed to accommodate one or more of the uses permitted in the underlying, principal zoning classification.
12. The application shall be accompanied by a processing fee, to be paid by the applicant, in an amount to be established from time to time by resolution of the Township Board.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-36 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
B. Standards for Mining Operations.
1. All buildings and mining equipment shall be located no closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet to the nearest abutting property line.
2. No excavation or mining shall take place within fifty (50) feet of the nearest abutting property line, nor within seventy-five (75) feet of the right-of-way of an existing or a platted street. If the circumstances of the site indicate that either or both of these setback requirements would not be adequate to protect abutting property, the Planning Commission shall require a greater distance and may also require provision of a greenbelt and/or earthen berm within a portion of the setback area. A reduction in the setback from a street right-of-way may be granted by the Township Board only in those instances where it is necessary to reduce the final elevation so that it conforms to the elevation of the street.
3. All active excavation shall be screened from view of an adjoining residential district by one of the following:
a. Construction of a raised earth berm, along the boundaries of the property. The Planning Commission shall determine the required berm height based on the need for screening along each property line (not to exceed twelve (12) feet in height). The berm shall be planted with grass, trees, and similar vegetation, and shall be sloped appropriately for the proposed vegetation.
b. Plantings of coniferous trees having a minimum caliper of 3 inches along the boundaries of the property with sufficient staggered rows and of a depth, that will guarantee effective screening.
4. All equipment and facilities used in the production, processing or transportation of sand, gravel, or stone shall be constructed, maintained, and operated, in such manner as to comply with the Environmental Performance Standards of Section 10.1.
5. Any paved public road used as a haul route to and from the mining site shall be swept, as needed, to prevent any accumulation of sand and/or gravel on the public roads. All gravel public or private roads providing access to the mining site shall be kept dust-free at all times during mining operations.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-37 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
6. The applicant shall acquire approval as to haul routes, bonding requirements, weight limits, speed limits, and other matters within the jurisdiction of the agencies responsible for the public roads.
7. The haul route shall be chosen so as to cause the least amount of disturbance to uses outside the Gravel and Sand Districts. All operators shall clearly post and otherwise inform all drivers of the approved haul route for that specific mining operation.
8. Temporary stockpiling of topsoil or overburden near road intersections and similar operational problems shall be subject to approval of the Township Board as not constituting a hazard to road traffic, pedestrians, or adjoining property.
9. Upon termination of any excavation and/or mining operation either by the operator, owner, the Township through this Ordinance, and/or through judicial means, the land shall be reclaimed according to the Standards for Rehabilitation in Section 5.25(C).
10. Sand and gravel operations shall not leave or bury obsolete equipment on the mining site. Violations of this provision shall be grounds for revocation of the operator's permit.
11. In order to protect the water wells in the surrounding area, de-watering is prohibited unless approved by the Township Board and appropriate State / County agencies based upon review by the Township Engineer to ensure against unreasonable disturbance of water wells.
12. All trucks shall be prohibited from standing and parking on the public right of way outside the entrance to all mining operation sites.
13. In the preparation of this ordinance, it is recognized that it would be impossible to foresee all of the activities which could potentially result in hazards to the public health, safety and welfare. Therefore, the Township Board shall be authorized to direct that actions of the operator be taken or ceased in order to prevent an immediate and identified harm to the public health, safety and welfare in connection with the gravel mining operation. The operator shall comply with such directive, however, in the event such a directive is given, the operator shall:
a. Be given a written notice identifying the reason for the directive, and specifying the action which is to be taken or ceased.
b. Be entitled to a hearing before the Township Board upon request of the operator. Such hearing shall be conducted at
Charter Township of Oxford 5-38 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
the next regular Township Board meeting, or at a special meeting the Supervisor may call for this purpose.
C. Standards for Rehabilitation of Mined Areas
1. All excavations shall be made either to a water-producing depth of at least 8 feet below the low-water mark for at least 80 percent of the water area, or shall be graded or backfilled with earthen materials, to insure:
a. That the excavated area shall not collect and permit to remain therein, stagnant water; or
b. That the surface of such area which is not permanently submerged is graded or backfilled as necessary so as to reduce the peaks and depressions thereof, and so as to produce a gently rolling surface that will minimize erosion due to rainfall and which will be in substantial conformity to the adjoining land in the immediate area.
2. The banks of all sand and gravel excavations shall be sloped to the water line in a water-producing excavation, and to the pit floor in a dry operation, at a slope which shall not be less than three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot vertical, and said banks shall be restored with vegetation in a manner set forth hereunder.
3. Where a permanent body of water will result from the mining operations, the slopes on all sides of the pit beginning at the high water mark, shall not exceed 4 feet horizontal to 1 foot vertical until the water reaches a depth of 5 feet at the low water mark.
4. Vegetation shall be restored by the use of sufficient soil and overburden and by appropriate seeding of grasses or planting of shrubs or trees in all parts of the mining area where such area is not to be submerged under water, as provided above.
5. Upon cessation of mining operations by abandonment or otherwise, the operator, within a reasonable period of time not exceeding twelve (12) months thereafter, shall remove all plant structures, buildings, stockpiles, and equipment unless such building or structures can be lawfully used in the district in which they are located.
6. All mined out areas shall, within a reasonable length of time, be reclaimed and rehabilitated consistent with the applicant's approved Plan of Reclamation. General rules for determining the reasonable length of time shall be:
Charter Township of Oxford 5-39 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
a. The plan of reclamation shall include a schedule for reclamation of each particular area to be mined. This schedule may be adjusted or amended once each year, as part of the annual inspection process, upon demonstration of a reasonable basis by the operator.
b. Reclamation shall begin within one (1) year of substantial completion of the mining activities, and
c. Reclamation shall be complete within two (2) years.
7. In the event the Planning Commission confirms that an operator previously mined areas of land without a permit, reclamation plan or performance guarantee, such operator shall include in the operators reclamation schedule a plan for the reclamation of such areas in segments of not less than 100 acres per year. Said reclamation plan for such previously mined areas shall conform to all current permit and bonding requirements.
D. Performance Guarantee Requirement:
1. A permit shall not be issued upon any application involving the removal of more than 1000 cubic yards of soil unless the Permittee shall first post a performance guarantee with the Township Clerk pursuant to Section 16.8, except as otherwise provided herein. The performance guarantee shall be in a form approved by the Township Board and in the amount of the cost of the reclamation and rehabilitation work as set forth in the Plan for Reclamation as submitted by the applicant. The cost of that work shall be estimated by the Township Engineer and approved by the Township Board after recommendation of the Gravel Committee as established under Section 5.25(E)(1), below; provided further that the Township Board is authorized to waive or reduce all or any part of the amount of such performance guarantee to the extent that the Township Board determines the same unnecessary to insure the completion of the work set forth in said plan. The Township Engineer's estimate will be based upon a review of that work as provided in the Reclamation Plan and shall be in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of reclamation by another at that point in time when reclamation is scheduled to commence. If the Township Engineer determines that the amount of the current surety is insufficient to reclaim the site, the amount of the performance guarantee shall be increased accordingly. The Township Engineer shall also consider inflation and other reclamation cost increases during the annual performance guarantee review (Section 5.25(D)(3)).
Charter Township of Oxford 5-40 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
2. The performance guarantee shall be valid for a one-year period and shall contain the expiration date. The performance guarantee shall include a cancellation / expiration clause which shall provide that the surety company shall notify the Township in writing a minimum of 30 days prior to cancellation and/or expiration of the performance guarantee (Section 5.25(D)(5)). The Township Clerk shall be provided one original bond certificate for the Township's records. The performance guarantee shall include the parcel identification number and legal description of the area covered by the performance guarantee.
3. The conditions of said performance guarantee shall be that it cover the entire area already disturbed and the entire area that will be disturbed by the operator within the current calendar year (January 1 - December 31). The performance guarantee shall reference all parcels covered by the performance guarantee by parcel identification number. The minimum area covered by the performance guarantee shall be 20 acres. The performance guarantee shall be kept in full force and effect until the area covered by the performance guarantee has been reclaimed according to the operator's approved rehabilitation plan. The Permittee shall comply with all provisions of this ordinance and terms and conditions of the permit, and complete all work set forth in the rehabilitation plan. The performance guarantee shall be reviewed annually by the Township Engineer to ensure that the performance guarantee amount is adequate, after adjustment for inflation and other reclamation cost increases, to cover completion of all work set forth in the rehabilitation plan.
4. For good cause shown, the Township Board is authorized to grant the Permittee an extension of the time to complete the work shown on the plan of Reclamation upon the Permittee's application therefor prior to the expiration of the date for completion.
5. Upon the Permittee complying with the provisions of this Ordinance, and the terms and conditions of the permit, the Clerk shall issue to the Permittee a Certificate of Completion and the performance guarantee shall be canceled, and in the case of a deposit of cash, certified check or irrevocable letter of credit, the same shall be returned to the Permittee.
E. Periodic Inspections & Reports
1. A permit shall continue for such length of time as may be required to complete removal of the sand and gravel as long as the operations are carried out in compliance with this Ordinance and the permit. In order to provide the Township with periodic review for compliance
Charter Township of Oxford 5-41 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
with all operations and permit requirements, the mining site shall be inspected at least annually by a committee made up of the Township Supervisor and two Planning Commission members appointed annually by the Chairperson of the Planning Commission. Any committee member may direct the Township Engineer and/or Township Planner to be present and assist with the site inspection and review. Prior to inspection, the Township shall notify the operator of the date and time of the inspection so that he will have the opportunity to be available.
The operator of each mining site under permit from the Township shall prepare and provide to the inspection committee an aerial photograph or a contour map of the site that includes the following:
a. A scale of 1" = 200' with contour intervals of five (5) feet.
b. Areas to be excavated in future years shall be clearly defined.
c. The aerial photo or contour map shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor and shall show the conditions of the site during the month of November of the current year.
At the time of the annual inspection, the operator shall be prepared to provide ground control stakes for the aerial survey or surveyor's stakes for the contour map, if the committee requests correlation with physical features on the site.
The committee shall prepare a report and if the mining operation is in violation of this Ordinance, the Township Board may have its consulting engineer inspect the site and prepare a written report. Upon finding the operator in violation of the Ordinance or permit, the Township Board shall notify him in writing. The violation shall be remedied within ninety (90) days or the Township Board may revoke the operating permit.
2. In order to defray the expenses incurred by the Township for surveillance of the mining operation and engineering inspections to insure compliance with the approved mining plan and rehabilitation plan, the operator shall establish an annual escrow account for surveillance and inspection of the mining operation. The escrow amount shall be determined on a per acre basis and shall be set by resolution of the Township Board. In determining the per acre amount, the Board may consult with a Registered Civil Engineer or Registered Landscape Architect with expertise in reclamation of mining sites and the costs associated with compliance inspections.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-42 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Any amount remaining in the escrow account at the termination of the operations shall be returned to the operator.
F. Procedures For Approval
1. Approval of mining operations shall be by way of special land use permit, pursuant to Article 4 and the standards of this Section. Sufficient copies of the complete application, including plan drawings, shall be submitted to the Building Department Township Clerk (18 copies). The Building Department will distribute copies to the township officials and staff. The Township Engineer, Planner and Attorney will review the complete application and provide their recommendations to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission will then review the site plans for the proposed mining operation and the rehabilitation plans for the mined areas and approve or deny the permit, according to the requirements and standards of Section 4.5 and Sections 5.25(A), (B), and (C). The
5.26 Motel or Hotel. Motels and hotels are subject to the following conditions:
A. A site shall contain no less than two (2) acres of land and no less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area shall be available per guest unit.
B. Each unit shall contain not less than two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of heated/air-conditioned floor area per guest unit.
C. All buildings shall be setback no less than fifty (50) feet from all perimeter parcel lines, while one hundred (100) feet is required when adjacent to residentially zoned, planned or occupied land.
D. Accessory uses may include, but not be limited to meeting rooms, ballrooms, restaurants, bars, recreational uses, and gift shops.
E. Cooking and/or kitchen facilities may be provided in new hotels/motels upon demonstration by the applicant that the provisions of all applicable fire prevention and building codes have been complied with.
5.27 Ponds. Private residential ponds, and agricultural or farm ponds are subject to the following conditions:
A. Parcel size must be a minimum of five (5) acres.
B. There shall be a setback of at least one hundred (100) feet from the edge of the excavation to all property lines.
C. There shall be a minimum setback from any septic tank and/or tile disposal field of at least one hundred (100) feet.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-43 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
D. Where a pond will be used for swimming, there shall be no slope in excess of 5:1 (five feet horizontal to one foot vertical) until the water reaches a depth of five (5) feet, on any side of the pond where a beach exists. In no case shall any slope exceed 3:1.
E. Excavated materials, in excess of one thousand (1,000) cubic yards, may not be hauled off the site unless specific approval is granted by the Planning Commission. Construction of a pond shall not be used as a means of establishing a mining operation in other than a Gravel and Sand district by the operator and/or the Planning Commission.
5.28 Private Schools. Private primary and secondary schools (pre-kindergarten through grade 12) are subject to the following conditions:
A. The Planning Commission shall evaluate the adequacy of the proposed site size based upon the following guidelines:
School Type Student Capacity Site Size In Acres
Elementary 300-600 5 + 1/100 students
Junior High 750 - 1,000 15 + 1/100 students
Senior High 900 - 2,000 25 + 1/100 students
B. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for all teachers, employees, and visitors.
C. Off-street waiting space shall be available so that school buses and parents' automobiles are not forced to stand within the right-of-way of any public street.
D. The layout of all parking lots, driveways, waiting areas and loading zones shall be designed with pedestrian safety as the primary consideration.
E. All buildings shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from all lot lines abutting a residential use.
5.29 Rooming House or Boarding House. A rooming house, boarding house, or other similar use which provides lodging and meals for residents are subject to the following conditions:
A. Off-street parking shall be provided based on the same standards as are used for multiple family dwellings.
B. Food service shall be limited to residents of the rooming house only and not available to the general public.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-44 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
C. The site shall include at least three thousand (3,000) square feet of land area per rooming unit.
5.30 Senior Housing Apartments. Senior housing apartments are subject to the following standards:
A. All of such facilities shall be constructed, maintained and operated in conformance with applicable state and federal laws.
B. The site shall be within walking distance and have suitable pedestrian connection to shopping facilities for food, prescription drugs, and personal services such as laundries, dry cleaners, beauty and barber shops, and similar uses.
C. Off-street parking shall be provided in the ratio of one space per unit.
D. The density of development permitted shall be based on the following requirements of land area per unit, according to the number of building stories. (Because of the present ability of the Fire Department to safely handle a maximum of three (3) stories when fighting a fire, no senior citizen housing will be permitted to exceed three (3) stories or thirty (30) feet in height.)
Stories
Required Land Area Per Unit (square feet)
Maximum Density (dwelling units per acre)
3
1,200
36
2 or less
1,550
28
5.31 Shooting Ranges, Gun Clubs. Shooting ranges, gun clubs, and similar uses, such as survival and other air-gun games, are subject to the following conditions:
A. The minimum site size shall be eighty (80) acres with a minimum width of one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet. If the proposed description of the project indicates the potential for adverse impacts on adjacent properties, the Planning Commission and Township Board may require an increase in the minimum sizes and setbacks established for the proposed use in the zoning ordinance. Any increase in such minimum sizes shall be required as the result of the Planning Commission and Township Board requiring additional information to determine, and attempt to limit, the potential negative impact upon adjacent properties caused by noise, traffic, lights and other nuisance factors.
B. Minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be two hundred fifty (250) feet. Minimum setbacks may be increased by the Planning Commission if
Charter Township of Oxford 5-45 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
warranted by the proposed facility in accordance with the NRA Range Sourcebook, published by the National Rifle Association.
C. Off-street parking shall be provided in the ratio of one (1) space for each three (3) users at capacity. All parking areas shall be kept dust-free at all times so as not to become a nuisance to adjoining properties.
D. All parking areas shall be screened from view of an adjoining residential district or use by either a greenbelt, obscuring fence, or a masonry wall, whichever is determined by the Planning Commission to be the most appropriate and effective.
E. The hours when shooting is permitted at a gun club or shooting range shall be limited from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. Monday through Saturday and 12 noon to 6 p.m. Sundays. The Planning Commission may apply more restrictive hours where protection for adjoining residents is necessary.
F. The design of the facility shall clearly show that safety of persons on and off the site is guaranteed. This shall mean that no projectile of any kind may be permitted to leave the site. Unless this safety requirement is clearly indicated by the design plans, a permit shall not be issued. The design of all ranges shall incorporate the recommended safety features of the National Rifle Association or similar safety features.
G. The firing range shall be fenced on all sides except the firing line, by a fence no less than eight (8) feet in height. Such fence shall be either of a chain-link type or of board construction sufficient to prevent persons from passing over or through the fence.
H. The firing line or other area from which firearms are discharged shall be located no closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from any property line, nor closer than five hundred (500) feet from any existing residential structure other than those on the premises.
I. The intensity level of sounds shall not exceed seventy-five (75) decibels (dBA) at the lot line of industrial uses, sixty-five (65) decibels at the lot line of commercial uses, and fifty-five (55) decibels at the common lot line when adjacent to residential uses and residential districts. The sound levels shall be measured in accordance with Section 10.1(J)
J. Central loudspeakers/paging systems are prohibited within two hundred fifty (250) feet of residentially planned, zoned or used property. Such systems shall not be directed toward a residential area even if outside the two hundred fifty (250) foot setback.
K. Survival games or other air-gun games may be permitted only in areas of the Township that have been designated as approved hunting areas and all properties used for such games shall be completely fenced to prevent
Charter Township of Oxford 5-46 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
participants from trespassing on adjoining properties. Signs warning participants not to cross the fence shall be placed every two hundred (200) feet along its perimeter. Failure to follow this requirement shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the applicant's Special Land Use Permit.
5.32 Wireless Communication Facilities.
A. Purpose and Intent.
It is the general purpose and intent of the Township to carry out the will of the United States Congress by authorizing communication facilities needed to operate wireless communication systems. However, it is the further purpose and intent of the Township to provide for such authorization in a manner which will protect the health, safety and welfare and retain the integrity of neighborhoods and the character, property values and aesthetic quality of the community at large. In fashioning and administering the provisions of this section, attempt has been made to balance these potentially competing interests.
Recognizing the number of providers authorized to establish and operate wireless communication services and coverage, and changes in State and Federal legislation, it is the further purpose and intent of this section to:
1. Facilitate adequate and efficient provision of sites for wireless communication facilities and ensure that wireless communication facilities are situated in appropriate locations and relationships to other land uses, structures and buildings.
2. Establish predetermined districts in the location considered best for the establishment of wireless communication facilities, subject to applicable standards and conditions.
3. Recognize that operation of a wireless communication system may require the establishment of facilities in locations not within the predetermined districts. In such cases, it has been determined that it is likely that there will be greater adverse impact upon neighborhoods and areas within the community. Consequently, more stringent standards and conditions should apply to the review, approval, and use of such facilities.
4. Limit inappropriate physical and aesthetic overcrowding of land use activities and avoid adverse impact upon existing population, transportation systems, and other public services and facility needs.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-47 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
5. Provide for adequate information about plans for wireless communication facilities in order to permit the community to effectively plan for the location of such facilities.
6. Minimize the adverse impacts of technological obsolescence of such facilities, including a requirement to remove unused and/or unnecessary facilities in a timely manner.
7. Minimize the negative visual impact of wireless communication facilities on neighborhoods, community land marks, historic sites and buildings, natural beauty areas and public rights-of-way. This contemplates the establishment of as few structures as reasonably feasible, the use of structures which are designed for compatibility, and the use of existing structures.
8. Implement and provide for compliance with State and Federal legislation through new and amended application, review, and decision standards, requirements and procedures for wireless communication facilities requests.
B. Authorization.
1. As a Permitted Use Subject to Site Plan Approval. In all Zoning Districts, a wireless communication facility described in this subsection (B)(1) shall be a permitted use subject to the standards and conditions in subsection (C), the application requirements in subsection (D), the collocation requirements in subsection (E), the procedures in subsection (G), and any prior Special Land Use or site plan approval conditions.
a. Wireless communications equipment attached to an existing structure not previously approved and used as a wireless communications support structure and located within a nonresidential zoning district, where there will be no substantial change in physical dimensions of the existing structure.
b. A proposed collocation upon a wireless communication support structure which has been approved by the Township for such collocation but which is not permitted by administrative review under subsection (B)(3).
c. Wireless communication equipment on an existing utility pole structure located within a right-of-way and not previously approved and used as a wireless communications support structure, where there will be no substantial change in physical dimensions of the existing pole.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-48 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
d. Attached wireless communication facilities that are not permitted by administrative review under subsection (B)(3).
2. As a Special Land Use. Unless permitted under subsections (B)(1) or (B)(3), wireless communication facilities require approval as a special land use, which shall be subject to the standards and conditions in subsection (C), the application requirements in subsection (D), the collocation requirements in subsection (E), the procedures in subsection (G), and a demonstration of the need for the proposed facility based on one or more of the following factors:
i. Proximity to an interstate or major thoroughfare.
ii. Areas of population concentration.
iii. Concentration of commercial, industrial, and/or other business centers.
iv. Areas where signal interference has occurred due to tall buildings, masses of trees, or other obstructions.
v. Topography of the proposed facility location in relation to other facilities with which the proposed facility is to operate.
vi. Other specifically identified reason creating facility need.
a. If it is demonstrated by an applicant that a wireless communication facility necessary to providing services cannot be established as permitted under subsection (B)(1), wireless communication facilities may be permitted as a Special Land Use in the AG, SF-3, SF-2, SF-1, C-2, I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts.
b. If it is demonstrated by an applicant that a wireless communication facility necessary to providing services cannot be established as permitted under subsection (B)(1) or in a zoning district identified in subsection (B)(2)(a), such wireless communication facility may be considered and permitted elsewhere in the Township as a Special Land Use, subject to the following:
1. In the application, the applicant shall demonstrate that no existing structure identified in subsection (B)(1) or
Charter Township of Oxford 5-49 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
location in a Zoning District identified in subsection (B)(2)(a), above can reasonably meet the specifically disclosed service, coverage and/or capacity needs of the applicant. Such demonstration requires identification of all structures and properties considered and a factual explanation of why they are not feasible in terms of availability, suitability, or otherwise.
2. Wireless communication facilities shall be of a “stealth” design such as, without limitation, a steeple, bell tower, tree, or other form which is located and compatible with the existing character of the proposed site, neighborhood and general area, as approved by the Township taking into account any alternative designs submitted by the Applicant or identified during the review and decision process.
3. Locations outside the Zoning Districts identified in subsection (B)(2)(a), shall be limited to the following sites:
i. Municipally-owned sites.
ii. Other governmentally owned sites.
iii. Religious or other institutional sites.
iv. Public or private school sites.
v. Other sites if: (i) not located in an R-1, R-2, R-3, or R-1A zoning district, and (ii) no sites identified in i – iv, above are available and suitable, as demonstrated in the application and determined by the Planning Commission.
4. The applicant’s demonstration of good faith efforts to identify and evaluate alternate sites, locations, designs, placements, or features for the proposed facility that would or could be more consistent with the ordinance purposes stated in subsection (A).
5. For each alternate site, location, design, placement, or feature for the proposed facility identified by the applicant or otherwise, the applicant’s demonstration that the proposed facility is more consistent with the
Charter Township of Oxford 5-50 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ordinance purposes stated in subsection (A), and/or that such alternate is not feasible.
3. Wireless Communication Equipment as a Permitted Use Subject to Administrative Review. A proposal for attached wireless communication facilities that satisfies the following criteria does not require Special Land Use or site plan approval. Confirmation that these criteria are satisfied shall be determined by an administrative review and written certification by the Zoning Administrator to the Building Official prior to issuance of any building permits. Such proposals shall also be reviewed for compliance with the standards and conditions in subsection (C), with the certification to identify any items of noncompliance.
a. The existing wireless communications support structure and/or wireless communications equipment compound are in compliance with this ordinance, and if not, are in compliance with a prior approval under this ordinance.
b. The proposal complies with the terms and conditions of any prior final approval under this ordinance of the wireless communications support structure and/or wireless communications compound.
c. The proposal will not increase the height of the wireless communications support structure by more than twenty (20) feet or ten percent (10%) of its original height (as first erected without any later additions), whichever is greater.
d. The proposal will not increase the width of the wireless communications support structure by more than necessary to the stated and documented purpose of the increase.
e. The proposal will not increase the area of the existing wireless communications equipment compound to more than 2,500 square feet.
C. Standards and Conditions Applicable to All Wireless Communication Facilities. All applications for wireless communication facilities shall be reviewed in accordance with the following standards and conditions, and, if approved, shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with such standards and conditions.
1. Facilities shall not be demonstrably injurious or otherwise detrimental to the public safety and welfare.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-51 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
2. Facilities shall be located and designed to be compatible with the existing character of the proposed site and harmonious with surrounding areas.
3. Wireless communication facilities shall comply with applicable federal and state standards relative to the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions.
4. Applicants shall demonstrate an engineering justification for the proposed height of the support structure and an evaluation of alternative designs which might result in lower height. Support structures shall not exceed the minimum height necessary for collocation by at least two (2) providers, or by a larger number of providers identified and disclosed in the application as intending and contracted or otherwise committed to use of the structure.
5. The following additional standards shall be met:
a. Except as needed for essential services, and regardless of the number of colocators, the maximum height of the wireless communication facility and antenna shall be the minimum height demonstrated to be necessary for reasonable communication by the applicant (and by other entities to colocate on the structure), not to exceed 250 feet. Accessory buildings shall be limited to the maximum height for accessory structure within the respective district.
b. The minimum setback of the support structure from any property line and existing or proposed road right-of-way line shall be at least the height of the highest point of the support structure, including antennae. No wireless transmission tower shall be located closer than 2,000 feet to any other such tower.
c. There shall be access to the support structure and equipment compound for police, fire and emergency vehicles, and for operation, maintenance, repair and inspection purposes, which may be provided by an easement.
d. The division of property for the purpose of locating a wireless communication facility is prohibited unless all zoning requirements and conditions are met.
e. Rooftop wireless communication facilities shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building. Wireless communication facilities mounted upon the side of a building shall be attached flush against the building surface, and shall not be allowed to protrude more than the depth of the antenna.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-52 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Such facilities shall blend into the design, contour and color scheme of the building.
f. The Planning Commission may regulate the color of the wireless communication facility and all accessory buildings to minimize distraction, maximize aesthetic appearance, and ensure compatibility with surroundings. Lighting is only allowed if required by, and in compliance with the standards of, the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications Commission, Michigan Aeronautics Commission, other governmental agencies, or the Township as a Special Land Use approval condition. Any such requirements and standards shall be documented by the Applicant.
g. Support structures shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable building codes. Any approval or certification under this ordinance shall be subject to and conditioned on the Building Official’s authority to require and be provided with a soils report from a geotechnical engineer, licensed in the State of Michigan, based on actual soil borings and certifying the suitability of soil conditions, and a written engineering certification from the manufacturer or designer of the support system that the support system can safely accommodate attached antennas under expected weather conditions. Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communication Commission, and Michigan Aeronautics Commission requirements shall be noted.
h. A maintenance plan, and any applicable maintenance agreement, shall be presented and approved as part of the site plan for the proposed facility. Such plan shall be designed to ensure the long term, continuous maintenance to a reasonably prudent standard. Such plans shall include the names, pager number and email addresses, if any, business and home telephone numbers, mobile telephone numbers, if any, and identity of no fewer than two persons who can be contacted at any hour of the day or night that have full authority to act on behalf of the applicant in the event of a malfunction or emergency. Such list of persons shall be kept current by immediate written notice to the Township of any changes.
i. The application shall include a certification by a State of Michigan licensed Professional Engineer regarding the manner in which the proposed structure will fall.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-53 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
j. The application shall include a description of performance guarantee to be posted at the time of receiving a building permit to ensure removal of the facility when it has been abandoned or is no longer needed. The security shall be in the form of cash, letter of credit, or an agreement in a form approved by the Township attorney and recordable at the Register of Deeds, establishing a promise of the applicant and owner of the property to remove the facility in a timely manner as required under this section of the ordinance. The applicant and owner shall be responsible for the payment of any costs and attorney’s fees incurred by the Township in securing removal.
k. The application shall include a map showing existing and known proposed wireless communication facilities within the Township and areas within three (3) miles surrounding the Township. If the information is on file with the Township, the applicant shall update as needed. Any such information which is trade secret and/or other confidential commercial information may be submitted with a request for confidentiality in connection with the development of governmental policy. This ordinance shall serve as the promise to maintain confidentially to the extent permitted by law. The request for confidentiality must be in writing.
D. Application Requirements. All of the following information and documents shall be required for a Special Land Use, site plan, or administrative review application to be considered complete:
1. A site plan prepared in accordance with Article 12 shall be submitted, showing the location, size, screening, lighting and design of all buildings and structures.
2. The site plan shall also include a detailed landscape plan prepared in accordance with Article 7. The purpose of landscaping is to provide screening and aesthetic enhancement for the structure base, accessory buildings and enclosure. In all cases, fencing of a minimum of eight (8) feet in height shall be required for protection of the support structure and security from persons who may otherwise access facilities.
3. The application shall include a description of security to be posted at the time of receiving a building permit to ensure removal of the facility when it has been abandoned or is no longer needed, as provided in Subsection (F). In this regard, the security shall be posted and maintained in the form of: (1) cash; (2) irrevocable letter of credit; or, (3) other security arrangement accepted by the Township Board.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-54 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
4. A map or plan showing the locations and heights of existing wireless communications support structures in the Township and communities adjoining the Township, and which identifies structures the Applicant is using or has the right to use and the heights at which its antennas are or may be installed.
5. The name, address identity, home and business telephone numbers, pager number and email addresses, if any, and mobile phone number, if any, of the person to contact for engineering, maintenance and other notice purposes. This information shall be kept current by immediate written notice of the Township of any changes.
6. An application fee in an amount established by Resolution of the Township Board.
7. Identification of the dates, nature and conditions of any prior zoning approvals or permits for the property.
8. If the application is for a new wireless communication support structure or to place or install additional wireless communications equipment on an existing support structure, a structural analysis and certification to the Township by a registered professional engineer that the structure is designed to support, or capable of supporting the proposed wireless communications equipment. Any modifications necessary to a structure being capable of supporting the proposed equipment shall be specifically identified in the analysis and certification.
9. If modifications to a wireless communications support structure are identified in a structural analysis, a written determination by the Township Building Official that, subject to review of an actual building permit application and plans, the identified modifications would be allowed and that with the modifications, the structure would meet building code requirements.
10. If the application is for a new wireless communications support structure or to increase the height of an existing structure, a written analysis and justification by a registered engineer that the proposed height is the minimum necessary for the provision of personal wireless services and one collocation.
11. If the application is for a new wireless communications support structure, identification of all other structures and properties considered for the proposed use and a factual explanation of why they are not feasible in terms of availability, suitability, or otherwise.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-55 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
12. If the application is for a new wireless communications support structure, identification of possible alternative locations, designs, or features, whether those alternatives were considered, and if so, a factual explanation of why those alternatives are not proposed.
13. If the application is for a new wireless communications support structure outside the AG, SF-3, SF-2, SF-1, C-2, I-1 and I-2 Zoning Districts, identification and submission in written form of the evidence and arguments the Applicant will rely on in claiming that those restrictions prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting it from providing personal wireless services and that its proposal is more consistent with the ordinance purposes stated in subsection (A), than alternate sites, locations, designs, placements and features.
14. Disclosure and copies of all other required governmental permits or approvals and the status and copies of pending applications for those permits or approvals.
15. If the application is for a Special Land Use approval, the name, expertise, and relationship to applicant of each licensed or registered professional that has or will provide evidence to support the application, with a summary of that evidence that includes any opinions expressed and the bases for such opinions.
16. For each professional opinion disclosed by the applicant as supporting the application, a statement of whether the applicant agrees that it should be subject to separate review by or for the Township, and if so, the type, scope, time, and cost of such a separate review that applicant believes would be reasonable.
17. The Applicant’s email address, fax number or address to which the Township should direct notices regarding the Application.
E. Collocation.
1. Statement of Policy. It is the policy of the Township to minimize the overall number of newly established locations for wireless communication facilities and Wireless Communication Support Structures within the community, and encourage the use of existing structures for Attached Wireless Communication Facility purposes, consistent with the statement of purpose and intent, set forth in Subsection (A), Purpose and Intent, above. Each licensed provider of a wireless communication facility must, by law, be permitted to locate sufficient facilities in order to achieve the objectives promulgated by the United States Congress. However, particularly in light of the dramatic increase in the number of wireless
Charter Township of Oxford 5-56 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
communication facilities reasonably anticipated to occur as a result of the change of federal law and policy in and relating to the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, it is the policy of the Township that all users should collocate on Attached Wireless Communication Facilities and Wireless Communication Support Structures in the interest of achieving the purposes and intent of this section, as stated above, and as stated in Subsection (A), Purpose and Intent. If a provider fails or refuses to permit collocation on a facility owned or otherwise controlled by it, where collocation is feasible, the result will be that a new and unnecessary additional structure will be compelled, in direct violation of and in direct contradiction to the basic policy, intent and purpose of the Township. The provisions of this subsection are designed to carry out and encourage conformity with the policy of the Township.
2. Feasibility of collocation. Collocation shall be deemed to be "feasible" for purposes of this section where all of the following are met:
a. The wireless communication provider entity under consideration for collocation will undertake to pay market rent or other market compensation for collocation.
b. The site on which collocation is being considered, taking into consideration reasonable modification or replacement of a facility, is able to provide structural support.
c. The collocation being considered is technologically reasonable, e.g., the collocation will not result in unreasonable interference, given appropriate physical and other adjustment in relation to the structure, antennas, and the like.
d. The height of the structure necessary for collocation will not be increased beyond a point deemed to be permissible by the Township, taking into consideration the several standards contained in Subsections (b) and (c), above.
3. Requirements for Collocation.
1. The construction and use of a new wireless communication facility shall not be granted unless and until the applicant demonstrates that collocation is not feasible.
2. All new and modified wireless communications facilities shall be designed and constructed so as to accommodate collocation.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-57 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3. The policy of the community is for collocation. Thus, if a party who owns or otherwise controls a facility shall fail or refuse to alter a structure so as to accommodate a proposed and otherwise feasible collocation, such facility shall thereupon and thereafter be deemed to be a non-conforming structure and use, and shall not be altered, expanded or extended in any respect.
4. If a party who owns or otherwise controls a facility shall fail or refuse to permit a feasible collocation, and this requires the construction and/or use of a new facility, the party failing or refusing to permit a feasible collocation shall be deemed to be in direct violation and contradiction of the policy, intent and purpose of the Township, and, consequently such party shall take responsibility for the violation, and shall be prohibited from receiving approval for a new wireless communication support structure within the Township for a period of five (5) years from the date of the failure or refusal to permit the collocation. Such a party may seek and obtain a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals if and to the limited extent the applicant demonstrates entitlement to variance relief which, in this context, shall mean a demonstration that enforcement of the five (5) year prohibition would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent wireless communication services, or that such enforcement would have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless communication services.
F. Removal.
1. A wireless communication facility must furnish reasonable evidence of ongoing operation at any time after construction.
2. A condition of every approval of a wireless communication facility shall be adequate provision for removal of all or part of the facility by users and owners when the facility has not been used for 180 days or more. For purposes of this section, the removal of antenna or other equipment from the facility, or the cessation of operations (transmission and/or reception of radio signals) shall be considered as the beginning of a period of nonuse.
3. The situations in which removal of a facility is required, as set forth in paragraph 1 above, may be applied and limited to portions of a facility.
3. Upon the occurrence of one or more of the events requiring removal, the property owner or persons who had used the facility shall
Charter Township of Oxford 5-58 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
immediately apply for any required demolition or removal permits, proceed with, and complete the demolition/removal.
4. If the required removal of a facility or a portion thereof has not been lawfully completed within sixty (60) days of the applicable deadline, and after at least thirty (30) days written notice, the Township may remove or secure the removal of the facility or required portions thereof, with its actual cost and reasonable administrative charge to be drawn, collected and/or enforced from or under the security posted at the time of application.
G. Procedures.
1. Review and administrative actions on Special Land Use and site plan approval applications.
a. The Zoning Administrator shall promptly review Special Land Use and site plan approval applications to determine if they are administratively complete by inclusion of all information required in subsection (D). If the application is not complete, no later than 14 business days after receiving it, the Zoning Administrator shall provide a written or electronic notice to the Applicant specifying the information necessary to complete the application. Such initial review for completeness by the Zoning Administrator shall be on behalf of the Planning Commission for Special Land Use and site plan approvals.
b. The Zoning Administrator shall review supplemental information submitted in response to an incomplete application notice and notify the Applicant of any remaining deficiencies.
c. An application shall be administratively complete upon the Zoning Administrator’s determination or the expiration of 14 business days from receipt of the application without a notice to the Applicant of deficiencies.
d. Upon a Special Land Use or site plan approval application being administratively complete, the Zoning Administrator shall promptly schedule it for a Planning Commission meeting that will allow for a Planning Commission site plan decision or Special Land Use decision after the required public hearing within the time periods in subsection (2) below.
e. If the application has disclosed professional opinions supporting the application and the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission has determined that independent
Charter Township of Oxford 5-59 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
professional review for the Township of any such opinion should be performed, the reasonable costs of such review may be assessed to the Applicant by a written notice from the Zoning Administrator, as a professional review cost to be paid in accordance with the notice.
2. Decisions on Special Land Use and site plan approval applications.
a. The Planning Commission shall approve or deny a Special Land Use application for a new wireless communications support structure not more than 90 days after it is administratively complete.
b. For all Special Land Use and site plan applications other than new wireless communications support structures, the Planning Commission shall approve or deny the application not more than 60 days after it is administratively complete.
3. Post-approval costs, fees and administrative actions. Zoning Compliance permits to implement and grant the authority allowed by a Special Land Use or site plan approval for wireless communication facilities, certificates of use and occupancy for such facilities shall be issued subject to and conditioned on all of the following:
a. Any conditions of the Special Land Use or site plan approval.
b. Payment of any outstanding professional review costs as described in subsection (G)(1)(e).
c. Payment of a permit fees in an amount established by or in accordance with a Resolution of the Township Board.
5.33 Yard Waste Composting Facilities. Yard waste composting facilities, those that manage the biological decomposition of organic matter under controlled, aerobic conditions, are subject to the following conditions:
B. Site Location and Design.
1. Because of the level of truck traffic associated with this use, direct access to a paved County Primary road is required.
2. All internal roads and operation areas shall be kept dust-free at all times.
3. The site shall be level and well-drained. A grading plan showing existing and future elevations and method of managing stormwater
Charter Township of Oxford 5-60 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
runoff shall be submitted with any application for site plan and/or special land use approval.
4. If the site abuts property planned, zoned or used for residential purposes, a buffer zone shall be maintained where no composting, storage, transfer or loading activities will take place equal to five hundred (500) feet from existing residential structures and one hundred (100) feet from adjoining residential property lines. All buffer areas shall be maintained as vegetative strips to facilitate the filtration of pollutants from stormwater runoff.
5. All site access roads or drives and all areas for employee parking shall be paved with asphalt or concrete. Internal haul roads may be unpaved.
6. The portion of the compost site visible from a public street shall be screened from public view by a combination berm/landscaped buffer or other method acceptable to the Planning Commission.
7. A minimum of four (4) paved, off-street parking spaces shall be provided on-site.
C. Operation.
1. Access to the site shall be controlled to prevent unauthorized dumping during non-business hours. The operator shall establish a procedure and mechanism for proper disposal of non-yard wastes at an approved sanitary landfill.
2. Only yard wastes shall be composted at such facilities, typically including leaves, grass clippings, brush, and tree or shrub trimmings. All yard wastes must be brought to the site loose or in biodegradable bags with a cornstarch or similar base designed to degrade rapidly under aerobic conditions. All bags brought to the site shall be broken up and turned into compost windrows within five (5) days of delivery to the site. In no instance shall yard wastes be accepted in non-degradable plastic bags.
3. The decomposition process shall be properly managed and maintained in an aerobic condition to prevent all unnecessary odors. Towards this end, the temperature of compost piles shall be monitored regularly, and all compost piles shall be turned when the internal temperature drops below one hundred (120) degrees Fahrenheit.
4. Ponded water shall not be permitted to collect on a yard waste composting site. A plan for collection, retention and drainage of storm water shall be provided for review and approval. Vegetation
Charter Township of Oxford 5-61 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
filtration of runoff prior to discharge off-site shall be accomplished by use of a fifty (50) foot wide (minimum) perimeter strip/swale of grass, or similar measure. Any direct discharge to a water body may require a Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) NPDES wastewater discharge permit.
5. The operator shall provide sufficient equipment on-site to properly manage the composting process. As a minimum this shall include a front end loader or similar machinery for loading, unloading, turning, and aeration operations; a shredder for reducing new material to a smaller particle size for faster decomposition; a source of water or watering trucks; and a screen to improve the quality and marketability of the final product.
6. The volume of yard wastes handled by the facility shall not exceed seven thousand (7,000) cubic yards of incoming yard wastes per acre of active composting area on-site, exclusive of access roads, service areas, parking areas, required buffer zones, and similar areas.
7. The operator shall provide a name, address, and phone number of the person responsible for operation of the site and who is also responsible for correcting all operational problems that may result in complaints being made to the Township.
8. Treated yard wastes shall be actively rotated in an aerobic condition. Wastes shall not be allowed to accumulate for longer than three (3) years before being finished and removed from the site.
9. The operator shall provide plans showing all equipment maintenance and storage areas. Plans shall show the location of all fuel storage facilities and shall detail primary and secondary containment for all hazardous materials, including product-tight containers for primary containment.
10. The applicant shall provide a plan for the removal of unmarketable compost.
11. An annual inspection/permit fee for all yard waste composting facilities shall be established by resolution of the Township Board.
12. Copies of all Michigan Department of Environmental Quality applications/permits, if required, shall be provided to the Planning Commission as part of the application package.
13. The use must conform with the Environmental Performance Standards of this ordinance, contained in Article 10.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-62 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
14. The operator shall provide the township with a performance guarantee in the form of cash, or irrevocable letter of credit, to guarantee operation of the yard waste composting facility in conformance with the standards of this Ordinance. The amount of the guarantee shall be established, from time to time, by resolution of the Township Board.
Charter Township of Oxford 5-63 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
[This Page Intentionally Left Blank]
Charter Township of Oxford 6-1 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ARTICLE 6
GENERAL PROVISIONS
6.1 Application. The provisions of this Article shall be applicable to all zoning districts unless otherwise specified in this chapter.
6.2 Accessory Buildings and Structures.
A. Use of Accessory Buildings and Structures. Attached and detached accessory buildings and structures in residential districts shall not be used as dwelling units or for the conduct of any business, profession, trade or occupation, except permitted home occupations pursuant to Section 6.10. , Such accessory buildings and structures shall not be used as storage that is offered for rent.
B. Timing of Construction. No accessory building or structure shall be constructed or established on a parcel unless there is a principal building, structure or use being constructed or already established on the same parcel of land, unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall require that a cash performance guarantee be posted to insure completion of the main building, as a condition of approval for prior construction of an accessory building.
C. Attached Accessory Buildings and Structures. Accessory buildings or structures which are attached to the principal building shall be considered a part of the principal building for the purposes of determining conformance with area, setback, height, and lot coverage requirements.
D. Detached Accessory Buildings and Structures
1. Setbacks. Detached accessory buildings and structures shall comply with the following setback requirements:
a. Front Yard Setback. Accessory buildings and structures shall comply with the front yard setback requirements established under Section 3.7. Accessory buildings on corner lots shall maintain the specified front setback from both streets, as required for main buildings in the same zoning district.
b. Side Yard Setback. Accessory buildings and structures shall comply with the side yard setback requirements established under Sections Section 3.7.
c. Rear Yard Setback. Accessory buildings and structures in the R-1A, R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts zoning districts shall be setback from the rear property line by a distance of at least
Charter Township of Oxford 6-2 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ten (10) feet or the height of the accessory building or structure, whichever is greater. Accessory buildings and structures in all other zones shall be located no closer than ½ of the rear yard setback requirement for the district in which they are located, as established under Section 3.7.
2. Distance Between Buildings. Detached accessory buildings shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any building on the site.
3. Height. Accessory buildings and structures in the R-1A, R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts zoning districts shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. Accessory buildings and structures in all other zones shall comply with the maximum building height requirement for the district in which they are located, as established under Section 3.7.
4. Lot Coverage. Accessory buildings and structures shall be included in computations to determine compliance with maximum lot coverage standards established under Section 3.7.
E. Location in Proximity to Easements or Rights-of-Way. Accessory buildings and structures shall not be located within a dedicated easement or right-of-way.
F. Area in Relation to Principal Building. The total floor area of all attached and detached accessory buildings in R-1A, R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts shall not exceed the total floor area of the main dwelling on the same lot.
G. Appearance. No attached or detached residential accessory building shall have exposed or uncovered cement block walls, tarpaper, plywood sheathing, or similar materials. All exposed walls shall have a finished appearance by the application of face brick, wood, aluminum or composition siding, or similar materials approved by the Zoning Administrator.
H. Non-Residential Features. In order to maintain the residential character of attached and detached accessory buildings located in the R-1A, R-1, R-2 and R-3 zoning districts, overhead or similar doors greater than nine (9) feet in height, and similar non-residential equipment and features, shall not be permitted on the side of the accessory building facing the front lot line.
I. Swimming Pools. Private swimming pools shall be considered as accessory structures and are subject to the following:
1. Private swimming pools shall not be permitted in the front yard.
2. All design and construction standards contained in the Michigan Residential Code related to private swimming pools shall be adhered to.
Charter Township of Oxford 6-3 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
6.3 Agricultural Exemption. Farm operations protected under the Right to Farm Act (P.A. 93 of 1981, as amended) shall be exempt from regulation under this Ordinance. Individuals wishing to exercise this exemption must first provide documentation to the Zoning Administrator that the activities in question are protected by the Right to Farm Act. All other land uses and improvement activities that are not part of the farm operation shall adhere to the provisions of this Ordinance.
6.4 Building Grades.
A. Any building requiring yard space shall be located at such an elevation that a sloping grade shall be maintained to cause the flow of surface water to run away from the walls of the building. There shall be a sloping grade beginning at the finished grade line at the front of the building to the front lot line. However, this shall not prevent the maintenance of natural existing grades or the grading of a yard space to provide sunken or terraced areas, provided proper means are constructed and maintained to prevent the run-off of surface water from flowing onto the adjacent properties.
B. When a new building is constructed on a vacant lot between two (2) existing buildings or adjacent to an existing building, the existing established grade shall be used in determining the grade around the new building. The yard around the new building shall be graded in such a manner as to meet existing grades and not to intensify run-off of surface water onto the adjacent properties.
C. Final grades shall be approved by the Building Official. The Building Inspector may require the developer to submit a written opinion of a registered civil engineer or land surveyor concerning grading for proper drainage around the building or structure in question.
6.5 Buildings to be Moved or Demolished.
A. No building permit shall be granted for the moving or demolishing of buildings or structures from without or within the limits of the Township to be placed on property within said limits unless the Building Official shall have made an inspection of the building to be moved and has found that it is structurally safe, will not adversely affect the character of existing buildings in the neighborhood of the new location and will fully comply with the Michigan Building Code and Michigan Residential Code and all other federal, state, county and Township laws, ordinances, and regulations. A performance guarantee as established by the Township Board of sufficient amount to ensure cost of completing building for occupancy within a period of not less than six (6) months from date of permit shall be furnished before permit is issued.
Charter Township of Oxford 6-4 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
B. Any building moved within a district and placed upon a foundation or any building moved into a district from outside the district shall be considered a new building and be subject to all the limitations and requirements herein set forth relating to uses, construction, permits, and certificates.
C. No permit shall be granted for the relocation of a building without evidence of approval from applicable road and utility agencies.
D. All debris from any demolished building or structure shall be properly disposed of. The foundation materials removed and disposed of, and backfilled with clean earth materials devoid of all debris, large stones and organic materials. The site shall be graded to a smooth, even surface and seeded to grass.
6.6 Drive-In/Drive-Thru Businesses. Businesses that employ drive-in or drive-thru facilities to service customers, including, but not limited to, restaurants, banks, pharmacies, coffee shops, and dry cleaners, shall adhere to the following regulations:
A. Driveways serving drive-in/drive-thru establishments shall have access to a paved County Road.
B. Adequate waiting spaces shall be provided for vehicle stacking, in accordance with Section 8.7(H).
C. The nearest edge of any ingress or egress point shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any street or road intersection (as measured from the nearest right-of-way line).
D. A six (6) foot high obscuring wall, fence or landscaping shall be provided along any property line adjacent to residentially zoned or used land, in accordance with Section 7.10.
E. Devices for the transmission of voices shall comply with the noise standards of Section 10.1(J).
6.7 Dwellings in Non-Residential Districts. No dwelling shall be erected in a non-residential zoning district, with the exception of caretaker’s quarters as permitted in this Ordinance.
6.8 Essential Services. Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the Township. The construction of buildings associated with essential services shall be subject to the provisions of Article 12, Site Plan Review (this shall not be construed to include sanitary sewage pump stations and similar structures as determined by the Zoning Administrator. Otherwise, the construction, maintenance, and alteration of essential services shall be exempt from the provisions of this Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator shall have the discretion to require Planning Commission review and approval of
Charter Township of Oxford 6-5 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
certain essential services, where, by nature of their character or placement, the potential for unusually adverse impact to neighboring properties exists.
6.9 Garage Sales, Rummage Sales and Similar Activities. Garage sales, rummage sales, yard sales, moving sales, and similar activities shall be considered temporary accessory uses within any residential zoning district subject to the following conditions.
A. Any garage sale, rummage sale, or similar activity shall be allowed without a building and land use permit for a period not to exceed four (4) days within a six (6) month period. Such activities in operation for a period of time in excess of four (4) days shall require a building and land use permit from the Administrator.
B. All such sales shall be conducted in a manner so as not to create a traffic hazard or a nuisance to neighboring properties.
C. All such sales shall be conducted a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the front lot line of the premises of such sale.
D. Overnight outside storage of goods or merchandise offered at such a sale is prohibited.
6.10 Home Occupations. Home occupations which are clearly incidental to the principal residential use are permitted in any residential district. The following conditions for home occupations shall be met.
A. The occupation shall utilize no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of any one story of the residential structure so used. Additionally, home occupations may utilize up to twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of any one accessory building located on the same property as the residential structure.
B. The home occupation shall not involve non-family on-site employees.
C. All home occupation activities shall be conducted indoors, except gardening.
D. No structural alterations or additions which will alter the residential character of the structure shall be permitted to accommodate a home occupation.
E. Only customary domestic or household equipment, or equipment judged by the Zoning Administrator not to be injurious or a nuisance to the surrounding neighborhood shall be permitted.
F. There shall be no external evidence of such occupations except a small announcement sign conforming to provisions for home occupation signage contained in Section 9.7(C).
Charter Township of Oxford 6-6 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
G. No unrelated commodity shall be sold on the premises in connection with a home occupation.
H. No home occupation shall be permitted which is injurious to the general character of the residential district and which creates a congested or otherwise hazardous traffic or parking condition.
6.11 Impact Assessment.
A. For certain land uses that are considered to have a significant potential impact on traffic, the infrastructure and demands for public services, and/or significant impacts on surrounding properties due to scale, the applicant shall be required to provide an impact assessment during the initial submittal for either a rezoning or site plan approval. When one or more of the following conditions exists, the Planning Commission may require the submittal of an impact assessment pursuant to this Section:
1. The number of residential units exceeds 100;
2. The square footage of non-residential buildings exceeds 100,000;
3. Anticipated vehicle traffic will exceed a total of 1,000 trips per day;
4. Hazardous materials will be generated, stored or disposed of on-site.
B. The cost of the impact assessment and review by the Township shall be borne by the applicant. Costs incurred by the Township for the review of a submitted impact assessment shall be charged to the trust and agency account established for the associated rezoning or site plan petition pursuant to Section 16.7.
C. The applicant may request a meeting with the Zoning Official, consultants and key agency staff prior to developing the impact assessment.
D. The minimum contents of this impact assessment shall be:
1. The name(s) and address(es) of person(s) or firm(s) responsible for preparation of the impact assessment and a brief statement of their qualifications.
2. An area plan or aerial photograph illustrating the entire site and nearby properties.
3. A description of overall site conditions, including a narrative and illustration describing adjacent uses, zoning, public roadways, utilities, significant woodlands, trees over eight (8) inches caliper, soil types, one hundred (100) year floodplains, drainage-ways and general topography. The area described shall be within one-quarter
Charter Township of Oxford 6-7 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
(1/4) mile for sites up to one hundred (100) acres and one (1) mile radius for larger sites. Aerial photographs are recommended to assist in describing the general vicinity.
4. A conceptual site plan illustrating a very general layout of proposed uses upon which the preliminary impact analysis is based, and any proposed phasing.
5. A description of the types of proposed uses and other man-made facilities, including any project phasing, and an indication of how the proposed use or uses conform or conflict with existing and planned development patterns. A description shall be provided of any increases in light, noise or air pollution which could negatively impact adjacent properties, particularly increases associated with smoke or truck routing.
6. A description of any general impact expected to wildlife areas, lakes, streams, ponds and regulated wetlands. Conceptual mitigation or replacement measures under consideration shall be described. The study shall also describe general measures to control soil erosion and sedimentation during and after construction.
7. A description of the number of expected employees, visitors or residents and the anticipated impact on police and fire protection. In particular, a description of the relationship of the use to municipal fire stations and the need for any new facilities or equipment shall be required. Letters from the appropriate agencies should be provided.
8. A description of proposed water and sanitary sewer facilities, including any improvements or off-site extensions needed to serve the long-range development on the site, and general calculations for sewage flows and water demands in comparison with sewer line capacity.
9. A description of conceptual plans to control drainage and any significant changes from existing drainage patterns.
10. Identification of methods of on and off-site disposal of solid waste. The information shall describe the type of hazardous substances expected to be used, stored or disposed of on the site, the general location within the site, and the method of containment. Documentation of compliance with Federal and State requirements shall be submitted, as appropriate.
E. Documentation by a qualified wetland specialist shall be required wherever the Township determines that there is a potential State or Federally regulated wetland which may be impacted by the proposed project.
Charter Township of Oxford 6-8 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
F. A traffic impact study, in accordance with Section 6.22, shall be included in the impact assessment, unless determined to not be necessary by the Planning Commission.
G. At the discretion of the Planning Commission or Township Board, a fiscal impact study may be required to estimate the anticipated financial effect of a proposed development project on the Township and those other public agencies which are likely to provide services to the occupants of said development. The study shall address such elements as, but not limited to, the anticipated tax revenue to be generated by the proposed development, and the frequency and expense of services it is likely to require.
6.12 One Lot, One Building. In all single-family residential districts, only one (1) principal building shall be placed on a single lot of record except for a caretaker’s residence approved under Article 5.
6.13 Open Air Businesses/Outdoors Sales and Display of Products. Open air business shall include, but not be limited to, the following uses: automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, recreation vehicle, snowmobile, jet ski, and watercraft sales or rental; agricultural equipment sales; nurseries, landscape suppliers, lumber yards, home and garden centers, and the sale of lawn furniture and accessories; and the sale of mobile homes, storage sheds, play houses and other prefabricated buildings. Such uses shall adhere to the following standards:
A. The storage or display areas shall not be permitted in the front yard setback and shall meet all other yard setback requirements applicable to any building in the District.
B. All outdoor sales and display areas shall be paved and include an approved stormwater drainage system.
C. All loading activities and parking areas shall be provided on the same premises off-street.
D. The site shall have a minimum frontage of no less than one hundred and fifty (150) feet and area of thirty-five thousand (35,000) square feet.
E. Ingress and egress to the outdoor sales area shall be at least sixty (60) feet from the intersection of any two (2) streets.
F. The storage of any soil, fertilizer, or similar loosely package materials shall be sufficiently contained to prevent any adverse effect upon adjacent properties.
G. No outside storage of discarded or salvaged materials shall be permitted on the premises.
Charter Township of Oxford 6-9 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
H. All equipment or materials stored outdoors shall be enclosed by an opaque fence or wall with a height at least equal to the tallest item stored. The Planning Commission may waive or reduce this requirement where it is determined that perimeter landscaping, walls, fences or other methods can adequately screen the outdoor items from adjacent properties.
I. All repair work, collision repair, bumping, painting or similar automobile body work must be maintained as an accessory use and conducted within a completely enclosed building and all outside vehicles waiting for repair shall be screened with no less than a six (6) foot high masonry wall.
J. There shall be no broadcast of continuous music or announcements over any loudspeaker or public address system.
K. There shall be no strings of flags, pennants or bare light bulbs permitted.
L. The site shall include a building of at least five hundred (500) feet of gross floor area for office use in conjunction with the approved use.
M. Outdoor storage of vehicle parts, parts salvage or supplies is prohibited.
6.14 Open Space Preservation. This development option is provided pursuant to Section 506 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, P.A. 110 of 2006, as amended. Under this option, land zoned R-3, SF-1, SF-2 and SF-3 may be developed with the same number of dwelling units as would conventionally be possible in those zoning districts, provided that those dwelling units are confined to 50% or less of the property, and further that a minimum of 50% of the property is perpetually preserved as open space, as described below under Section 6.14(A).
A. Minimum Open Space Required. In all developments proposed under the standards of this option, at least fifty (50) percent of the gross buildable area of the subject property must be perpetually preserved as open space. Gross buildable area is defined as that portion of the gross site area not containing open bodies of water, streams, 100-year floodplains, and wetlands (as defined by Charter Township of Oxford Ordinance No. 80B). This option may only be exercised in the R-3, SF-1, SF-2 and SF-3 zoning districts.
B. The following land areas shall not be applied toward satisfaction of the minimum open space requirement stated under sub-section A., above:
1. The area of any public road right-of-way or private road easement.
2. Unbuildable land, including wetlands (as defined by Charter Township of Oxford Ordinance No. 80B), 100-year floodplains, open bodies of water (except stormwater management facilities, as provided under Section 6.14(C)(4)) and streams.
Charter Township of Oxford 6-10 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3. Areas within developable lots.
4. Public or private golf courses.
5. Utility easements, unless the Planning Commission determines that the inclusion of the easement in the open space would contribute to the open space purposes of this section.
C. The following land areas may be applied toward satisfaction of the minimum open space requirement stated under sub-section A., above:
1. Uncleared areas of the site left in their natural condition.
2. Landscaped greenbelts.
3. Public and private parks developed with recreation amenities including but not limited to: landscaping, gazebos, benches, play equipment, pathways, and wildlife enhancements.
4. Stormwater management facilities, including detention, retention and sedimentation basins, up to 25% of the total amount of open space required under sub-section A., above.
5. Agriculturally-used land.
6. Utility easements, if the Planning Commission determines that the inclusion of the easement in the open space would contribute to the open space purposes of this section.
D. All open space preserved under this option shall be subject to the following provisions:
1. Open Space Standards. Open space intended to satisfy the minimum requirements stated under sub-section A., above, must adhere to the following standards:
a. Open space shall be centrally located, located along the road frontage of the development, located to preserve significant natural features, or located to connect open spaces throughout the development.
b. Open space provided along exterior public roads shall have a depth of at least fifty (50) feet, and be either landscaped or left in a natural wooded condition. In either case, open space along exterior public roads shall be provided with a minimum of one (1) evergreen or canopy tree for each forty (40) feet of road frontage. Such plantings shall be planted in staggered rows or clustered into natural groupings to provide a natural
Charter Township of Oxford 6-11 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
appearance. Preservation of existing trees may be credited towards meeting this frontage landscaping requirement.
c. Open space must either be left in its natural condition, provided with recreational amenities, or landscaped. This shall not apply to stormwater management facilities applied toward open space requirements pursuant to Section 6.14(C)(4).
d. Connections with adjacent open space, public land or existing or planned pedestrian/bike paths may be required by the Planning Commission.
e. Open space must be accessible. Access can be provided via sidewalks, pathways or pedestrian easements throughout the development or where open space abuts road rights-of-way within the development.
f. Views of open spaces from lots and roads within the development are encouraged. For larger developments (over 100 residential units), the Planning Commission may require one or more unobstructed views of lakes or other areas as a condition of approval. Such views shall be composed of at least 100 contiguous lineal feet of road frontage having an unobstructed view of a lake or other landscape feature found acceptable to the Planning Commission.
g. Where lakes and ponds are located within or abut a development, the Planning Commission may require open space to provide lake access.
2. Preservation of Open Space. Open space shall be set aside by the developer through an irrevocable recorded document that is found acceptable to the Planning Commission and Township Board, such as:
a. Recorded deed restrictions;
b. Covenants that run perpetually with the land;
c. Dedication to a land conservancy approved by the Planning Commission; or,
d. A conservation easement established per the State of Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Preservation Act, Public Act 451 or 1994, as amended (MCL 324.2140).
Charter Township of Oxford 6-12 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3. Preservation of open space as described above under 6.14(D)(2) shall assure that open space will be protected from all forms of development, except as shown on an approved site plan, condominium plan or plat and shall never be changed to another use. The recorded document utilized shall:
a. Indicate the proposed allowable use(s) of the preserved open space. The Planning Commission and Township Board may require the inclusion of open space restrictions that prohibit the following:
i. Dumping or storing of any material or refuse;
ii. Activity that may cause risk of soil erosion or threaten any living plant material;
iii. Cutting or removal of live plant material except for removal of dying or diseased vegetation;
iv. Use of motorized off-road vehicles;
v. Cutting, filling or removal of vegetation from wetland areas;
vi. Use of pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers within or adjacent to wetlands.
b. Require that the preserved open space be maintained by parties who have an ownership interest in the open space.
c. Provide standards for scheduled maintenance of the open space.
d. Provide for maintenance to be undertaken by Oxford Charter Township, at the Township’s option, in the event that the preserved open space is inadequately maintained, or is determined by the Township to be a public nuisance, with the assessment of costs upon the property owners.
4. Continuing Obligation. The preserved open space shall forever remain open space, subject only to uses approved by the Township on the approved site plan. Further subdivision of open space land or its use for other than recreation, conservation or agricultural purposes, except for easements for utilities and septic systems, shall be strictly prohibited.
5. Allowable Structures. Any structure(s) or building(s) accessory to a recreation or conservation use may be erected within the preserved
Charter Township of Oxford 6-13 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
open space, subject to the approved site plan. Accessory structures may include:
a. Maintenance buildings;
b. Recreation structures (gazebos, boardwalks, docks, etc.);
These accessory structure(s) or building(s), together with their associated parking lots and access roads, shall not exceed, in the aggregate, one (1) percent of the required open space area.
E. Lot Size Reduction. The minimum lot width and lot area for lots in single-family detached residential developments, as stated in the Schedule of Regulations for each zoning district, may be reduced by up to fifty (50) percent when developed using the option provided under this sub-section. Further reduction in lot size and/or width may be permitted if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that such reduction is necessary in order to achieve the number of lots or units conventionally feasible on the entire subject property. Every square foot of lot reduction proposed below the minimum lot area permitted for the district must be preserved as open space, and may be counted toward the minimum required open space described above under sub-section A., provided that it meets all other requirements of this Section. Required lot setbacks shall not be reduced.
F. Land shall not be developed using this option in a manner that would necessitate the extension of public sewer outside of the Township’s established sewer district, unless the development of the land without the exercise of this option would also depend upon such an extension.
6.15 Seasonal and Temporary Outdoor Sales Operations. The outdoor sale of items on a non-permanent basis by persons other than the owner or tenant of the premises upon which such sales are proposed shall be subject to the standards of this Section. Outdoor sales of products on a permanent basis and/or accessory to a principal use of a property shall adhere to the provisions of Section 6.13. Seasonal or Temporary Sales Permits shall not be issued for properties that are in violation of this or any other Township ordinance.
A. Seasonal Outdoor Sales.
1. The sale of seasonal items shall be permitted within any non-residential zoning district upon issuance of a Seasonal or Temporary Sales Permit by the Building Official, pursuant to sub-section C., below. Seasonal items shall include Christmas trees, pumpkins, produce considered to be “in season,” and similar items whose sales depend upon a holiday or time of year, but shall not include fireworks.
Charter Township of Oxford 6-14 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
2. The sale of seasonal items shall not exceed 90 days per year. Renewal of Seasonal or Temporary Sales Permits issued for such sales that occur on an annual basis shall require approval by the Building Official each season.
3. This Section shall not be construed to prohibit roadside stands selling agricultural products raised or grown on the same premises, as permitted in the AG and SF-1, 2 and 3 zoning districts
B. Other Temporary Outdoor Sales.
1. The sale of non-seasonal merchandise in the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts shall be permitted upon issuance of a Seasonal or Temporary Sales Permit by the Building Official, pursuant to sub-section C., below. Such sales in any other non-residential district shall be subject to Planning Commission review of the necessary Seasonal or Temporary Sales Permit. Such non-seasonal items shall include vehicles, fireworks, artwork, rugs and similar items.
2. The sale of non-seasonal items on a particular property shall be limited to seven (7) days per calendar month, and may be subject to one seven (7) day extension, as approved by the Building Official, provided that compliance with all other provisions of this Section is maintained. A permit issued for the sale of non-seasonal items shall not run continuously with such permits issued in a preceding or subsequent month on the subject property. Renewal of Seasonal or Temporary Sales Permits issued for such sales that occur on a repeat basis shall require approval by the Building Official for each occurrence.
C. Seasonal or Temporary Sales Permit Standards. A Seasonal or Temporary Sales Permit pursuant to this Section shall be issued by the Building Official or Planning Commission, as provided for in this section, upon review of sketch plan submitted by the petitioner demonstrating conformance with the provisions listed below. Failure to comply with these provisions shall constitute grounds for termination of an approved Seasonal or Temporary Sales Permit.
1. Setbacks. Seasonal or temporary outdoor sales activities shall adhere to required front yard setbacks, and may be located no closer than ten (10) feet to the side lot line where they abut non-residential property, and no closer than twenty (20) feet where they abut residential property.
2. Access. Adequate ingress, egress and internal vehicular circulation areas shall be provided for seasonal or temporary sales activities. In
Charter Township of Oxford 6-15 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
no case shall a fire lane be occupied or otherwise obstructed by such activities.
3. Parking. Adequate parking shall be provided for seasonal or temporary sales activities. In no case shall such activities occupy parking areas necessary for the principal use of the property to satisfy ordinance requirements. Under no circumstances shall parking be located within a road right-of-way.
4. Impacts on Neighboring Property. Seasonal or temporary sales operations shall not be conducted in a manner that creates a nuisance to neighboring properties. Noise generated by such activities shall comply with Section 10.1(J). Lighting installed for such activities shall comply with Section 10.2.
5. Hours of Operation. Seasonal or temporary sales operations shall be limited to hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., unless it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission that earlier or later hours will not create unreasonable impacts on adjoining property.
6. Signage. Signage for seasonal or temporary sales operations shall comply with the standards for permanent free-standing signs of Section 9.8(D). Banner, streamers, and the like are prohibited pursuant to Section 9.4(G).
7. As a condition of the Seasonal or Temporary Sales Permit, the subject site shall be completely restored to its original condition within seven (7) days following the termination of the permitted Seasonal or Temporary Sale use or expiration of the permit, whichever occurs first. This shall include the removal of all equipment, shelving, signage and/or temporary structures. A $200.00 performance guarantee for such restoration activities shall be deposited with the Township at the time of application. Once the site has been restored, the guarantee shall be returned to the petitioner.
6.16 Structural Damage. Any structure or building which may be in whole or in part destroyed by fire, windstorm, or other such cause, if rebuilt, shall be rebuilt in accordance with this Ordinance and other pertinent codes and ordinances (except as provided under Article 15 for legally-existing non-conformities) or shall be returned to a safe and healthy condition with all debris removed from the site within one-hundred and eighty (180) days from the occurrence of such damage.
6.17 Television Satellite Antennas. Television satellite dish antennas shall be subject to the following requirements when being installed or constructed in any zoning districts:
Charter Township of Oxford 6-16 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
A. Satellite dishes shall be considered accessory structures and must comply with all yard and height requirements in this Ordinance.
B. No satellite dish antenna including any platform or structure upon which the antenna is mounted shall extend more than three (3) feet above the highest portion of a roof.
C. The satellite dish antenna shall be permanently attached to a foundation or structure.
D. No part of the satellite dish antenna shall exhibit any commercial advertising other than a name or symbol not exceeding two (2) square feet.
E. A zoning permit must be obtained before any satellite dish antenna of over two (2) feet in diameter is constructed or installed.
6.18 Temporary Dwellings and Construction Offices. No garage, tent, trailer, basement, or similar fixed or moveable structure shall be used as a dwelling except under the following conditions:
A. A tent, travel trailer, motor home or similar enclosure may be occupied for periods up to thirty (30) days only within an approved and licensed campground or other overnight camping facility.
B. The owner of property in any district permitting single-family residential use may obtain approval from the Building Inspector for placement of one (1) mobile home on the property for not more than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of issuance of a building permit, during the actual construction on the property of the owner's single family dwelling. The temporary dwelling shall be connected to an approved water supply and sewage disposal system.
C. After a building permit and zoning compliance permit have been issued for the construction of a principal building in any non-residential zoning districts, a temporary zoning compliance permit may be issued for the placement and use of a mobile home on the construction site of the principal building, subject to the following requirements:
1. The permit period shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) days and shall specify the exact location of the mobile home. The temporary permit may be renewed for successive one hundred twenty (120) day periods provided the total shall not exceed three hundred sixty-five (365) days.
2. The mobile home shall be located not closer than ten (10) feet to any lot line.
Charter Township of Oxford 6-17 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3. If the mobile home is or will be on the lot for more than fifteen (15) days, it shall be connected to waste disposal and water supply systems.
4. The permit shall identify the persons intended to occupy the mobile home; occupancy by any person not so identified is prohibited.
5. These provisions are intended to facilitate the management and security of premises under construction. If an administrative official finds, on the basis of information furnished to him, that these purposes will not be reasonably carried out by the intended use, he shall deny the permit; in which case, the applicant may apply to the Board of Appeals for relief from the decision of the administrative official.
6.19 Temporary Sales Offices. The Charter Township of Oxford prohibits business activity in residential districts, except for the exceptions contained within this Ordinance. This Section is intended to address the specific needs of a subdivision during its development and construction phase.
A. Definitions. As contained in this Section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
1. Additional Permitted Use: A use which directly involves and relates to the subdivision or, if applicable, the Development Project in which the Sales Office is located.
2. Development Project: A residential development consisting of one or more Subdivision where the subdivision lands and contiguous or otherwise connected and related.
3. Model Home: A structure, or unit thereof, constructed for eventual use as a single-family residence, but used temporarily as a sample of such residences for display to prospective residence purchasers.
4. Sales Office: An office used for the sale of property and/or homes and Additional Permitted Uses within the subdivision where the Model Home Sales Office is located and, if applicable, the Development Project, and situated within either a Model Home or a Trailer.
5. Subdivision: A parcel of land divided under the Land Division Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, or the Condominium Act of the State of Michigan.
6. Trailer: A mobile and/or temporary structure placed temporarily at a subdivision.
B. Applications.
Charter Township of Oxford 6-18 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
1. Each applicant for a license for use of a Sales Office must submit an application to the building department on a form supplied by the Township. The applicant, through a person authorized on behalf of the entity making the application, shall verify on the application all information required, including:
a. Name of the applicant
b. Address of applicant's principal place of business
c. Telephone number of the applicant's principal place of business
d. Contact person at the applicant's principal place of business
e. Position of the person making the application on behalf of the applicant
f. In the case of a corporate applicant, the resolution of the applicant authorizing the person to make the application
g. Identity of the Subdivision for which the Sales Office shall serve
h. A representation that no use except as authorized in the Zoning District in which the Sales Office is located shall take place including a representation that no commercial activity concerning another Subdivision will take place from the Sales Office except for the subdivision in which the sales offices is located, or except for any other Additional Permitted use
i. Days of the week and hours of the day the Sales Office will be operational
j. The address, fax and phone number of the person to whom notice to the applicant can be sent by the Township
k. The position of each person who will occupy the Sales Office the days of the week and hours of occupancy
l. A consent by the applicant during the term of the license for the Township representative(s) to inspect, during the proposed hours of operation, the activity taking place in the Sales Office and to speak with applicant's agents, representatives and employees at the Sales Office and those
Charter Township of Oxford 6-19 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
persons who use the Sales Office regarding the use of the Sales Office
2. Each application must be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee in an amount established by resolution of the Township Board.
C. Sales Offices Permitted. Subject to the following provisions, the zoning administrator, upon receipt of a proper application, may issue a license for a Sales Office, which shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:
1. Only one Sales Office may be permitted for each Subdivision, except that in the case of a Development Project, then, in addition, there may be one additional Sales Office for the entire Development Project. No additional Sales Offices shall be permitted for additional Subdivision phases.
2. No use shall be allowed from or in the Sales Office except as specifically authorized by the Zoning District in which the Sales Office is located except an Additional Permitted Use.
3. All Model Homes shall be located on a parcel of land identified by its own Sidwell number so as to permit that Model Home to otherwise meet all requirements of Oxford Township Zoning Ordinance including setbacks and frontage on approved streets.
4. Water and Sewer.
a. All Model Homes containing a Sales Office shall be serviced by a permanent potable water supply and a sewerage system, approved by the Township.
b. All Trailers containing a Sales Office shall be serviced by a temporary potable water supply and a temporary sewerage system as approved by the Township, and the applicant shall post at the Township sufficient security, in the form of cash or a letter of credit, to ensure the removal and closure of the temporary systems and facilities.
5. Duration and Renewal.
a. Trailer Sales Offices: The duration of the license shall be the shorter of the following:
i. Until the construction and final inspection of a Model
Charter Township of Oxford 6-20 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Home to be used for a Sales Office.
ii. Until the expiration of six (6) months from the date of license issuance. A license for an additional three (3) months may be issued upon review and approval of the zoning administrator if it is demonstrated that there is good ground for the failure to complete construction of a model home for sales purposes within the initial six-month period.
iii. Until there is a change in one or more statements contained on the application if the applicant fails to inform the Township of the change of facts, and if the change in facts establishes that the applicant is no longer entitled to a license under this Section.
b. Model Home Sales Offices: The duration of the license shall be the shorter of the following:
i. Until all homes within the subdivision have been initially sold; or
ii. Until the expiration of eighteen (18) months from the date of issuance of the license, with such licenses being renewable upon approval of the zoning administrator until such time as all homes within the subdivision have been initially sold.
iii. Until there is a change in one or more statements contained on the application if the applicant fails to inform the Township of the change of facts, and if the change in facts establishes that the applicant is no longer entitled to a license under this Section.
6. Landscaping shall be provided for the trailer and the trailer site, or the Model Home.
7. Signage in accordance with Section 9.7(F) shall be permitted.
8. Any lighting shall not interfere with traffic or be a hazard to drivers in the vicinity and shall be focused on the trailer site.
9. Special Provisions for Trailers. The following provisions shall apply only to trailers, and not Model Homes.
a. Adequate security in the form of cash or a letter of credit shall
Charter Township of Oxford 6-21 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
be required to ensure the continued maintenance and removal of the Trailer.
b. The trailer shall be appropriately screened and skirted.
c. A temporary driveway and parking area with a minimum of five (5) parking spaces shall be provided on the trailer site. The driveway and parking area shall be surfaced at a minimum with gravel or other similar material.
D. Violation and Revocation of License.
1. Upon fourteen (14) days’ notice to the applicant of a violation of this Section, if the violation has not been cured the license for the Sales Office shall be revoked and all reports of occupancy and Permitted and Additional Permitted Uses shall terminate at and from the Sales Office or in the alternative, the Oxford Township Board may, prior to revocation, notify the applicant to appear before the Board to provide testimony and evidence why the license should not be revoked.
E. Additional Penalty and Remedies as provided in this Ordinance. This provision shall not impair any other penalties for violation of this Ordinance, or any other remedy available to the Township for violations of this Ordinance.
6.20 Trash.
A. Dumpster Enclosures.
1. Dumpsters, trash compactors and similar waste receptacles shall be enclosed on three (3) sides by a screen wall or fence with a completely obscuring gate on the fourth side. Such screening shall be of a height equal to or greater than the trash receptacle itself. The screening requirements of this Section shall not apply to single-family residences.
2. Gates on required dumpster enclosures shall remain closed at all times except when actual loading and unloading of waste occurs.
3. In locating trash receptacle facilities, primary consideration shall be given to access for service, minimizing on-site traffic congestion, and minimizing visibility or other negative impacts to the site or adjoining properties.
4. Materials used for dumpster enclosures shall be architecturally compatible with the principal building on the property.
Charter Township of Oxford 6-22 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
5. Protective bollards shall be provided within and in front of required dumpster enclosures to prevent damage during unloading.
6. The Planning Commission may further require internal storage and/or the use of trash compactors where, in the determination of the Planning Commission, the public health, safety, and welfare is served.
7. The Planning Commission may modify or waive the required screening when they determine that no significant negative effects will result from the waiver of such screening.
B. Construction Debris. A temporary trash and construction debris storage area shall be required to be located on the site of all construction and renovation projects for the duration of the project. All trash and construction debris shall be enclosed within such storage area, and periodically removed from the construction site, in a fashion sufficient to prevent it from blowing onto adjacent property. All trash and debris shall be removed from the property and disposed of properly.
6.21 Unlawful Buildings, Structures, Site Designs and Uses. A building, structure or use which was not lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance shall not be made lawful solely by the adoption of this Ordinance. In case any building, or part thereof, is used, erected, occupied or altered contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance, such building or use shall be deemed an unlawful nuisance and may be required to be vacated, torn down or abated by any legal means, and shall not be used or occupied until it has be made to conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. Public expenditures toward abating any such nuisance shall become a lien upon the land.
6.22 Unsafe Buildings. Nothing within this Ordinance shall be construed to prevent compliance with an order by the appropriate authority to correct, improve, strengthen, or restore to a safe or healthy condition, any part of a building or premises declared unsafe or unhealthy.
6.23 Water Supply and Sewage Disposal.
A. Every building and principal structure hereafter erected, or moved upon any premises and used in whole or in part for dwelling, recreational, camping, business, commercial, or industrial purposes, including churches, schools, and other buildings and structures in which persons customarily congregate shall be provided with a safe and sanitary water supply, and safe means of sewage collection and disposal, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the appropriate local, County and State departments and agencies. All industrial wastes shall be pre-treated for hazardous contents. Under no conditions shall such waste be deposited upon the surface of the
Charter Township of Oxford 6-23 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ground or in lagoons in such manner as to create a nuisance or health hazard.
B. Every dwelling hereafter erected, altered or moved shall be connected to a public sanitary sewer or to a private sewage disposal system approved by the Oakland County Health Department.
6.24 Keeping of Farm Animals. The keeping of farm animals, where permitted pursuant to Section 3.6, shall adhere to the following standards:
A. Applicability. The regulations of this sub-section shall apply to all properties upon which farm animals are kept, with the exception of bona fide farm operations protected in accordance with the Right to Farm Act (P.A. 93 of 1981).
B. Density of Animals Allowed. The aggregate number of farm animals that may be kept on a property shall be governed by the Right to Farm Act Generally Accepted Agricultural and Management Practices (GAAMP) Standards, as amended.
C. Animals shall be maintained and accommodated in a manner so as to not pose a nuisance.
6.25 Wind Energy Conversion Systems.
A. Intent. It is the intent of the Charter Township of Oxford to promote the effective and efficient use of Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS) by regulating the siting, design, and installation of such systems to protect the public health, safety, and welfare in no case shall this Ordinance guarantee the wind rights or establish access to the wind.
B. Approval Required. Except where noted in this Section, it shall be unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter, or locate any WECS project within Oxford Township unless approval for a:
1. Agricultural WECS. See Section 6.25.C.
2. Private WECS. A permit has been obtained from the Building Department.
3. Commercial WECS. A Special Land Use has been obtained pursuant to Article 4 and this Section.
4. Temporary WECS. A permit has been obtained from the Building Department.
Charter Township of Oxford 6-24 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
C. Agricultural Exemption. Agricultural WECS projects accessory to permitted farm and agricultural operations shall be exempt from the requirements of this Section with the exception of (D)(2) below. Agricultural WECS projects shall conform to the regulations of the zoning district.
D. General Standards. The following standards shall apply to wind energy conversion systems in Oxford Township:
1. Design Safety Certification. The safety of the design of all WECS structures shall comply with all current applicable State of Michigan guidelines and standards.
2. Setbacks. All private and commercial WECS structures must be setback from property lines at a distance equal to or greater than the height of the structure, measured from the base of the structure to the highest reach of the blade.
3. Interference. All WECS structures shall be certified by the manufacturer to minimize or mitigate interference with existing electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone, microwave or television signals.
4. Noise Levels. The noise level for either a private or commercial WECS structure shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 10.1.J – Noise.
E. Additional Standards for Commercial WECS Structures. The following additional standards shall apply to all commercial wind energy conversion systems in Oxford Township.
1. Color. Towers and blades shall be a non-reflective neutral color.
2. Controls and Brakes. All commercial WECS structures shall be equipped with manual and automatic controls to limit rotation of blades to a speed below the designed limits of the WECS. The Professional Engineer must certify that the rotor and overspeed control design and fabrication conform to applicable design standards. No changes or alterations from certified design shall be permitted unless accompanied by a Professional Engineer’s statement of certification.
3. Compliance with FAA. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain the appropriate FAA permits for the WECS structure, or to obtain a determination of no significant impact to air navigation from the FAA.
Charter Township of Oxford 6-25 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
4. Climb Prevention. All commercial WECS structures must be protected by anti-climbing devices.
5. Warnings. A visible warning sign of High Voltage may be required to be placed at the base of all commercial WECS structures. The sign must have at a minimum of six (6) inch letters with ¾ inch stroke. Such signs shall be located a maximum of three hundred (300) feet apart and at all points of site ingress and egress.
6. Performance Bond. The Township shall have on file a performance bond for removal of a commercial structure. The value of the bond shall be in the amount given prior to construction for the cost of removal and any other costs deemed necessary by the Township.
7. Removal. A condition of every approval of a commercial WECS shall be adequate provision for removal of all or part of the facility by users and owners upon the occurrence of one or more of the following events:
a. When the facility has not been used for 180 days or more. For purposes of this section, the removal of equipment from the facility, or the cessation of operations (transmission of electrical power or prolonged periods of no movement of the WECS) shall be considered as the beginning of a period of nonuse.
b. Six months after new technology is available at reasonable cost, as determined by the Planning Commission, which permits the operation of the WECS without the requirement of the support structure.
c. The situations in which removal of a facility is required, as set forth in paragraphs “a” and “b” above, may be applied and limited to portions of a facility.
d. Upon the occurrence of one or more of the events requiring removal, the property owner or persons who had used the facility shall immediately apply for any required demolition or removal permits, proceed with, and complete the demolition/removal.
e. If the required removal of a facility or a portion thereof has not been lawfully completed within sixty (60) days of the applicable deadline, and after at least thirty (30) days written notice, the Township may remove or secure the removal of the facility or required portions thereof, with its actual cost and
Charter Township of Oxford 6-26 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
reasonable administrative charge to be drawn, collected and/or enforced from or under the security posted at the time of application.
Charter Township of Oxford 6-27 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
[This Page Intentionally Left Blank]
Charter Township of Oxford 7-1 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ARTICLE 7
LANDSCAPING, SCREENING, FENCES AND WALLS
7.1 Contents. For ease of use, the sub-sections of this chapter are outlined below:
7.1 Contents
7.2 Intent and Scope of Requirements.
7.3 Specific Landscaping Requirements for Zoning Districts.
A. Requirements for Commercial, Office and Industrial Districts.
B. Requirements for Multiple Family Residential Districts.
C. Requirements for Non-Residential Uses in Residential Districts.
7.4 General Landscaping Standards.
A. General Site Requirements.
B. Landscaping Adjacent to Roads.
C. Berms.
D. Greenbelts.
E. Screening.
F. Parking Lot Landscaping.
G. Landscaping of Rights-of-Way.
H. Maintenance of Unobstructed Visibility for Drivers.
I. Potential Damage to Utilities.
J. Landscaping of Divider Medians.
7.5 Standards for Landscape Materials.
7.6 Installation and Maintenance.
7.7 Treatment of Existing Plant Material and Landscape Improvements.
7.8 Modifications to Landscape Requirements.
7.9 Landscape Plan Submission Requirements.
7.10 Fence and Wall Standards.
7.2 Intent and Scope of Requirements.
A. Intent. Landscaping enhances the visual image of the Charter Township of Oxford, preserves natural features, improves property values, and alleviates the impact of noise, traffic, and visual distraction associated with certain uses. Screening is important to protect less intensive uses from the noise, light, traffic, litter and other impacts of more intensive, nonresidential uses. These provisions are intended to set minimum standards for the design and use of landscaping, greenbelts, and screening, and for the
Charter Township of Oxford 7-2 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
protection and enhancement of the Township's environment. More specifically, the intent of these provisions is to:
1. Improve the appearance of off-street parking areas, vehicular use areas, and property abutting public rights-of-way,
2. Protect and preserve the appearance, character, and value of the neighborhoods that abut non-residential areas, parking areas, and other intensive use areas, thereby protecting the public health, safety and welfare,
3. Reduce soil erosion and sedimentation, and
4. Increase stormwater infiltration, thereby helping to prevent flooding.
5. It is also the intent of this section to encourage the use of desirable native plant species for all landscaping, including but not limited to, foundation plantings, lawn areas, screening and greenbelt areas, and surface stormwater conveyance features. Encouraging the use of native plants in this Ordinance is based on the following:
a. Native plants are a necessary part of the proper functioning of natural ecosystems within the Charter Township of Oxford and perform tasks including, but not limited to, stormwater attenuation, uptake and purification, air purification, wildlife food and habitat, and community character and aesthetics; and
b. Landscaping with native plants encourages environmentally-sound maintenance practices by requiring little or no pesticide or fertilizer use, and minimal watering once plants are established, which, in turn, reduces the threat of environmental degradation; and
c. The Township has stated in its Master Plan the goal to preserve the natural features and character of Township lands and protect the quality of vital Township air, land and water resources; and to encourage the uses of desirable native species of vegetation.
B. Scope of Application. No site plan shall be approved unless it shows landscaping and screening consistent with the requirements of this Section. A building permit shall not be issued until the required landscape plan is submitted and approved, and a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless provisions set forth in this Section have been met or a performance guarantee has been posted. The requirements in this Article shall not apply to single family detached homes, unless otherwise specifically noted.
Charter Township of Oxford 7-3 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
C. Minimum Requirements. The requirements in this Section are minimum requirements, and under no circumstances shall they preclude the developer and the Township from agreeing to more extensive landscaping.
D. Design Creativity. Creativity in landscape design is encouraged. Accordingly, required trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform intervals, irregular intervals, or in groupings, depending on the designer's desired visual effect and, equally important, the intent of the Township to coordinate landscaping on adjoining properties.
E. Summary of Regulations. The following table summarizes the landscaping regulations contained in this Section:
Charter Township of Oxford 7-4 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Summary of Minimum Landscape Requirements1 Min. Height Min. Width Deciduous or Evergreen Trees Ornamental Trees Deciduous or Evergreen Shrubs Landscaping Island Ratio
General Site Landscaping
Sec. 7.4(A)
--
--
1 per 3,000
sq. ft.
--
--
--
Landscaping Adjacent to Roads
Sec. 7.4(B)
--
20 ft.
1 per 30 lineal ft.
1 per 100 lineal ft.
5 per 30 lineal feet
--
Greenbelts
Sec. 7.4(D)
--
20 ft.
1 per 30 lineal ft.
--
2
--
Greenbelts used for Screening Sec. 7.4(B) & (E)
6 ft.
20 ft.
3
--
--
--
Berms in Front Yard
Sec. 7.4(B)
4
4
1 per 30 lineal ft.
1 per 100 lineal ft.
5 per 30 lineal ft.
--
Berms used for Screening
Sec. 7.4(C) & (E)
3 ft. 5
4
3
--
--
--
Parking Lot Landscaping
Sec. 7.4(F)
--
5 ft. 6
1 per 300
sq. ft.
--
--
20 sq. ft. per space
1 See Sections 7.3 and 7.4 for detailed requirements.
2 Five (5) shrubs may be substituted for each tree.
3 Evergreens must be closely spaced (no further than fifteen (15) feet apart) to form an 80% visual barrier in summer and 60% visual barrier in winter within three (3) years.
4 See Section 7.4(C). for detailed requirements.
5 Berms used to screen parking areas from view from the road shall not exceed 3 ft., per Sections 7.3(A)(3), 7.3(B)(3), and 7.3(C)(3).
6 Minimum area of each parking lot landscaped area: 200 sq. ft.
7.3 Specific Landscaping Requirements for Zoning Districts.
A. Requirements for Commercial, Office, and Industrial Districts. All lots or parcels of land located in the C-1, C-2, O, RO, I-1 and I-2 zoning districts shall comply with the following landscaping requirements:
1. General Site Landscaping. All undeveloped portions of the site not already containing specific landscape requirements shall conform to the General Site Requirements in Section 7.4(A).
Charter Township of Oxford 7-5 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
2. Landscaping Adjacent to Road. All commercial, office, and industrial developments shall comply with the requirements for landscaping adjacent to the road in Section 7.4(B).
3. Screening of Off-Street Parking. A berm may be used to screen off-street parking from view of the road, in which case the berm shall be a maximum of three (3) feet in height, and shall be planted in accordance with Section 7.4(B). The berm shall be located totally on private property, adjacent to the road right-of-way.
4. Screening Between Conflicting Land Uses. Screening in the form of a landscaped berm, greenbelt, or wall shall be required wherever a non-residential use in a commercial, office, or industrial district abuts directly upon land zoned or used for residential purposes, and where loading areas would be visible from residential districts. Landscaped screening shall comply with the requirements in Section 7.4(E). If a wall is used instead of landscaping, the requirements in Section 7.10 shall be complied with, but a landscaped greenbelt conforming to Section 7.4(D) shall be required on the side of the wall facing the residential district.
5. Greenbelts. Except where screening is required, a landscaped greenbelt shall be provided along side and rear property lines in accordance with Section 7.4(D).
6. Parking Lot Landscaping. Off-street parking areas containing greater than twenty (20) spaces shall comply with the requirements for parking lot landscaping in Section 7.4(F).
Charter Township of Oxford 7-6 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Figure 1 Landscaping Requirements for Commercial, Office and Industrial Districts
B. Requirements for Multiple Family Residential Districts. All lots or parcels of land located in the RM zoning district shall comply with the following landscaping requirements:
1. General Site Landscaping. All undeveloped portions of the site not already containing specific landscape requirements shall conform to the General Site Requirements in Section 7.4(A).
2. Landscaping Adjacent to Road. All multiple family developments shall comply with the requirements for landscaping adjacent to the road in Section 7.4(B).
3. Screening of Off-Street Parking. A berm may be used to screen off-street parking from view of the road, in which case the berm shall be a maximum of three (3) feet in height, and shall be planted in accordance with Section 7.4(B). The berm shall be located totally on private property, adjacent to the road right-of-way.
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
General Site
General Site LandscapingLandscaping
Section 7.4 D.
Section 7.4 D.
Parking Lot
Parking Lot LandscapingLandscaping
Section 7.4 F.
Section 7.4 F.
Greenbelt
Greenbelt
Section 7.4 D.
Section 7.4 D.
Screening
Screening
?
?Landscape BermLandscape Berm Sections 7.4 C. & D.Sections 7.4 C. & D.
?
?Screening Screening Section 7.4 E.Section 7.4 E.
?
?Wall Wall –– Sections 7.Sections 7.10 & 10 & 7.4 D.7.4 D.
Landscaping
Landscaping Adjacent to RoadAdjacent to Road
Section 7.4 B.
Section 7.4 B.
Charter Township of Oxford 7-7 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
4. Screening Between Conflicting Land Uses. Screening in the form of a landscaped berm, greenbelt, or wall shall be required on all sides of a multiple family development abutting land zoned or used for single family residential purposes. Landscaped screening shall comply with the requirements in Section 7.4(E). A wall may be used instead of landscaping adjacent to nonresidential districts, subject to the requirements in Section 7.10. If a wall is used instead of landscaping, the requirements in Section 7.10 shall be complied with, but a landscaped greenbelt conforming to Section 7.4(D) shall be required on the side of the wall facing the residential district.
5. Greenbelts. Except where screening is required, a landscaped greenbelt shall be provided alongside and rear property lines in accordance with Section 7.4(D).
6. Parking Lot Landscaping. Off-street parking areas containing greater than ten (10) spaces shall comply with the requirements for parking lot landscaping in Section 7.4(F).
7. Privacy Screen. Where multiple family dwellings are designed so that rear open areas or patio areas front onto a public street, a landscaped privacy screen shall be provided. The screen may consist of a combination of trees, shrubs, and berms, subject to review by the Planning Commission.
Charter Township of Oxford 7-8 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Figure 2 Landscaping Requirements for Multiple Family Residential Districts
C. Requirements for Non-Residential Uses in Residential Districts. All non-residential uses developed in residential zoning districts shall comply with the following landscaping requirements:
1. General Site Landscaping. All undeveloped portions of the site not already containing specific landscape requirements shall conform to the General Site Requirements in Section 7.4(A).
2. Landscaping Adjacent to Road. All non-residential developments located in residential districts shall comply with the requirements for landscaping adjacent to the road in Section 7.4(B).
3. Screening of Off-Street Parking. A berm may be used to screen off-street parking from view of the road, in which case the berm shall be a maximum of three (3) feet in height, and shall be planted in
General Site Landscaping
Section 7.4 D.
Parking Lot Landscaping
Section 7.4 F.
Screening
? Landscape Berm Sections 7.4 C. & D.
? Screening Section 7.4 E.
? Wall – Sections 7.10 & 7.4D.
Landscaping Adjacent to Road or Landscape Berm
Section 7.4 B. or C.
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
Greenbelt
Section 7.4 D.
Charter Township of Oxford 7-9 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
accordance with Section 7.4(B). The berm shall be located totally on private property, adjacent to the road right-of-way.
4. Screening Between Conflicting Land Uses. Screening in the form of a landscaped berm, greenbelt, or wall shall be required wherever a non-residential use abuts directly upon land zoned or used for residential purposes. Landscaped screening shall comply with the requirements in Section 7.4(E). If a wall is used instead of landscaping, the requirements in Section 7.10 shall be complied with, and a landscaped greenbelt conforming to Section 7.4(D) shall be provided on the side of the wall facing the residential district.
5. Greenbelts. Except where screening is required, a landscaped greenbelt shall be provided alongside and rear property lines in accordance with Section 7.4(D).
6. Parking Lot Landscaping. Off-street parking areas containing greater than ten (10) spaces shall comply with the requirements for parking lot landscaping in Section 7.4(F).
Figure 3 Landscaping Requirements for Non-Residential Uses in Residential Areas
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
Screening
Screening
?
?Landscape Berm Landscape Berm Sections 7.4 C. & D.Sections 7.4 C. & D.
?
?Screening Screening Section 7.4 E.Section 7.4 E.
?
?Wall Wall –– Sections 7Sections 7.10 & .10 & 7.4 D.7.4 D.
Landscaping Adjacent to
Landscaping Adjacent to Road or Landscape BermRoad or Landscape Berm
Section 7.4 B. or C.
Section 7.4 B. or C.
Parking Lot
Parking Lot LandscapingLandscaping
Section 7.4. F.
Section 7.4. F.
Greenbelt
Greenbelt
Section
Section 7.4.D.7.4.D.
General Site
General Site LandscapingLandscaping
Section 7.4. D.
Section 7.4. D.
Charter Township of Oxford 7-10 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
7.4 General Landscaping Standards.
A. General Site Requirements. All undeveloped portions of the site shall conform to the following general landscaping standards, except where specific landscape elements, such as greenbelts, berms, parking lot landscaping, landscaping along roadways or screening are required:
1. All undeveloped portions of the site shall be planted with grass, ground cover, landscape mulch, shrubbery, landscape stone, or other suitable live plant material, which shall extend to any abutting street pavement edge. Grass areas in the front yard of all non-residential uses shall be planted with sod, hydro-seed, or conventional seed with mulch blankets.
2. A mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees shall be planted on non-residential parcels at the rate of one (1) tree per 3,000 square feet or portion thereof of any undeveloped open area for which specific landscaping requirements do not appear elsewhere in this chapter. Required trees may be planted at uniform intervals, irregular intervals, or in groupings.
B. Landscaping Adjacent to Roads
1. Planting Requirements. Where required, landscaping adjacent to public and private roads shall comply with each of the following planting requirements:
Planting Type Requirement
Deciduous or Evergreen Trees
1 per 30 lineal feet of road frontage
Ornamental Trees
1 per 100 lineal feet of road frontage
Shrubs
5 per 30 lineal feet of road frontage
For the purposes of computing length of road frontage, openings for driveways and sidewalks shall not be counted. Trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform intervals, irregular intervals, or in groupings.
2. Location and Dimensions. Required landscaping adjacent to public and private roads shall be located totally on private property within a planting strip adjacent to the road right-of-way, planted in accordance with the requirements for intersection visibility under
Charter Township of Oxford 7-11 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Section 8.3. The minimum width of the planting strip shall be twenty (20) feet.
Figure 4 Landscaping Adjacent to Roads
C. Berms. When proposed, berms shall conform to the following standards:
1. Dimensions. Unless otherwise indicated or appropriate, required berms shall be measured from the grade of the parking lot or flat ground adjacent to the berm, and shall be constructed with slopes no steeper than one (1) foot vertical for each three (3) feet horizontal (33 percent slope), with at least a two (2) foot flat area on top. Berms may undulate in height, subject to review and approval of berm design as shown on the site plan. All berms shall conform to the requirements for intersection visibility under Section 8.2.
2. Protection from Erosion. Any required berm shall be planted with sod, ground cover, or other suitable live plant material to protect it from erosion so that it retains its height and shape.
3. Required Plantings
a. Berms located in the front yard of non-residential parcels shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements for Landscaping Adjacent to Roads, Section 7.4.B.
b. Berms used for screening other than in the front yard shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements for Screening, Section 7.4(E).
20 ft.
200 ft.
Planting Requirements
? Road frontage: 200’ – 24’ = 176’
? Deciduous or evergreen trees @ 1/30 lineal feet = 6
? Ornamental trees @ 1/100 lineal feet = 2
? Shrubs @ 5/30 lineal feet = 30
Charter Township of Oxford 7-12 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Figure 5 Berms
4. Measurement of Berm Length. For the purposed of calculating required plant material, berm length shall be measured along the exterior edge of the berm.
D. Greenbelts. A twenty (20) foot greenbelt shall be required along the side and rear property lines of all nonresidential developments. Greenbelts shall conform to the following standards:
1. Location. Required greenbelts shall be located between the property line and any developed or paved area, including parking areas, access drives and buildings.
2. Measurement of Greenbelt Length. For the purposes of calculating required plant material, greenbelt length shall be measured along the exterior edge of the greenbelt.
3. General Planting Requirements
a. Ground Cover Requirements. Grass, landscape mulch, landscape stone, or other suitable live plant material shall be planted over the entire greenbelt area, except where paved walkways are used.
2 ft.
10 ft.
Planting Requirements
? For berms located in the front yard, Section 7.4 B.
? For berms used for screening, Section 7.4 E.
2’ minimum flat area on top
1:3 maximum slope
Charter Township of Oxford 7-13 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
b. Tree and Shrub Requirements. Except where the greenbelt is used for screening, a minimum of one (1) deciduous or evergreen tree shall be planted for each thirty (30) lineal feet or portion thereof of required greenbelt, or, alternatively, five (5) shrubs may be substituted for each required tree. Trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform intervals, irregular intervals, or in groupings.
c. Distance from Sidewalk. Plant materials shall not be placed closer than four (4) feet to the right-of-way line where the greenbelt abuts a public sidewalk.
4. Greenbelts Used for Screening. Greenbelts used for screening shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements for Screening, Section 7.4(E).
Figure 6 Greenbelt Along Side & Rear Property Lines
20 ft.
20 ft.
180 ft.
Planting Requirements
? Property Line: 180’
? Deciduous or evergreen trees @ 1/30 lineal feet = 6 or shrubs @ 5/30 lineal feet = 30
Charter Township of Oxford 7-14 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
E. Screening
1. Screening Requirements between Conflicting Land Uses. Unless otherwise specified, wherever an evergreen or landscaped screen is required, screening shall consist of closely-spaced evergreen plantings (i.e., no farther than fifteen (15) feet apart) which can be reasonably expected to form an eighty (80) percent visual barrier in summer and sixty (60) percent visual barrier in winter, that is at least six (6) feet above ground level within three (3) years of planting. Deciduous plant materials may be used provided that an eighty (80) percent visual barrier in summer and sixty (60) percent visual barrier in winter is maintained. Wherever screening is required adjacent to residentially zoned or used property, the screening shall be installed as soon as practicable in relation to site grading and general construction activities.
2. Screening of Equipment. Mechanical equipment, such as air compressors, pool pumps, transformers, sprinkler pumps, satellite dish antennae, and similar equipment shall be screened on at least three (3) sides. Insofar as practical, said screening shall exceed the vertical height of the equipment being screened by at least six (6) inches within two (2) years of planting.
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
20 ft.
Residential
Residential UseUse
Non
Non--Residential Residential UseUse
Greenbelt Planting Requirements
Greenbelt Planting Requirements
-
- Dense evergreen plantings (max. 15 ft. apaDense evergreen plantings (max. 15 ft. apart)rt)
-
- 80% visual barrier summer80% visual barrier summer
-
- 60% visual barrier winter60% visual barrier winter
Figure 7
Figure 7 Screening Between Conflicting Land UsesScreening Between Conflicting Land Uses
Screening Options:
Screening Options:
1.
1. Landscaped BermLandscaped Berm Sections 7.4 C. & E.Sections 7.4 C. & E.
2.
2. GreenbeltGreenbelt Section 7.4 E.Section 7.4 E.
3.
3. WallWall
Sections 7.Sections 7.10 & 7.4 D.10 & 7.4 D.
Charter Township of Oxford 7-15 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
F. Parking Lot Landscaping. In addition to required screening, all off-street parking areas shall be landscaped as follows:
1. Landscaping Ratio. Off-street parking areas containing greater than twenty (20) spaces shall be provided with at least twenty (20) square feet of interior landscaping per parking space. Landscaping around the perimeter of the lot shall not satisfy this requirement. Suitable interior parking lot landscaping is illustrated below in Figure 8. Wherever possible, parking lot landscaping shall be designed to improve the safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, guide traffic movement, break up the expanse of pavement, create shade, and improve the appearance of the parking area.
2. Minimum Area. Landscaped areas in parking lots shall be no less than five (5) feet in any single dimension and no less than two hundred (200) square feet in area. Landscaped areas in or adjacent to parking lots shall be protected with curbing or other means to prevent encroachment of vehicles.
3. Other Landscaping. Landscaping provided to satisfy other requirements elsewhere on the parcel shall not be counted in meeting the parking lot landscaping requirements.
4. Required Plantings. Requirements for plant material shall be based on the location, size, and shape of the parking lot landscaped area. A minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted per three hundred (300) square feet or fraction thereof of interior landscaped area. At least fifty percent (50%) of each interior landscaped area shall be covered by living plant material, such as sod, shrubs, ground cover, or trees. The landscape plan shall indicate the types, sizes, and quantities of plant material proposed for such area.
Charter Township of Oxford 7-16 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Figure 8 Parking Lot Landscaping
G. Landscaping of Rights-of-Way. Public rights-of-way located adjacent to required landscaped areas and greenbelts shall be planted with grass or other suitable live ground cover, and shall be maintained by the owner or occupant of the adjacent property as if the rights-of-way were part of the required landscaped areas or greenbelts. No plantings except grass or ground cover shall be permitted closer than three (3) feet from the edge of the road pavement.
H. Maintenance of Unobstructed Visibility For Drivers. No landscaping shall be established or maintained on any parcel or in any parking lot that will cause a traffic hazard by obstructing the view of drivers. All landscaping shall be planted in accordance with the requirements for intersection visibility under Section 8.2.
I. Potential Damage to Utilities. In no case shall landscaping material be planted in a way that will interfere with or cause damage to underground utility lines, public roads, or other public facilities. Species of trees whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways, sewers, or other utilities, such as willows, silver maples, and the like, shall not be planted closer than fifteen (15) feet from any such roadways, sewers, or utilities.
J. Landscaping of Divider Medians. Where traffic on driveways, maneuvering lanes, private roads, or similar vehicle access-ways is separated by a
Parking Lot Requirements
? Internal landscaping: @ 20 s.f./space
? Plantings: 2400 s.f. provided @ 1 tree/300 s.f. = 8 trees
Charter Township of Oxford 7-17 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
divider median, the median shall be curbed and have a minimum width of ten (10) feet. A minimum of one (1) deciduous or evergreen tree shall be planted for each thirty (30) lineal feet or portion thereof of median. Trees may be planted at uniform intervals, irregular intervals, or in groupings, but in no instance shall the center-to-center distance between trees exceed sixty (60) feet.
K. Fractional Requirements. When units or measurements determining quantities of required plantings result in requirement of a fraction of a plant, any fraction up to one-half may be disregarded, and fractions of one-half or greater shall require one (1) plant.
7.5 Standards for Landscape Materials. Unless otherwise specified, all landscape materials shall comply with the following standards:
A. Plant Quality. Plant materials used in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be nursery grown, free of pests and diseases, hardy in southeastern Michigan, in conformance with the American Standards for Nursery Stock of the American Landscape and Nursery Association (formerly the American Association of Nurserymen), and shall have passed inspections required under state regulations. Species native to Oakland County are recommended for all types of landscaping.
B. Non-Living Plant Material. Plastic and other non-living plant materials shall not be considered acceptable to meet the landscaping requirements of this Ordinance.
C. Plant Material Specifications. The following specifications shall apply to all plant material proposed in accordance with the landscaping requirements of this Ordinance:
1. Deciduous shade trees shall be a minimum of two and one-half (2.5) inches in caliper measured six (6) inches above grade with the first branch a minimum of four (4) feet above grade when planted.
2. Deciduous ornamental trees shall be a minimum of one and one-half (1-1/2) inches in caliper measured six (6) inches above grade with a minimum height of four (4) feet above grade when planted.
3. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height when planted. Furthermore, evergreen trees shall have a minimum spread of two and one-half (2.5) feet, and the size of the burlapped root ball shall be at least ten (10) times the caliper measured six (6) inches above grade.
4. Shrubs shall be a minimum of two (2) feet in height when planted. Low growing shrubs shall have a minimum spread of twenty-four (24) inches when planted.
Charter Township of Oxford 7-18 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
5. Hedges shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, visual screen within two (2) years after planting, barring unusual growing conditions, such as drought or disease. Hedges shall be a minimum of two (2) feet in height when planted.
Summary of Plant Material Specifications1 Minimum Caliper Minimum Height Minimum Spread
Deciduous Trees
2 1/2 in.2
4 ft. first branch
--
Ornamental Trees
1 1/2 in.2
4 ft. first branch
--
Evergreen Trees
--
6 ft.
2 1/2 ft.
Shrubs
--
2 ft.
2 ft.
Hedges
--
2 ft.
--
1 See Section 7.5 for detailed requirements.
2 Measured six (6) inches above grade.
6. Ground cover used in lieu of turf grasses in whole or in part shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage after one (1) complete growing season.
7. Grass area shall be planted using species normally grown as permanent lawns in southeastern Michigan. Grass, sod, and seed shall be clean and free of weeds, pests, and diseases. Grass may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded. When grass is to be established by a method other than complete sodding or seeding, nurse grass seed shall be sown for immediate effect and protection until complete coverage is otherwise achieved. Hydroseed, mulch blankets, or other acceptable means shall be used to protect newly seeded areas.
8. Mulch used around trees, shrubs, and vines shall be a minimum of three (3) inches deep, and installed in a manner as to present a finished appearance.
9. Prohibited Plant Species. Species that are either considered nuisances or are invasive exotic species that pose potentially harmful effects on natural ecosystems, shall not be used to satisfy the landscaping requirements of this Article. For the purposes of this section, the Township may refer to lists of invasive and diseased species maintained by the Michigan Department of Natural
Charter Township of Oxford 7-19 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Resources, Department of Environmental Quality, Department of Agriculture and Rural Development, or other State departments for guidance.
D. Native Plants in Landscaping. If native species are to be used in landscaping and plantings, the following standards shall be adhered to:
1. Native plant species chosen for a site should be based on the existing vegetation and site conditions. The woodland, wetland or meadow species that currently grow on a site typically indicate the native species to be used in landscaping the site.
2. Plantings installed in areas of stormwater conveyance, infiltration, or retention/detention should be planted with native species that specifically perform the necessary runoff attenuation, filtration, water uptake and purification functions needed in such areas. Both herbaceous and woody species should be incorporated into the plant mix, where the desired function dictates.
7.6 Installation and Maintenance. The following standards shall be observed where installation and maintenance of landscape materials are required:
A. Installation. Landscaping shall be installed in a sound, workmanlike manner to ensure the continued growth of healthy plant material. Areas to be landscaped shall be provided with a minimum topsoil depth of six (6) inches. Trees, shrubs, hedges, and vines shall be generously mulched at the time of planting.
B. Installation of Perimeter Landscaping. Landscaping along the perimeter shall be installed prior to construction, except where such landscaping would be destroyed during construction.
C. Seeding or Sodding. Lots or parcels shall be seeded or sodded within ninety (90) days after occupancy.
D. Protection from Vehicles. Landscaping shall be protected from vehicles through use of curbing in parking, loading and vehicular circulation areas. Landscape areas shall be elevated above the pavement to a height that is adequate to protect the plants from snow removal, salt, and other hazards.
E. Timing of installation.
1. Landscaping provided for nonresidential and multiple family residential projects shall be installed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. Where phased projects are proposed, all landscaping associated with each phase shall be installed prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. However, if the development (or phase of a development) is being completed during the off-season when
Charter Township of Oxford 7-20 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
plants can not be installed, the Planning Commission or Zoning Official shall have the ability establish an alternative schedule for the installation of required landscaping. If landscaping is to be installed after the Certificate of Occupancy is granted, the developer shall provide a performance guarantee to ensure installation of required landscaping in an amount equal the estimated value of the proposed landscape improvements.
2. Landscaping of all common areas associated with single-family residential developments shall be installed prior to the occupancy of the first lot or unit of the development, or of a particular phase in the case of a phased development. However, if the development is being completed during the off-season when plants can not be installed, the Planning Commission or Zoning Official shall have the ability establish an alternative schedule for the installation of required landscaping. If landscaping is to be installed after the Certificate of Occupancy is granted, the developer shall provide a performance guarantee to ensure installation of required landscaping, in an amount equal the estimated value of the proposed landscape improvements. Notwithstanding, required street trees shall be installed within 90 days of occupancy of each lot or unit, or by June 1 for residences occupied in winter months.
F. Maintenance. Landscaping required by this Ordinance shall be maintained in a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris. All unhealthy and dead plant material shall be replaced immediately upon notice from the Zoning Official, unless the season is not appropriate for planting, in which case such plant material shall be replaced at the beginning of the next planting season.
All constructed or manufactured landscape elements, such as but not limited to benches, retaining walls, edging, and so forth, shall be maintained in good condition and neat appearance. Rotted, deteriorated, or damaged landscape elements shall be repaired, replaced, or removed.
G. Irrigation. All cultivated landscaped areas shall be irrigated with a permanent, automatic irrigation system designed to provide efficient irrigation coverage with minimal overspray onto non-landscaped areas. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to lessen or waive this requirement if it is demonstrated to their satisfaction that such irrigation is not necessary to maintain proposed landscaping in a healthy condition. Irrigation shall not be required for existing vegetation maintained in a natural state. The landscape plan shall indicate the nature, location, and specifications of the irrigation system which shall be used. The landscape plan shall have sufficient detail to show that adequate irrigation will be provided to all required landscape areas and plant materials.
Charter Township of Oxford 7-21 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
7.7 Treatment of Existing Plant Material and Landscape Improvements.
A. Consideration of Existing Vegetation in the Landscape Design. In instances where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its development, the Planning Commission may permit substitution of such plant material in place of the requirements set forth previously in this Article, provided such substitution is in keeping with the spirit and intent of this Article and the Ordinance in general.
B. Use of Existing Landscape Improvements. Existing hedges, berms, walls, or other landscape elements may be used to satisfy the requirements set forth previously, provided that such landscaping is in conformance with the requirements of this Section.
7.8 Modifications to Landscape Requirements. In consideration of the overall design and impact of a specific landscape plan, and in consideration of the amount of existing plant material to be retained on the site, the Planning Commission may modify the specific requirements outlined herein, provided that any such adjustment is in keeping with the intent of this Article and Ordinance in general. In determining whether a modification is appropriate, the Planning Commission shall consider whether the following conditions exist:
A. Topographic features or other unique features of the site create conditions such that strict application of the landscape regulations would result in a less effective screen than an alternative landscape design.
B. Parking, vehicular circulation, or land use are such that required landscaping would not enhance the site or result in the desired effect.
C. The public benefit intended by the landscape regulations could be better-achieved with a plan that varies from the strict requirements of the Ordinance.
7.9 Landscape Plan Submission Requirements. All development proposals for which landscaping is required pursuant to this Article shall submit a landscape plan demonstrating compliance with the standards herein. The required landscape plan shall include the following:
A. Location of all proposed plant material.
B. Schedule of all proposed plant materials, indicating the botanical and common name, number, size, and root type, as well as which landscaping or tree replacement requirement, if any, the plant material is intended to satisfy.
C. Calculations used for determining required number of trees and shrubs.
Charter Township of Oxford 7-22 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
D. Proposed groundcover in all unpaved areas of the site.
E. Location of all existing trees exceeding 18 inches DBH on the site.
F. Proposed topographical contour lines.
G. Berm cross-sections, if proposed.
H. Planting details.
I. Irrigation details sufficient to demonstrate that adequate irrigation will be provided to all landscaped areas.
J. Details of any proposed structures, such as retaining walls, gazebos, arbors, fences, etc.
7.10 Fence and Wall Standards.
A. General Requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct, or cause to be constructed, any fence on any property within the Charter Township of Oxford, including land zoned or used for single-family residential purposes, except in accordance with these regulations.
B. Location Of Fences and Walls.
1. All fences and walls shall be located entirely on the property of the owner of the fence. Adjoining property owners may jointly install a fence on the common property line.
2. No fence or wall shall be located within a public easement in which public utilities are located or are proposed to be located without first receiving the approval of the public utility responsible.
3. No fence or wall shall be established or maintained on any parcel that will cause a traffic hazard by obstructing the view of drivers. All fences and walls shall be installed in accordance with the requirements for intersection visibility under Section 8.2.
C. Height Regulations.
1. Fences and walls located on property zoned or used for residential purposes shall comply with the following regulations:
a. Fences and walls located in a required front setback adjoining a public or private road shall not exceed three (3) feet in height, with the exception of walls or fences that are associated with a decorative entrance feature of a multi-unit
Charter Township of Oxford 7-23 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
residential development, which may measure up to six (6) feet in height.
b. Fences and walls located in any required side setback not adjoining a street, or in any required rear setback, shall not exceed six (6) feet in height.
2. Fences and walls on property zoned or used for commercial or office purposes shall not exceed six (6) feet in height, unless waived by the Planning Commission. Fences in a required front setback shall not be permitted except where required by the Planning Commission.
3. Fences and walls on any industrial lot shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height.
4. Fences enclosing land used for agricultural purposes shall be exempt from the regulations of this subsection.
5. In determining the height of a fence or wall that separates two adjoining lots and that is located within two (2) feet of the common lot line, the maximum height at any point shall be measured from the highest grade at that point within two (2) feet on either side of the common lot line.
D. Safety.
1. No spikes, nails, barbed wire, or other pointed objects or sharp protrusions shall be placed on, attached to, or permitted to remain on, any fence or wall below the height of eight (8) feet, except in the case of fences that enclose farmland, in which case barbed wire may be permitted at any height of the fence.
2. Fences shall not contain any electric charge or current, except fences that enclose land used for agricultural purposes, in which case electrically charged fence wires shall be permitted, provided such wires shall be attached to the inside face of the fence posts. All electrically charged fences shall be of a type and make approved by Underwriters Laboratories.
3. Fences and walls may be constructed of woven wire, metal, wood, plastic, or masonry. Masonry walls shall require a foundation equal to the depth of the frost line, or forty-two (42) inches. Posts or anchoring devices for all other fences shall be placed at a depth of not less than thirty (30) inches.
E. Retaining Walls. A retaining wall shall be regulated as a fence if the wall projects more than eighteen (18) inches above the grade of the ground being retained.
Charter Township of Oxford 7-24 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
F. Maintenance. Fences and walls shall be maintained so as to not endanger life or property, and so as to not collapse or present an imminent risk of collapse.
G. Exemptions. Fences and walls enclosing land used for agricultural purposes shall be exempt from the regulations and requirements of this Section. Likewise, fencing for municipal facilities shall also be exempt from fencing regulations.
H. Dumpster Enclosures. Dumpster enclosures shall be provided and screened in accordance with Section 6.20(A).
Charter Township of Oxford 8-1 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ARTICLE 8
ACCESS, CIRCULATION, PARKING AND LOADING
8.1 Required Road Frontage and Access.
A. Subject to the terms and exceptions set forth in Section 16.3 of this Ordinance with regard to zoning compliance permits, every use, building or structure established after the effective date of this Ordinance, shall be located on a lot or parcel which fronts upon, and is accessed by, a public road, or an approved private road which meets all requirements of Article 11. Such required frontage shall be provided for a distance equal to or greater than the minimum lot width required in that particular zoning district, as measured along the right of way line, except as follows:
1. Minimum road frontage for lots or parcels which abut, wholly or in part, a public or private road cul-de-sac or other curved portion of a public or private road, may be reduced to eighty five (85) percent of the required minimum lot width for the district in which the lot is located.
B. Common Driveways. Two (2) lots having contiguous road frontage may be accessed from that road via a common driveway. Should a common driveway be established, easement and maintenance agreements shall be required, meeting the minimum standards set forth in Section 11.5(A), (B) and (C), as well as Section 11.6, and shall be subject to Township review.
8.2 Visibility at Intersections. On any corner lot in any district, no fence, wall, screen, hedge, sign, or other structure or planting shall obstruct the visibility of vehicular traffic between the heights of three (3) feet and ten (10) feet in an area measuring twenty-five (25) feet from the point of intersection of the street right-of-way lines and the tangent connecting the twenty-five (25) foot extremities of the intersecting right-of-way lines.
Charter Township of Oxford 8-2 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
8.3 Access Management Standards.
A. Applicability. All development that is subject to site plan, site condominium, planned unit development, plat or private road review shall meet the requirements set forth in this Section. Access to public roads shall be controlled in the interest of public safety.
B. Access Barrier. Each building or group of buildings, parking and/or service areas, shall be physically separated from public roads by a curb, or other suitable barrier against unchanneled motor vehicle access or egress, except for driveway access authorized herein.
C. Driveway Access Standards. Driveways shall conform to the following performance standards or to standards adopted by the Road Commission for Oakland County, whichever is more stringent:
1. The design and placement of driveways must relate to internal circulation and parking areas such that the entrance can absorb the maximum rate of inbound traffic during a normal peak traffic period.
2. There must be sufficient on-site storage to accommodate at least three queued vehicles waiting to park or exit without using a portion
R
R--OO--WW
Clear Vision
Clear Vision AreaArea
25’
25’
25’
25’
Charter Township of Oxford 8-3 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
of the public right-of-way, obstructing existing vehicle sight distance, or otherwise interfering with street traffic.
3. Provisions for circulation between adjacent parcels are encouraged through coordinated or joint parking systems.
4. Driveways shall be designed to accommodate all vehicle types having occasion to enter and exit the site, including delivery vehicles. There shall be clear delineation and/or separation, where appropriate, of entry and exit lanes within driveways.
5. Loading and unloading activities shall not hinder vehicle ingress or egress.
6. Driveways placement must be such that an exiting vehicle has an unobstructed sight distance according to the minimum adopted by the Road Commission for Oakland County or MDOT, as applicable.
D. Driveway Spacing. Required spacing of driveways, whether within a single lot or on adjacent lots, shall be determined as provided herein. These standards shall not preclude access to a lot or parcel by a single driveway where such driveway would be otherwise permitted by the appropriate road agency.
1. Driveway spacing will be determined as a function of operating speeds of the adjacent public road. These spaces are based on average vehicle acceleration and deceleration rates and are considered necessary to maintain safe traffic operation. Spacing will be measured from the midpoint of each driveway. Spacing will be determined according to the following minimum standards or to standards adopted by the Road Commission for Oakland County or MDOT, as applicable, whichever is more stringent.
Speed Limit (mph) Minimum Spacing (feet)
25 105
30 125
35 150
40 185
45 230
50 275
2. In the event that a particular parcel or parcels lack sufficient road frontage to maintain adequate spacing, the applicant shall have one of two options:
a. A waiver can be sought from the Planning Commission from the minimum spacing requirements provided herein, but in no case can the waiver be greater than the minimum required to
Charter Township of Oxford 8-4 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
provide safe access to a site while still meeting the intent of this Section. In determining whether such a waiver is acceptable, the Planning Commission shall consider the following criteria, in addition to the recommendation of the Township Engineer:
i Traffic volumes on adjacent roadways;
ii Intensity of use anticipated for proposed drives;
iii Availability of acceptable sight distances;
iv Distance from adjacent intersections;
v The presence of physical separation or barriers between existing and/or proposed driveways;
vi Input from the Road Commission or MDOT, as applicable; and,
vii The importance of the additional curb cuts to the function of the site.
b. The adjacent landowners may agree to establish a common driveway. Should a common driveway be established, easement and maintenance agreements shall be required, meeting the minimum standards set forth in Section 11.5(A), (B) and (C), as well as Section 11.6.
3. Number of Driveways per Parcel.
a. A maximum of one (1) two-way driveway opening or a pair of one (1) way driveway openings shall be permitted to a particular lot from each adjacent road.
b. Based on the recommendation of the County Road Commission and/or Township Engineer that an additional driveway is in the interests of safe traffic operation, the Planning Commission may permit one (1) additional driveway entrance along a continuous site with frontage in excess of three hundred (300) feet or two (2) additional driveway entrances along a continuous site with frontage in excess of six hundred (600) feet.
4. Driveway Approaches.
a. At a minimum, all uses or proposed uses which are subject to site plan review requirements shall provide paved driveway
Charter Township of Oxford 8-5 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
tapers to provide access to and from paved or gravel roadways.
b. Acceleration, deceleration, and passing lanes for driveway approaches entering on a public roadway may be required, as determined by the Township, based upon the following considerations:
i Traffic volumes, accident data, horizontal and vertical alignment, and sight distance conditions of the public roadway upon which a driveway is entering.
ii Other unique site conditions such as land use, topography, or other natural conditions.
iii Traffic generated by the proposed use.
c. Driveway tapers and acceleration, deceleration, and passing lanes shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards of the Road Commission for Oakland County for roadways under their jurisdiction and the Michigan Department of Transportation for roadways under their jurisdiction.
8.4 Traffic Impact Studies.
A. Intent. The Township requires traffic impact studies in certain cases to identify the anticipated traffic impacts and to assist in decision making. The intent of this section is to provide specific direction for the preparation of traffic impact studies where such studies are required by this Zoning Ordinance. The requirements of this section are also intended to help Township staff and officials determine the appropriateness of certain uses at proposed locations in terms of traffic impacts and the adequacy of proposed access design. Traffic impact studies may also be used by the applicant to justify additional access points, as outlined in Section 8.3(D)(2).
B. Applicability. A traffic impact study may be required by the Planning Commission for any use which, in the Township Engineer’s preliminary analysis, is expected to potentially generate over one hundred (100) directional trips in any peak hour or over seven hundred fifty (750) directional trips in an average day, or for projects at locations that currently experience traffic operational problems.
C. Submittal Procedures. The traffic impact study shall be submitted with the site plan or other material required to be submitted.
D. Qualifications of Preparer. The person responsible for the preparation of the study shall have a degree or specific professional training in the
Charter Township of Oxford 8-6 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
preparation of traffic impact studies. The preparer shall have at least three (3) years of recent experience in the preparation of traffic impact studies, shall provide evidence of ongoing experience and familiarity with the Highway Capacity Manual and other traffic operation evaluation techniques, shall be an associate (or higher) member of one or more professional transportation-related organizations and shall be either a registered engineer (PE) or a planner with AICP or PCP certification. Any study involving roadway or traffic signal design work shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a registered engineer (PE) with specific training in traffic engineering.
E. Contents. The extent of information to be provided depends upon the expected trip generation of the proposed project. The information provided in the traffic impact study shall include:
1. A description of the site, surroundings and study area. Illustrations and a narrative should describe the characteristics of the site and adjacent roadway system (functional classification, lanes, speed limits, etc.). This description should include surrounding land uses, expected development in the vicinity which could influence future traffic conditions, special site features and a description of any committed roadway improvements. The study should define and justify the study area selected for analysis.
2. A description of the requested use which relates to traffic generation, such as the number and types of dwellings units, the gross and usable floor area, the number of employees and shift change factors. Intended phasing or future expansion should also be noted.
3. A description of existing peak-hour traffic volumes (and daily volumes if applicable) at intersections and on street(s) adjacent to the site. The existing level of service analysis shall be provided for intersections in the vicinity which are expected to experience an increase in traffic of at least five percent due to the proposed project. Existing traffic counts shall not be over two years old from the date of submittal of the report.
4. Roadway characteristics, described and illustrated, as appropriate. Features to be addressed include existing rights-of-way, lane configurations, geometrics, signal timing, traffic control devices, posted speed limits, average running speeds, sight distance information, existing driveways and potential turning movement conflicts in the vicinity of the site.
5. For projects that will be completed and occupied within one year of a traffic impact statement submittal, an analysis of background traffic (i.e. the expected increase in traffic volumes related to approved
Charter Township of Oxford 8-7 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
projects and historic annual percentage increases).
6. Forecasted trip generation of the proposed use for the a.m. (if applicable), the p.m. peak hour and an average weekday. For commercial uses that are expected to generate significant weekend traffic, a weekend forecast shall also be required. The forecasts shall be based on one standard deviation above the average rate, outlined in the most recent edition of Trip Generation, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE). For rezoning requests, the study shall contrast the traffic impacts of typical uses permitted in the requested zoning district with uses permitted in the current zoning district. The determination of typical uses shall be made by the Building Department or Planning Commission. Any trip reduction for pass-by trips, transit, ride-sharing, other modes, internal capture rates, etc., shall be based both on ITE findings and documented survey results acceptable to the agency reviewers. The community may accept in whole or in part the trip reduction rates used. For projects intended to be developed in phases, the trip generation by phase shall be described.
F. Distribution of Traffic. The projected traffic generated shall be distributed (inbound vs. outbound; left turn vs. right turn) onto the existing street network to project turning movements at site access points and nearby intersections where required. Projected peak hour turning movement volumes shall be illustrated in the report. A description of the application of standard engineering procedures for determining the distribution should also be attached.
G. Capacity Analysis. A before and after level of service or "capacity" analysis at the proposed access points and nearby intersections shall be completed using the procedures outlined in the most recent edition of the Highway Capacity Manual, published by the Transportation Research Board.
H. Mitigation Alternatives. The study shall outline mitigation measures and demonstrate any changes to the level of service achieved by these measures. Any alternatives or suggested phasing of improvements should be described. The mitigation measures may include items such as roadway widening, need for bypass lanes or deceleration tapers/lanes, changes to signalization, use of access management techniques or a reduction in the proposed intensity of use.
I. Waiver of Study Requirements. The requirement for a traffic impact study or the study elements listed herein may be waived or modified by the Planning Commission. Reasons for the waiver or modification shall be documented, and the following factors may be considered:
1. Roadway improvements are already scheduled which are expected
Charter Township of Oxford 8-8 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
to mitigate any impacts associated with the proposed project.
2. The existing level of service is not expected to be significantly impacted by the proposed project due to specific conditions at this location.
3. A similar traffic study was previously prepared for the site and is still considered applicable.
8.5 General Off-Street Parking Requirements. In all zoning districts, off-street parking facilities for the storage and parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for the use of occupants, employees, and patrons of the buildings hereafter erected, altered, or extended after the effective date of this Ordinance, shall be provided as herein prescribed. Such space shall be maintained in a safe, passable condition, and shall not be encroached upon so long as said main building or structure remains, unless an equivalent number of such spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with this Ordinance.
A. Location of Parking for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. The off-street parking facilities required for one- and two-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot as the building they are intended to serve, but shall not be considered a parking lot under the provisions of Section 8.7 of this Article.
B. Location of Parking for Multiple-Family Residential. The off-street parking facilities for multiple-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot as the dwellings they are intended to serve, and shall consist of a parking lot as set forth in Section 8.7. In no event shall any uncovered parking space be located nearer than ten (10) feet to any main building.
C. Location of Parking for Other Land Uses. The off-street parking facilities required for all other uses shall be located on the lot or within five hundred (500) feet of the permitted uses requiring such off-street parking, such distance to be measured along lines of public access to the property between the nearest point of the parking facility to the building to be served. A fully executed parking easement agreement for all off-site parking shall be signed by all parties involved and recorded with the Oakland County Register of Deeds for all off-street parking intended to service the main facility. Such parking easement agreement shall be subject to Township review and approval.
D. Seating Capacity of Seats. As used in this Article to determine parking requirements, seats shall mean that each twenty-four (24) inches of seating facilities shall be counted as one (1) seat, except that where specifications and plans filed with the Zoning Administrator specify a certain seating capacity for a particular building, such specified seating capacity shall be used as the basis for determining required parking spaces.
Charter Township of Oxford 8-9 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
E. Similar Uses and Requirements. In the case of a use not specifically mentioned, and which is similar to another use listed, the requirements for off-street parking facilities for the similar use shall apply.
F. Floor Area. For the purpose of this Article, the floor area used to determine the required number of parking spaces shall be as defined in Section 2.2.
G. Fractional Requirements. When units or measurements determining number of required parking spaces result in requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to, and including one-half may be disregarded and fractions over one-half shall require one (1) parking space.
H. Existing Off-Street Parking at Effective Date of Ordinance. Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this Ordinance which serves an existing building or use, shall not be modified in quantity, arrangement or construction to other than that required under the terms of this Ordinance.
I. Collective Provisions. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to prevent collective provisions of off-street parking facilities for two or more buildings or uses, subject to the Planning Commission’s finding that such an arrangement is practical and satisfactory to each of the uses intended to be served, and when all requirements for location, design, and construction are met.
1. Computing Collective Parking Requirements. In computing requirements for any collective parking arrangement, the total space requirement is the sum of the individual requirements that will occur at the same time. If parking requirements for individual uses occur at distinctly different times, the total of such off-street parking facilities required for collective use may be reduced below the sum total of the individual parking requirements.
2. Record of Agreement. A copy of the agreement between the joint users of the collective parking shall be recorded with the Oakland County Register of Deeds. The agreement shall include a guarantee for continued use of the parking facility by each party. Such collective parking agreement shall be subject to Township review and approval.
J. Parking Duration. Except when land is used as storage space in connection with the business of a repair or service garage, a twenty-four (24) hour time limit for parking in non-residential off-street parking areas shall prevail, it being the purpose and intention of the foregoing that the requirement of maintaining vehicle storage or parking space is to provide for the public safety in keeping parked cars off the streets. Such requirement is not designed to or intended to provide, and shall not permit, the storage or
Charter Township of Oxford 8-10 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
prolonged parking of wrecked or junked cars on any such parking area in any such district, or for creating a junk yard or a nuisance in such areas.
K. Restriction of Parking on Private Property. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to park any motor vehicle on any private property, or use said private property for vehicle storage, or use any portion of any private property as a parking space, without the express or implied consent, authorization, or ratification of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent, or trustee of such property. Complaint for the violation of this Section shall be made by the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent, or trustee of such property.
L. Flexibility in Application. The Township recognizes that, due to the specific requirements of any given development, inflexible application of the parking standards set forth in Section 8.6 may result in development with inadequate or excessive amounts of parking in relation to that which is needed. The former situation may lead to traffic congestion or unauthorized parking on adjacent streets or neighboring sites. The latter situation may result in excess paving and stormwater runoff and the inefficient use of land which could otherwise be left as open space.
1. The Planning Commission may permit deviations from the requirements of Section 8.6 and may require more or allow less parking whenever it finds that such deviations are more likely to provide a sufficient number of parking spaces to accommodate the specific characteristics of the use in question. In making such a determination, the Planning Commission shall consider the following criteria:
a. The anticipated number of employees, customers, residents or other users of the facility at any one time;
b. Demonstration of need by petitioner based on comparable uses at similar locations;
c. Proximity to existing parking areas where shared or collective parking agreements are possible; and,
d. Availability of non-motorized, transit, or other alternatives to vehicular transportation.
2. The Planning Commission may attach conditions to the approval of a deviation from the requirements of Section 8.6 that bind such approval to the specific use in question. Where a deviation results in a reduction in parking, the Planning Commission may further impose conditions which ensure that adequate reserve area is set aside for future parking, if needed. Where an area is set aside for reserve parking, it shall be easily developed, not devoted to a use
Charter Township of Oxford 8-11 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
other than open space, and shall be designed to accommodate attendant facilities such as maneuver lanes and drainage.
M. Electric Vehicle Charging Stations. Parking spaces dedicated for electric vehicle charging stations can be counted toward meeting the requirement of off-street parking. These stations shall be signed and reserved for electric vehicle charging only. The stations shall comply with State of Michigan Electrical Code. Where allowed by the Road Commission for Oakland County, on-street electric vehicle charging stations shall also be permitted.
8.6 Off-Street Parking Requirements by Use. The amount of required off-street parking space for new uses or buildings, additions thereto, and additions to existing buildings as specified above shall be determined in accordance with the following table, no more or less parking may be approved except under the flexibility provisions found in Section 8.5(L). The space so required shall be stated in the application for a building and land use permit and shall be irrevocably reserved for such use and/or shall comply with the initial part of this Section.
Use
Required No. of Spaces
Per Each Unit of
Measure as Follows:
A. Residential Parking Requirements.
1.
Single- or Two-Family Dwelling
2
Per each dwelling unit
2.
Multiple-Family Dwelling
2
Per each dwelling, plus
1
Per each ten (10) dwelling units
3.
Senior Citizen Housing
0.5
Per each dwelling unit, plus
1
Per each ten (10) dwellings units
B. Institutional Parking Requirements.
1.
Churches and Places of Worship
1
Per each four (4) seats based on maximum seating capacity in the main place of assembly therein
2.
Private Clubs & Lodges
1
Per each four (4) individual members allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local county, state, fire, health, or building codes
Charter Township of Oxford 8-12 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3.
Hospitals
1
Per each two (2) beds, plus
1
Per staff doctor, plus
1
Per each two (2) employees
4.
Convalescent Homes, Homes for the Aged, Nursing Homes, Children’s’ Homes
1
1
1
Per each four (4) beds, plus
Per each staff doctor, plus
Per each two (2) employees
5.
High Schools
1
Per each teacher, plus
1
Per each ten (10) students, plus
1
Per each employee or administrator.
Or
Requirements of the auditorium or assembly hall therein (whichever is greater)
6.
Elementary & Junior High Schools, Trade Schools
1
1
Per each teacher, plus
Per each employee or administrator,
or
Requirements of the auditorium or assembly hall therein (whichever is greater)
7.
Child Care Center, Day Nurseries, or Nursery Schools
1
1
Per each five (5) students, plus
Per each employee
8.
Stadiums & Sports Arenas
1
Per each four (4) seats or eight (8) ft of bench
C. Commercial Parking Requirements.
1.
Retail Stores, including Pharmacies, Convenience Stores, Video Rental Establishments, Discount Stores and other similar uses, except as otherwise specified herein
1
Per each 200 sq ft of GFA
2.
Furniture, Appliances, & Household Equipment, Repair Shops, Hardware Stores and other similar uses
1
Per each 800 sq ft of UFA
1
Per each two (2) employees
3.
Auto Salesroom, Wholesale Stores, Machinery Sales, & other similar uses
1
1
Per each 1000 sq ft of UFA, plus
Per each employee
Charter Township of Oxford 8-13 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
4.
Medical Clinic & Dental Offices
1
Per each 250 sq ft of GFA
5.
Business & Professional Offices
1
Per each 350 sq ft of GFA
6.
Motels, Hotels, Tourist Homes
1
1
Per each guest bedroom, plus
Per employee, plus amount required for accessory uses
7.
Banks, Post Offices
1
1
Per each 200 sq ft of UFA, plus
Per each one (1) employee
plus
Required stacking spaces
8.
Barber & Beauty Shops
2
Per each operator
9.
Bed and Breakfast Establishment
1
Per each B & B bedroom, plus
3
Required for owner’s use
10.
Bowling Alleys
5
Per bowling lane, plus
Amount required for accessory uses
11.
Dance halls, pool or billiard parlors, roller or skating rinks, exhibition halls and assembly halls without fixed seats
1
Per each two (2) persons allowed within the load established by the Building Code
12.
Drive-in Restaurants
1
Per each 50 sq ft of GFA, plus
1
Per each two (2) employees, with a minimum total of 25 parking spaces
13.
Drive-Thru Restaurants
1
1
Per each 200 sq ft of GFA, plus
Per each two (2) employees, with a minimum total of 25 parking spaces
14.
Establishments (other than drive-in or drive-thru restaurants) in which the sale and consumption of food, beverages and/or refreshments occurs on the premises
1
1
Per each four (4) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, state, or county fire, health, or building codes, plus
Per each three (3) employees, or
1
Per each 100 sq ft of UFA, plus
1
Per each three (3) employees (whichever is greater)
Charter Township of Oxford 8-14 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
15.
Funeral Homes, Mortuaries
1
Per each 50 sq. ft. of service parlors, chapels, and reception areas, plus
1
Per each funeral vehicle stored on the premises
16.
Private Tennis, Swim or Golf Clubs, or other similar uses
1
Per each two (2) member families or individuals, plus
Amount required for accessory uses
17.
Private Clubs and Lodges
1
Per each two (2) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes or 15 spaces per 1,000 square feet of usable floor area, whichever is greater
18.
Golf Course, open to the general public
3
1
Per each hole, plus
Per each employee, plus
Amount required for accessory uses
19.
Driving Range
1
Per two (2) tees
20.
Filling Stations, Automobile Service Stations
2
1
Per each service stall, plus
Per each employee, plus
1
Per each service vehicle; plus
1
Per each fuel pump
21.
Motor Vehicle Wash Establishments (self-serve)
2
1
Per each wash stall; plus
Per each vacuum station
22.
Motor Vehicle Wash Establishments (other than self-serve)
2
Per each unit which represents the establishments maximum capacity as computed by dividing the linear dimensions of the mechanical wash/dry operation by 20 ft, plus
1
Per each vacuum station
1
Per each employee
plus that required for convenience stores, as applicable.
23.
Service Garages, Auto Repair Shops, Collision or Bump Shops, and other similar uses
2
1
Per each service stall, plus
Per each two (2) employees computed on the basis of the maximum number of employees on duty at any one time
Charter Township of Oxford 8-15 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
24.
Open Air Business (not otherwise provide for herein)
1
Per each 800 sq ft of lot area used for said business
25.
Personal Service Establishments (not otherwise provided for herein)
1
1
Per each 300 sq ft of UFA, plus
Per each two (2) employees
26.
Theaters, Auditoriums, and Assembly Halls
2
Per each four (4) seats based on the maximum seating capacity in the main place of assembly therein, plus
1
Per each two (2) employees
27.
Video Arcades
1
Per each 50 sq. ft. of UFA, with a minimum of 6 spaces
28.
Video Rental Facilities
1
Per each 200 sq. ft. of UFA, with a minimum of 6 total spaces
29.
Commercial outdoor recreation centers not specified elsewhere.
To be determined by the Planning Commission in consideration of the expected types of activities, number of participants, spectators, accessory uses and occupants per vehicle
30.
Medical clinics including outpatient care centers, emergency care, 24 hour medical stations, etc.
2
Per each exam or outpatient procedure/operating room, plus
1
Per each laboratory or recovery room, plus
1
Per each two (2) rooms for employee parking
D. Industrial Parking Requirements.
1.
Industrial or Manufacturing Establishments, Research Establishments
1
Per each 1-1/2 employees computed on the basis of the greatest number of persons employed at any one time, or
Per each 800 sq ft of UFA (whichever is greater)
2.
Warehouses and Storage Buildings
1
Per each two (2) employees computed on the basis of the greatest number of persons employed at any one time, or
1
Per each 2,000 sq ft of GFA (whichever is greater)
3.
Contractors Office
1
1
1
Per each employee, plus
Per vehicle stored on-site, or
Per 300 sp ft of GFA
Charter Township of Oxford 8-16 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
4.
Auto Wrecking and Junk Yards
1
1
1
Per each employee, plus
Per each operating vehicles stored on-site, plus
Per each acre of land in the yard
8.7 Off-Street Parking Lot Construction and Operation. The construction of any parking lot shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance and such construction shall be completed and approved by the Zoning Administrator and the Township Engineer prior to use of the property as a parking lot and before a Certificate of Occupancy is issued. Plans for the development of any parking lot must be prepared, submitted, reviewed and approved in accordance with the standards of Article 12, Site Plan Review.
A. Paving and Drainage. All such parking lots, driveways, or loading areas required for uses other than single- or two-family residential shall be paved with either asphalt or concrete, shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of surface water which might accumulate within or upon such area, and shall be completely constructed prior to a Certificate of Occupancy being issued. No surface water from such parking lot area shall be permitted to drain onto adjoining private property or regulated wetlands without first flowing into a sedimentation management facility. Under certain conditions, the Planning Commission shall have the discretion of waiving certain hard surface paving requirements if the following conditions prevail:
1. Where driveways, loading, turn-around, or storage areas receive only limited use and are not used for employee parking, customer parking, or primary access.
2. Where gravel surfacing and potential problems arising from dust or scattered gravel will not impact neighboring properties.
3. Where hard surfacing will significantly increase storm water runoff and create a potential for flooding and/or soil erosion.
B. Illumination. All illumination associated with such parking lots shall be designed, installed and maintained in accordance with Section 10.2.
C. Setbacks, Landscaping, and Screening.
1. Parking shall not be permitted in the required front yard setback.
2. Parking shall not encroach upon perimeter greenbelts required pursuant to Section 7.3, unless such requirements have been modified by the Planning Commission.
Charter Township of Oxford 8-17 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3. Parking areas that adjoin a residential use or district shall be screened in accordance with Section 7.4(E), or provided with a masonry screen wall of no less than five (5) in height.
4. Parking areas shall be provided with internal landscaping in accordance with Section 7.4(F).
D. Dimensional Requirements. Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot, by means of limited and clearly defined drives, shall be provided for all vehicles. Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with the following minimum regulations.
Parking Pattern
Maneuvering Lane Width
Parking Space Width
Parking Space Length
One-Way
Two-Way
0o (parallel)
12 ft
20 ft
9 ft
20 ft
30o to 53o
12 ft
20 ft
9 ft
20 ft
54o to 74o
15 ft
24 ft
9 ft
20 ft
75o to 90o
15 ft
24 ft
10 in
20 ft
The Planning Commission, in their discretion, may allow the required parking space length to be reduced by up to two (2) feet where vehicles are able to overhang curbs or wheel blocks without impacting adjacent landscaped areas or reducing adjacent sidewalks to a width of less than five (5) feet.
E. Curbing shall be provided to prevent any vehicle from projecting over the lot or setback lines, provide separation between vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and to protect adjacent buildings and landscaped areas. At minimum, curbing shall be provided around the perimeter of the parking lot and around all internal islands.
F. Backing onto a public or private roadway from an off-street parking space shall be prohibited.
G. Truck Parking. Off-street parking facilities for trucks at restaurants, service stations, and similar establishments, shall be of sufficient size to adequately serve trucks and not interfere with other vehicles that use the same facilities. Such truck space shall not be less than ten (10) feet in width and fifty-five (55) feet in length.
H. Off-Street Stacking Space for Drive-Through Facilities. All businesses, which provide drive-through facilities for serving customers within their automobile, shall provide adequate off-street stacking space and lanes, which meets the following requirements:
Charter Township of Oxford 8-18 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
1. Each stacking space shall be computed on the basis of ten (10) feet in width and twenty (20) in length. Each stacking lane shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width.
2. Clear identification and delineation between the drive-through facility and parking lot shall be provided. Drive-through facilities shall be designated in a manner, which promotes pedestrian and vehicular safety.
3. For all drive-through facilities which have a single stacking lane, an escape lane shall be provided which allows other vehicles to pass those waiting to be serviced.
4. The number of stacking spaces per service lane shall be provided for according to the following table, however the Planning Commission may permit deviations from the requirements of this Section and may require more or allow fewer stacking spaces whenever it finds that such deviations are more likely to provide a sufficient number of stacking spaces to accommodate the specific characteristics of the use in question.
5. When a use is not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street stacking space for the most similar use shall apply.
Use
Minimum Stacking Spaces
Per Service Lane
Banks
4
Photo Service
4
Pharmacies
3
Dry-Cleaning
4
Quick Lube
4
Fast-Food Restaurants
6
Car Washes (Self Service)
Entry
3
Exit
1
Car Washes (Automatic)
Entry
6
Exit
2
6. Barrier-Free Parking Facilities. Barrier-free parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the Michigan Building Code and ICC-ANSI A117.1.
Charter Township of Oxford 8-19 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
8.8 Parking and Storage of Commercial and Recreational Vehicles.
A. Parking and Storage of Commercial Vehicles and Equipment.
1. Commercial vehicles and equipment shall include, but shall not be limited to, tractors (excluding lawn tractors), bulldozers, earth carriers, drag lines, cranes, back hoes, dump trucks, stake trucks, flatbed trucks, panel trucks, cube vans, wreckers, septic tank pumpers, semi-tractors, tanker trucks, well-drilling rigs, welding trucks, semi-trailers, buses, and any other type of commercial or construction equipment, as well as any other motor vehicles not customarily used for passenger transport and/or having a payload of three (3) tons or greater.
2. The open storage or outdoor parking of commercial vehicles or equipment in residentially zoned or used areas of the Township shall be prohibited, with the following exceptions:
a. The open storage and outdoor parking of panel trucks, cube vans and/or enclosed trailers is permitted provided that they have no more than two (2) axles (one steering, one drive), and do not exceed twenty-eight (28) feet in length. All such vehicles shall adhere to the standards set forth in Section 8.8(B)(2) for recreational vehicles.
b. For the purposes of this Section, motor vehicles customarily used for passenger transport (i.e. sedans, coupes, hatchbacks, station wagons, minivans, vans, pick-up trucks, sport utility vehicles, etc.) shall not be considered commercial vehicles, even when used for a commercial purpose.
c. The open storage or outdoor parking of commercial vehicles and/or equipment shall be allowed in any zoning district where such parking or storage is limited to vehicles or equipment engaged in the performance of a service on the adjacent or underlying property, for the period of time reasonably necessary to complete the service. Utility service vehicles, emergency service vehicles and vehicles engaged in agricultural activities are also exempt from these provisions.
B. Parking and Storage of Recreational Vehicles on Residentially Zoned or Used Property
1. Recreational vehicles shall include, but shall not be limited to, campers, motor homes, travel trailers, boats, jet skis and other personal watercraft, snowmobiles, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) and associated trailers.
Charter Township of Oxford 8-20 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
2. The outdoor parking or open storage of recreational vehicles shall be allowed on residentially zoned or used property, subject to the following provisions:
a. With the exception of any property located within an SF-3 or AG zoning district consisting of 10 or more acres, the property must have an existing residential dwelling.
b. Such parking shall be prohibited within any public road right-of-way or private road easement.
c. In no case shall a recreational vehicle be parked less than five (5) feet from the principal residential dwelling on a residential lot or parcel.
d. Recreational vehicles parked consistently on a residential lot or parcel for longer than fourteen (14) days shall comply with Section 8.8(B)(3), below.
3. The storage of recreational vehicles consistently for lengths exceeding fourteen (14) days shall be allowed on residentially zoned or used property, subject to the following provisions:
a. With the exception of any property located within an SF-3 or AG zoning district consisting of 10 or more acres, the property must have an existing residential dwelling.
b. The recreational vehicle(s) being stored shall be owned by the owner or lessee of the residential property.
c. Such storage shall be prohibited within the a required front yard setback as well as any public road right-of-way or private road easement.
d. In no case shall a recreational vehicle be stored less than five (5) feet from the principal residential dwelling on a residential lot or parcel.
e. Recreational vehicles parked or stored on a residential lot or parcel in a residential district shall not be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes, except that recreational vehicles parked or stored on property located within an SF-3 or AG zoning district consisting of 10 or more acres may be used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes for a period not to exceed 30 days annually.
Charter Township of Oxford 8-21 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
4. The repair, refurbishing or reconstruction of licensed and operable recreational vehicles on residential property shall be subject to the following:
a. The property must have an existing residential dwelling.
b. Recreational vehicles being worked on shall be on an improved driveway surface.
c. Procedures exceeding forty-eight (48) hours in duration or which require the vehicle to be inoperable in excess of forty-eight (48) hours shall be conducted within an enclosed building.
d. Inoperable and/or unlicensed vehicles and vehicle parts shall be stored inside an enclosed building.
8.9 Off-Street Loading Requirements. On the same premises with every building or part thereof, erected, and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods display, department store, wholesale, market, hotel, hospital, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, material or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading services in order to avoid undue interference with street or parking areas.
A. Such loading and unloading space, unless completely and adequately provided for within a building, shall be an area ten (10) feet by fifty (50) feet, with fourteen (14) foot height clearance, and shall be provided according to the following schedule.
Gross Floor Area (sq. ft.)
Loading & Unloading Spaces Required
in Terms of Square Footage of Gross Floor Area
0 - 2,000
None
2,000 - 20,000
One (1) space
20,000 - 100,000
One (1) space plus one (1) space for each 20,000 sq ft in excess of 20,000 sq ft
100,000 - 500,000
Five (5) spaces plus one (1) space for each 40,000 sq ft in excess of 100,000 sq ft
over 500,000
Fifteen (15) spaces plus one (1) space for each 80,000 sq ft in excess of 500,000 sq ft
B. Double Count. Off-street loading space areas shall not be construed as, or counted toward, the supply of required as off-street parking space area.
C. Backing into a site from a public or private road right-of-way shall be prohibited.
Charter Township of Oxford 8-22 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
8.10 Safety Paths. All developers of property subject to the requirements of the Township’s Safety Path and Sidewalk Regulations Ordinance No. 117, shall comply with all provisions of said Ordinance. In accordance with Ordinance No. 117, and at the request of the applicant, the Planning Commission may include a recommendation to the Township Board denoting an amount of money to be paid by the developer to the Township in lieu of constructing the safety path(s). The amount of money included within the recommendation shall be informed by a report from the Township Engineer.
Charter Township of Oxford 8-23 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
[This Page Intentionally Left Blank]
Charter Township of Oxford 9-1 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ARTICLE 9
SIGNAGE
9.1 Contents. For ease of use, the sub-sections of this chapter are outlined below:
9.1 Contents
9.2 Purpose
9.3 Definitions
9.4 Signs Prohibited in All Districts
9.5 Signs Allowed without a Permit
9.6 Schedule of Sign Regulations
9.7 Signs in Residential Districts
9.8 Signs in Non-Residential Districts
9.9 Billboards
9.10 Temporary Signs
9.11 Sign Design Standards
9.12 Sign Permit Review Process
9.13 Inspection and Maintenance
9.14 Non-Conforming Signs
9.15 Removal of Prohibited Signs in Public Places
9.16 Removal of Unauthorized Signs in Public Rights-of-Way
9.17 Appeals
9.2 Purpose. The purposes of this section shall be to preserve the residential character and rural atmosphere of the community; to prevent the marring of the appearance of the Township by an excessive number of signs; to provide for the safety of drivers and pedestrians by controlling distractions and impairments to visibility; to render the area attractive to travelers; to protect residents from annoyances; and to protect the public health, safety, welfare, and property values by: establishing standards for the design, size and location of signs; establishing permit review and approval procedures for signs; regulating the construction and maintenance of signs; and providing for the removal of any unauthorized signs placed within road rights-of-way or on public property. All signs within the Township shall conform to the provisions of this section, and shall not, by reason of their size, location, construction, or manner of display, endanger life and limb, confuse or mislead traffic, obstruct vision necessary for vehicular and pedestrian traffic safety, or otherwise endanger public welfare.
9.3 Definitions. The following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meaning given in Section 2.2 of this Ordinance, unless the context other otherwise requires:
Charter Township of Oxford 9-2 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Animated Sign
Awning Sign
Balloon Sign
Banner Sign
Billboard
Business Sign
Canopy Sign
Changeable Copy Sign
Commercial Message
Construction Sign
Development Entranceway Sign
Flag
Flashing Sign
Freestanding or Ground Sign
Illuminated Sign
Incidental Sign
Integral Sign
Marquee
Marquee Sign
Monolith Sign
Neon Sign
Non-Conforming Sign
Obsolete Sign
Off-Premises Sign
Pennant Sign
Political Sign
Portable Sign
Principal Building
Projecting Sign
Real Estate Sign
Roof Sign
Sandwich Sign
Sign
Street Furniture Sign
Street Frontage
Suspended Sign
Temporary Sign
Wall Sign
Window Sign
9.4 Signs Prohibited in All Districts. Unless otherwise permitted by this Ordinance, by variance or by legal non-conforming status as provided in this Ordinance, the following signs shall not be permitted:
A. Signs which imitate, or may be confused with or construed as, an official traffic sign, signal or device, or which contain the words “stop,” “go,” “yield,” “slow,” “caution,” “danger,” “warning,” or similar words.
B. Signs which are located or placed on any property or building or illuminated in a manner that interferes with motorists’ proper visibility of pedestrians, traffic or traffic signs, signals or devices.
C. Signs that are located in, project into, or overhang any public right-of-way or dedicated public easement, except as allowed by the Township, County, State or Federal government.
D. Any sign or sign structure which, in terms of applicable building or electrical codes, is structurally or electrically unsafe, or which blocks a fire escape or a door, window or other opening that could be used for fire escape.
E. All portable or non-structural signs except those used for Township- or Village-sponsored events when posted three (3) days or less or as allowed under other sections of this Ordinance. For purposes of this Ordinance, a sign shall be considered non-structural if it has no permanently mounted,
Charter Township of Oxford 9-3 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
self-supporting structure or is not an integral part of a building to which it is accessory.
F. Any sign which has any visible moving parts, visible revolving parts, visible mechanical movement of any description, or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic, or mechanical means, including intermittent electrical pulsations, or by action of normal wind current, except for flags and time, temperature and stock market signs as provided in this Ordinance, but including animated signs.
G. Exterior banners, pennants, strings of flags, spinners and streamers. Temporary banners for Oxford Township or Oxford Village-sponsored events are exempt from this requirement when posted forty-five (45) days or less.
H. String of lights used for commercial purposes, other than seasonal or holiday decorations.
I. Flashing signs with moving or blinking lights, or signs with exposed incandescent light bulbs.
J. A rotating search light or similar device which emits beams of light.
K. Signs which incorporate any open spark or flame unless specifically approved by the Building Department.
L. Roof signs or any sign which projects more than one foot above the roof line.
M. Pylon or pole-mounted signs. In instances where the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission or Zoning Official, as applicable, that visibility would be seriously impacted by a ground or monument sign, a pylon sign may be permitted. Visibility is related only to ingress/egress of pedestrians and vehicles - not visibility of buildings or advertisements
N. Backlit awnings, especially those made of translucent fabric or material.
O. Any sign greater than six (6) square feet displayed on an automobile, truck, or other motorized vehicle, parked in view of a public road right-of-way or private road easement for greater than three (3) consecutive days.
P. Street furniture signs with the exception of signage on table umbrellas used for outdoor cafe-style dining.
Q. Signs which are attached to utility poles, trees, fences, rocks or in an unauthorized manner to walls or other signs.
Charter Township of Oxford 9-4 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
R. Signs on public or private towers. Any type of signage including logos shall not be permitted on a public or private radio, television, cellular phone, or water towers with the exception of the name of the municipality.
S. Off-premises signs, except as provided for billboards under Section 9.9, temporary signs advertising a house for sale, lease, or rent under Section 9.10(l), and way-finding signs under Section 9.5(X).
T. Obsolete signs which advertise an activity, business product, or service no longer produced or conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located. Where the owner or lessor of the premises is seeking a new tenant, such signs may remain in place for not more than ninety (90) days from the date of vacancy.
U. Signs erected on either public or private property without the consent of the owner or occupant thereof.
V. Any sign unlawfully installed, erected, or maintained.
W. Signs advertising activities which are illegal under federal, state or Township laws or regulations.
9.5 Signs Allowed without a Permit. The following signs are allowed to be erected or maintained without a permit, provided they comply with the following regulations and all applicable ordinances, laws, and regulations, including the construction standards of this section.
A. Address Signs. A sign having an area of not more than two (2) square feet, to convey only the street number and address.
B. Business Affiliation Signs. Signs not exceeding a total of two (2) square feet per business indicating acceptance of credit cards or describing business affiliations and are attached to a permitted sign, exterior wall, building entrance or window.
C. Directional Signs. Signs located immediately adjacent to each exit, entrance or change in direction of vehicular or pedestrian travel that are installed to provide for the safe flow of persons and/or vehicles.
D. Flags. Insignia of any nation, state, government, community organization, corporation, college or university, respectfully displayed, provided that no more than five (5) flags representing the same entity exist on a property, and further that no flag be located in or fly over a public right-of-way.
E. Garage Sale Signs. Signs for garage sales, yard sales, basement sales, rummage sales, moving sales, estate sales or other similar sales, when conducted at a residence: may be erected on private property only; are limited to two (2) signs per sale location; may not exceed six (6) square feet
Charter Township of Oxford 9-5 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
or four (4) feet in height per sign; may not be erected for more than six (6) days in any calendar year per sale location; and may not occupy a public right-of-way.
F. Gas Station Pump Island Signs. Signs located immediately adjacent to gas pumps which provide identification to "self-serve" and "full-serve" operations, provided that there are no more than two (2) such signs per pump island and that such signs do not exceed four (4) square feet in area.
G. Historical Marker. Plaques or signs describing state or national designation as an historic site or structure and/or containing narrative, not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area.
H. Incidental Signs. Signs bearing non-commercial messages that have a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which they are located, such as those designating the location of public telephones, restrooms, restrictions on smoking and restrictions on building entrances, provided that no such signs exceed two (2) square feet in area.
I. Integral Signs. Signs that display the name of the building, date of erection, or take the form of a monumental citation or commemorative tablet, when carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other noncombustible material and made an integral part of the structure and not exceeding six (6) square feet in area.
J. Menu Board. Subject to Planning Commission approval, note to exceed one (1) sign per lane, each sign no greater than twenty-four (24) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height which display menu items and contain a communication system for placing food orders at an approved drive through restaurant, provided such sign(s) is not in the front yard.
K. Miscellaneous Signs. On vending machines, gas pumps, and ice containers indicating the contents or announcing on-premise sales, provided that the sign on each device does not exceed two (2) square feet in area.
L. Model Signs. Temporary signs directing the public to a model home or unit, which do not exceed six (6) square feet in area.
M. Open House Signs. Portable real estate "open house" signs with an area not greater than six (6) square feet and a maximum height of five (5) feet, provided only one such sign may be located on the premises being sold. Such signs may not be erected for more than eight (8) consecutive days and may not occupy a public right-of-way.
N. Owner/Tenant Signs. Address or occupant name and other signs of up to two (2) square feet in area mounted on the wall of a commercial building.
Charter Township of Oxford 9-6 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
O. Parking Lot Signs. Signs indicating restrictions on parking, when placed within a permitted parking lot, which do not exceed six (6) feet in height and four (4) square feet in area.
P. Political Signs. Signs for the purposes of general expression (limited to one per residence) and temporary political signs advocating or opposing candidates for public office or a position on an issue to be decided at an election. Such signs shall not exceed ten (10) square feet in area and four (4) feet in height. Temporary political signs shall be removed within 10 days after the election.
Q. Public Notice Signs. Temporary signs announcing any public, charitable, educational, religious or other noncommercial event or function, limited to one (1) sign located entirely upon the property on which such event or function is held, set back no less than fifteen (15) feet from the property line, and having a maximum sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet. If building-mounted, such signs shall be flat wall signs and shall not project above the roof line. If free-standing, the height of any such sign shall be no more than six (6) feet above normal grade. Such signs shall be allowed no more than thirty (30) days prior to the event or function and must be removed within seven (7) days after the event or function. Such signs may be illuminated in accordance with the restrictions set forth in Section 9.10 hereof.
R. Public Signs. Signs posted by duly constituted public authorities in the performance of their public duties.
S. Real Estate Signs. Portable real estate signs of six (6) square feet or less and a maximum height of five (5) feet, limited to one (1) per road frontage, and advertising the sale, lease or rental of the premises on which erected. Such signs may not occupy a public right-of-way.
T. Regulatory, Directional and Street Signs. Erected by a public agency in compliance with Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices Manual. Tourist Oriented Directional Signs, or “TODS,” shall be included under this provision. Regulatory, directional and street signs may be located within the road right-of-way.
U. Rental Office Directional Signs. Up to two (2) signs identifying or directing motorists to a rental or management office in a multiple family development, provided that such signs are a maximum of four (4) feet in height, are setback a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any property line or public right-of-way, and do not exceed three (3) square feet in area.
V. Vehicle Signage. Signs located on motor vehicles or trailers bearing current license plates which are traveling or lawfully parked upon public highways, or parked upon any premises where the sign is not visible from the street.
Charter Township of Oxford 9-7 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
W. Warning Signs. Signs such as no trespassing or warning of electrical currents or animals, provided that such signs do not exceed six (6) square feet.
X. Way-Finding Signs. Temporary, off-premise way-finding signs may be permitted that direct travelers to a public or quasi-public seasonal or special event. Temporary, off-premise way-finding signs are to be used for directional purposes only and shall be limited to four (4) per event; may be erected on private property only; may not exceed six (6) square feet or four (4) feet in height per sign; and may not be erected for more than twelve (12) days in any calendar year per event; and may not occupy a public right-of-way.
9.6 Schedule of Sign Regulations. The schedule provided below summarizes the quantity, maximum area, maximum height, and minimum setback from existing road rights-of-way permitted for signage requiring a permit under this Section. Detailed requirements for the signs listed below are provided under sub-sections 9.7 and 9.8. Wherever conflict exists between the following schedule and the standards of those sub-sections, those sub-sections shall prevail. Billboards are addressed separately under Section 9.9.
Sign
Number
Max. Area
Max. Height
Min.
Setback
Signs in Residential Districts (Section 9.7)
Agricultural Product Signs
1
16 s.f.
4 ft.
15 ft.
Farm or Estate Signs
1
9 s.f.
6 ft.
15 ft.
Home Occupation Signs
1
2 s.f.
4 ft.1
15 ft.
Non-Profit Organization Signs
1
32 s.f.
6 ft.
15 ft.
Residential Development Entranceway Signs
1/entrance
20 s.f.
6 ft.
15 ft.
Temporary Construction Signs
1/frontage
32 s.f.
6 ft.
15 ft.
Charter Township of Oxford 9-8 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Sign
Number
Max. Area
Max. Height
Min.
Setback
Signs in Non-Residential Districts (Section 9.8
Awning and Canopy Signs
N/A
25% of surface2
N/A
Per district
Free-Standing Signs
See Section 9.8(D)
Gasoline Price Signs
1
20 s.f.
6 ft.
Per district
Marquee Signs
1/frontage
1½ s.f. per foot of building frontage
Per district
Per district
Office or Industrial Development Entranceway Signs
1/entrance
36 s.f.
6 ft.
15 ft.
Temporary Construction Signs
1/frontage
32 s.f.
6 ft.
15 ft.
Time/Temperature/Stock Market Signs
1/frontage
N/A3
6 ft.1
15 ft.1
Wall Signs
See Section 9.8(J)
Window Signs
N/A
25% of window area
N/A
N/A
1 If sign is free-standing.
2 Such signs shall be counted in determining compliance with maximum permitted area of wall signage.
3 Such signs shall not be counted in determining compliance with wall or free-standing sign area requirements.
Charter Township of Oxford 9-9 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
9.7 Signs in Residential Districts. The following signs shall be allowed in the AG, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, R-1A, R-1, R-2, R-3, RM, and MHC zoning districts, subject to permit approval in accordance with Section 9.11 and the following standards. Such signs shall only pertain to permitted or special land uses, and shall be located upon the same property to which the sign relates, unless otherwise provided herein.
A. Agricultural Product Signs. In the AG, SF-1, SF-2, and SF-3 districts, one (1) sign advertising agricultural and/or horticultural products grown on the premises shall be permitted in conjunction with a temporary roadside stand. The sign shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area, four (4) feet in height nor be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to any property line. The sign shall be erected not more than two weeks prior to opening of sales and removed within on (1) week of the end of sales.
B. Farm or Estate Signs. Signs in the AG and SF-3 districts displaying the name of one permitted business, farm or estate, not to exceed nine (9) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height. One (1) such sign shall be permitted per farm or estate, in addition to the home occupation sign permitted under item C, below. Such a sign may be indirectly illuminated, provided that all lighting equipment for these signs shall be designed to illuminate the sign only and shall not interfere with driver visibility or cause glare on adjoining properties.
AWNING
AWNING SIGNSIGN
AWNING
AWNING SIGNSIGN
WALL SIGN
WALL SIGN
WINDOW
WINDOW SIGNSIGN
FREE
FREE--STANDING STANDING
SIGN
SIGN
FREE
FREE--STANDING STANDING
SIGN
SIGN
FREE
FREE--STANDING STANDING
SIGN
SIGN
Sign Types
Sign Types
Charter Township of Oxford 9-10 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
C. Home Occupation Signs. Either one (1) wall or one (1) freestanding sign per parcel containing a permitted home occupation, with a minimum setback from the street right-of-way of fifteen (15) feet, and not exceeding two (2) square feet in area and four (4) feet in height. Such signs may not be illuminated, and must be consistent with the residential character of the neighborhood in which they are to be located.
D. Non-Profit Organization Signs. Permanent, free-standing signs identifying churches, schools, museums, libraries or other non-profit institutions, at a rate of one (1) sign per parcel, with a minimum setback from the street right-of-way of fifteen (15) feet, which does not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height.
E. Residential Development Entranceway Signs. Permanent freestanding signs or signs affixed to decorative walls or fences identifying the entrances of residential developments such as subdivisions, apartment complexes, condominium communities, senior housing complexes, mobile home parks and similar uses, are permitted at at a rate of one (1) per entranceway, not to exceed a total of two (2), with a minimum setback from the street right-of-way of fifteen (15) feet, and not exceeding twenty (20) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height. Residential entranceway signs may be located within the median of a boulevard entrance to a residential development; such signs shall be set back from the intersection road right-of-way line by not less than ten (10) feet and shall comply with the intersection visibility provisions of Section 8.2.
Where such sign is placed upon a decorative wall or fence, the area of the sign shall be computed by measuring the area of the envelope required to enclose the lettering, graphics and border, if any, not the entire decorative wall or fence. Such decorative walls and fences shall conform to the provisions of Section 7.10.
F. Temporary Construction Signs. Temporary signs which advertise the construction of new residential subdivisions or similar permitted development, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height. Such signs shall be removed immediately after the last available lot, home-site or parcel is sold.
9.8 Signs in Non-Residential Districts. The following signs shall be allowed in the O, C-1, C-2, I-1, I-2 and RO zoning districts, subject to permit approval in accordance with Section 9.11 and the following standards. Such signs shall only pertain to permitted or special land uses, and shall be located upon the same property to which the sign relates, unless otherwise provided herein.
A. Signs for Residential District Uses in a Nonresidential District. Signs for non-conforming residential district uses in a nonresidential district shall be governed by the sign regulations for residential district uses.
Charter Township of Oxford 9-11 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
B. Signs for Non-conforming Non-Residential Uses. Signs for non-conforming nonresidential uses in an office, commercial or industrial district (for example, a non-conforming commercial use in an industrial district) shall be governed by the sign regulations which are appropriate for the type of use, as specified in this Section.
C. Awning and Canopy Signs. Permanent signs on awnings and canopies shall be permitted, subject to the following standards:
1. Coverage. The total area of the lettering and logo shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total area of the awning or canopy that is visible from the street.
2. Compliance with Size Requirements for Wall Signs. The area of signs on awnings or canopies shall be counted in determining compliance with the standards for total area of wall signs permitted on the parcel.
3. Projection. Limitations imposed by this Ordinance concerning projection of signs from the face of a wall or building shall not apply to awning and canopy signs, provided that such signs shall comply with the setback requirements for the district in which they are located.
D. Free-Standing Signs. Freestanding signs shall be permitted, subject to the following regulations:
1. Number. One (1) permanent freestanding sign shall be permitted per street or highway frontage on each parcel. In multi-tenant buildings or shopping centers the sign area may be used to identify the name of the shopping center or multi-tenant building.
2. Maximum Height and Area Requirements. Maximum height and area requirements for free-standing signs shall be applied within each non-residential zoning district according to the standards set forth below:
Maximum Height and Area Requirements for Free-Standing Signs
Maximum Area (Square Feet)
District
Maximum Height (feet)
Per Side
Total
C-1 Local Commercial
6
32
64
C-2 General Commercial
6
50
100
O Office
6
50
100
RO Research-Office
6
60
120
I-1 Light Industrial
6
50
100
I-2 General Industrial
6
60
120
Charter Township of Oxford 9-12 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3. Setback from the Right-of-Way. Freestanding signs may be located in the required front yard, provided that no portion of any such sign shall be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to the existing right-of-way line. If a parcel is served by a private road or service road, no portion of a freestanding sign shall be closer than fifteen (15) feet to the edge of the road or private road easement/right-of-way.
4. Setback from Residential Districts. Freestanding signs shall be located no closer than fifty (50) feet to any residential district.
E. Gasoline Price Signs. Gasoline price signs shall be permitted, subject to the following standards:
1. Number. One (1) gasoline price sign shall be permitted for each gas station.
2. Size. Gasoline price signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area. Gasoline price signs shall not be counted in determining compliance with the standards for total area of wall or freestanding signs permitted on the parcel.
3. Height. The height of a gasoline price sign shall not exceed six (6) feet.
4. Setback. Gasoline price signs shall comply with the setback and height requirements specified for freestanding signs in the district in which the signs are located.
F. Marquee Signs. Marquee signs shall be permitted for theaters located in commercial districts, subject to the following requirements:
1. Number. One (1) marquee shall be permitted per street frontage.
2. Size. The total size of a marquee sign shall not exceed one and one-half (1 1/2) square feet per lineal foot of building frontage.
3. Compliance with Size Requirements for Wall Signs. The area of permanent lettering on a marquee sign shall be counted in determining compliance with the standards for total area of wall signs permitted on the parcel.
4. Construction. Marquee signs shall consist of hard incombustible materials. The written message to be affixed flat to the vertical face of the marquee.
5. Vertical Clearance. A minimum vertical clearance of ten (10) feet shall be provided beneath any marquee.
Charter Township of Oxford 9-13 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
6. Projection. Limitations imposed by this Ordinance concerning projection of signs from the face of a wall or building shall not apply to marquee signs, provided that marquee signs shall comply with the setback requirements for principal buildings for the district in which they are located.
G. Office or Industrial Development Entranceway Signs. Permanent freestanding signs or signs affixed to decorative walls or fences identifying the entrances of office, research or industrial developments, condominiums, or subdivisions composed of multiple businesses on individual lots or units and served by its own public or private road. Such signs shall be provided at a rate of one (1) per entranceway, not to exceed a total of two (2), with a minimum setback from the street right-of-way of fifteen (15) feet, and not exceeding sixty (60) square feet in area per side and six (6) feet in height. Development entranceway signs may be located within the median of a boulevard entrance to an office or industrial development; such signs shall be set back from the intersecting road right-of-way line by not less than ten (10) feet and shall comply with the intersection visibility provisions of Section 8.2
Where such a sign is placed upon a decorative wall or fence, the area of the sign shall be computed by measuring the area of the envelope required to enclose the lettering, graphics and border, if any, not the entire decorative
Total Sign Are
Total Sign Areaa
Not to exceed 1½
Not to exceed 1½ square feet per lineal square feet per lineal foot of building frontagefoot of building frontage
LOCAL CINEMA
LOCAL CINEMA
Permanent Lettering
Permanent Lettering
Counted
Counted towardtoward Wall Sign Wall Sign Area RequirementsArea Requirements
Changeable Copy
Changeable Copy
Ten feet of
Ten feet of clearance re-clearance re-quired be-quired be-neath mar-neath mar-queequee
Marquee Signs
Marquee Signs
Charter Township of Oxford 9-14 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
wall or fence. Such decorative walls and fences shall be governed as provided under Article 7.
H. Temporary Construction Signs. Temporary signs which advertise the construction of new non-residential development, not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height. Such signs shall be removed immediately after the last available lot, unit or parcel is sold or leased.
I. Time/Temperature/Stock Market Signs. Time, temperature, and stock market signs shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions:
1. Frequency of Message Change. The message change shall not be more frequent than once every ten (10) seconds.
2. Size. The area of these types of signs shall not be included within the maximum sign area permitted on the site.
3. Number. One (1) such sign shall be permitted per street frontage.
J. Wall Signs. Wall signs shall be permitted, subject to the following standards:
1. Number. One (1) permanent wall sign shall be permitted per building on each parcel. In the case of a multi-tenant building or shopping center, one (1) wall sign shall be permitted for each tenant having an individual means of public access. Tenants who occupy a corner space in a multi-tenant structure shall be permitted to have one (1) sign on each side of the building. Where several tenants use a common entrance in a multi-tenant structure, only one (1) wall sign shall be permitted, but the total sign area should be allocated on an equal basis to all tenants.
2. Size. The total area of a wall sign shall be determined by the maximum area requirements set forth in the table below for each zoning district with the exception of buildings which are setback more than one hundred fifty (150) feet back from the road right-of-way, in which case may be allowed to have a maximum square footage not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet.
Charter Township of Oxford 9-15 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Maximum Area Requirements for Wall Signs
District
Area in Square Feet per One (1) Foot of Frontage
Total Maximum Area in Square Feet
C-1 Local Commercial
1
100
C-2 General Commercial
2
150
O Office
1
100
RO Research-Office
2
150
I-1 Light Industrial
2
200
I-2 General Industrial
2
200
3. Location. One wall sign may be located on each side of a building that faces a street or highway.
4. Vertical Dimensions. The maximum vertical dimension of any wall sign shall not exceed one fourth (1/4) of the building height.
5. Horizontal Dimensions. The maximum horizontal dimension of any wall-mounted sign shall not exceed one-half (1/2) of the width of the building.
6. Height. The top of a wall sign shall not be higher than whichever is lowest:
a. The maximum building height specified for the district in which the sign is located.
b. The top of the sills at the first level on windows above the first story.
c. The height of the building facing the street on which the sign is located.
7. In addition to the wall signage described above, one (1) wall sign measuring no greater than fifteen (15) feet in area shall be permitted at the rear of buildings which have a parking lot or alley located there. In the case of a multi-tenant building or shopping center, one (1) wall sign shall be permitted for each tenant having an individual means of public access facing the rear of the building.
K. Electronic Message Signs. Electronic Message Signs (LED), including fiber-optic signs, shall be permitted only within non-residential zoning districts, as either a freestanding or wall-mounted sign or window sign. Such signs shall be allowed subject to the sign regulations for each district and subject to the following additional regulations:
1. The electronic display shall not be animated, flashing, or scrolling.
Charter Township of Oxford 9-16 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
2. The frequency of the message change shall be restricted to no more than once very thirty (3) seconds.
3. The maximum area of an electronic message board sign shall be considered part of a wall or freestanding sign and shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total sign area.
4. The maximum height of an electronic message board shall conform to the height regulations for signs allowed in each zoning district.
5. The electronic message sign may not display light of such intensity or brilliance to cause glare, impair the vision of an ordinary driver, or constitute a nuisance. Each electronic message sign must be automatically dimmed as determined by a light level detector on the electronic message sign. The automatic dimming system cannot exceed a level of illumination of five-hundredths (0.05) of a foot-candle (0.538 lux), and a luminaire brightness of sixteen hundred (1,600) foot-lamberts (lumens of light output per square foot) when measured form the nearest property line. For properties located adjacent to residentially zoned or used land, the following additional standard must be met:
a. All Electronic Message Signs are required to shut off between the hours of 10 PM or the closing time of normal business hours, whichever is later, and 7 AM or the opening of business hours, whichever is earlier.
6. Prior to the issuance of a sign permit, the applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory-programmed not to exceed the above listed light levels, and that the intensity level is protected from end-users manipulation by password-protected software.
L. Window Signs. Temporary and permanent window signs shall be permitted on the inside in commercial and office districts provided that the total combined area of such signs (including incidental signs) shall not exceed one-quarter (1/4) or twenty-five (25) percent of the total window area. Temporary window signs shall not be displayed longer than fourteen (14) days.
M. Projecting Signs. Individual projecting signs may be permitted subject to the following:
1. Projecting signs shall be affixed to and mounted perpendicular to the building façade.
Charter Township of Oxford 9-17 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
2. The signboard shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet per side. If a wall sign is already installed on the structure, the total maximum area of all signage cannot exceed sixty (60) square feet.
3. The distance from the ground to the lower edge of the signboard shall be nine (9) feet minimum.
4. The distance from the building wall to the signboard shall not exceed six (6) inches.
5. The width of the signboard shall not exceed six (6) feet.
6. Fastening and anchorage of the sign to the building must meet applicable Building Code regulations.
9.9 Billboards. In addition to the stated purposes and intent of this Ordinance; the following regulations are intended to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by regulating the location, size, height, spacing and other aspects of billboards. These regulations are necessary because billboards can reduce traffic safety by diverting the attention of motorists from the road, and because billboards are often incompatible with other signs and land uses in surrounding areas and result in aesthetic deterioration. Where permitted, billboards shall subject to the following restrictions as well as regulations established by the Michigan Highway Advertising Act. P.A. 106 of 1972 as amended.
A. Location. Billboards shall only be permitted in I-1 and I-2 districts which are located on a road which is a primary highway within the meaning of MCL 252.302(f).
B. Number. Not more than three billboards may be located per linear mile of primary highway. The linear mile measurement shall not be limited to the boundaries of the Charter Township of Oxford where the particular highway extends beyond such boundaries. No billboard shall be erected when there already exists in the Township seven (7) or more billboard sign faces which are subject to the permit requirements of this section.
C. Distance between Billboards. No billboard shall be located within 1,000 feet of another off-premise sign abutting either side of the same street or highway or to an adjoining residential zoning district.
D. Area. The surface display area of any side of an off-premise sign may not exceed three hundred (300) square feet. In the case of off-premises sign structures with tandem or stacked sign faces, the combined surface display area of all faces on any side may not exceed three hundred (300) square feet.
E. Height. The height of an off-premise sign shall not exceed twelve (12) feet above: (1) the grade of the ground on which the sign sits or (2) the grade of the abutting roadway, whichever is higher.
Charter Township of Oxford 9-18 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
F. Setback. No off-premise sign shall be located closer than two hundred (200) feet to a public right-of-way, closer than ten (10) feet to any interior boundary lines of the premises on which the sign is located, nor closer than five hundred (500) feet to any playground, school, residential dwelling, church or park.
G. Illumination. All lighting equipment for billboards shall be designed to illuminate the sign only and shall not interfere with the driver visibility or cause glare on adjoining residential properties. All billboards must be illuminated from a light source exterior to the sign itself.
H. Construction. A billboard shall be self-supported and pole mounted.
9.10 Temporary Signs. Temporary signs shall conform to the following requirements:
A. A temporary sign shall have a maximum height of four (4) feet in residential areas, and six (6) feet in commercial areas, from the natural grade at the base of the sign.
B. Temporary signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in residential areas, and sixteen (16) square feet in commercial areas, with a maximum of two (2) sides per sign, except banners which shall have a maximum area of twenty-five (25) square feet per side.
C. Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, temporary signs shall remain in place no longer than a period of sixty (60) days within a calendar year.
D. The permission of the property owner or their designee shall be required prior to the erection of a temporary sign on any parcel. This includes the placing of a temporary sign on vacant property.
E. Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, a temporary sign shall only be allowed to be placed on publicly-owned property, including road rights-of-way, when placed there by and for the benefit of the respective public agency or with the written permission of the public agency.
F. An organization or business that holds a number of events throughout the calendar year, which term “events” shall not be interpreted to mean a “sale”, may apply for an annual temporary sign permit in accordance with the following provisions:
1. Such organization shall provide a list of each event and the date(s) of such event not later than fourteen (14) days prior to the event for which a temporary sign will be erected. Exceptions to the fourteen (14) day requirement may be granted by the Zoning Administrator or his or her designee for fundraising events for national or international disasters or emergencies.
Charter Township of Oxford 9-19 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
2. Provided such organization has been in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, it shall be allowed to apply for a renewal of its temporary sign permit on an annual basis by application to the Building Department in accordance with the requirements of this section.
G. Sandwich or A-frame signs are permitted, if they meet the criteria for temporary signs outlined herein.
H. “Help Wanted” signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in area and four (4) feet in height, which may be displayed on private property for a period of up to four (4) weeks at a time, and not more than four (4) times within each calendar year.
I. A maximum of four (4) off-site temporary signs advertising a house for sale, lease, or rent are allowed without a permit, provided that such signs are removed immediately after the house advertised has been sold, leased, or rented, and provided that such signs comply with the provisions of this Ordinance concerning placements and setbacks from road rights-of-way.
J. Customary holiday displays are exempt from the temporary sign regulations contained in this section.
K. Temporary signs placed upon property in the Township in violation of this Ordinance may be removed only by the Township Ordinance Enforcement Officer, the owner of the sign, or the owner of the property where a sign has been placed, or their designees. Any action taken by the Township under this paragraph shall be noticed to the property owner of record. A temporary sign that has been removed by the Township will be kept for five (5) days, at which time the sign may be destroyed or disposed of by the Township.
9.11 Sign Design Standards.
A. Construction Standards.
1. General Requirements. All signs shall be designed and constructed in a safe and stable manner in accordance with the Township's adopted building code and electrical code. All electrical wiring associated with a freestanding sign shall be installed underground.
2. Architectural Compatibility. Signs shall be designed and constructed to be consistent with the architectural design of the building they identify, as determined by the Zoning Official or Planning Commission in consideration of the following criteria:
a. Consistency of proposed construction materials to those of the identified building;
Charter Township of Oxford 9-20 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
b. Consistency of proposed color scheme to that of the identified building;
c. Incorporation of architectural details or other embellishment found on the identified building.
3. Building Code. All signs shall be designed to comply with minimum wind pressure and other requirements set forth in the adopted Building Code.
4. Framework. All signs shall be designed so that the supporting framework, other than the supporting poles on a freestanding sign, is contained within or behind the face of the sign or within the building to which it is attached so as to be totally screened from view.
B. Illumination.
1. General Requirements. If illumination is proposed, signs shall be illuminated only by steady, stationary, shielded light sources directed solely at the sign, or internal to it.
2. Non-Glare, Shielded Lighting. Use of glaring undiffused lights or bulbs shall be prohibited. Lights shall be shielded so as not to project onto adjoining properties or thoroughfares, and shall not exceed fifteen (15) foot-candles, measured perpendicular to the sign face, at a distance of four (4) feet.
3. Traffic Hazards. Sign illumination that could distract motorists or otherwise create a traffic hazard shall be prohibited.
4. Bare Bulb Illumination. Illumination by bare bulbs or flames is prohibited.
C. Location.
1. Within a Public Right-of-Way. No sign shall be located within, project into or overhang a public right-of-way, except as otherwise permitted herein.
2. Setback Requirements. All signs shall comply with the setback requirements for this district they are located in, except as otherwise permitted herein, and provided that no freestanding sign is located closer than fifteen (15) feet from any lot line.
3. Clear Vision Area for Motorists. No sign shall be established or maintained on any parcel that will cause a traffic hazard by obstructing the view of drivers. All signs shall be installed in accordance with the requirements for intersection visibility under
Charter Township of Oxford 9-21 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Section 8.2. Signage must also comply with the requirements of the Road Commission for Oakland County.
D. Height. No freestanding sign shall be greater than six (6) feet in height, unless otherwise provided in this Section.
E. Measurement.
1. Sign Area Measurement. Sign area shall be computed as follows:
a. General Requirements. Where a sign consists of a generally flat surface or sign face on which lettering and other information is affixed, the sign area shall be computed by measuring the entire face of the sign including any framing or borders, but not including the base, pedestal, or other supports upon which the sign may be mounted.
b. Individual Letters. Where a sign consists of individual letters and/or logo affixed directly to a wall or building, the area of the sign shall be computed by measuring the area of the envelope required to enclose the lettering and/or logo.
c. Free-Standing Signs. The area of a double-faced freestanding sign shall be computed using only one (1) face of the sign provided that: 1) the outline and dimensions of both faces are identical, and 2) the faces are back-to-back so that only one face is visible from any given direction. In the case of a multi-faced free-standing sign having more than two sides or those having two sides not back-to-back as described above, the area of the sign shall be computed using the total of all faces of the sign.
d. Cylindrical Sign. The area of a cylindrical ground sign shall be computed by multiplying the circumference of the cylinder by its height.
2. Height Measurement. The height of a sign shall be measured along a straight vertical line from the average grade beneath the sign to the highest point of the sign or supporting structure.
3. Setback and Distance Measurements. The following guidelines shall be used to determine compliance with setback and distance measurements:
a. The distance between two signs shall be measured along a straight horizontal line that represents the shortest distance between the two signs.
Charter Township of Oxford 9-22 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
b. The distance between a sign and a parking lot or building shall be measured along a straight horizontal line that represents the shortest distance between the outer edge of the parking lot or building.
c. The distance between a sign and a building or property line shall be measured along a straight horizontal line that represents the shortest distance between the sign and the building.
9.12 Sign Permit Review Process.
A. Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, relocate, or structurally change a sign or other advertising structure, unless specifically exempted under Section 9.5, without first obtaining a permit in accordance with the provisions set forth herein. A permit shall require payment of a fee, which shall be established by resolution of the Township Board.
B. Permit Application Contents. Application for a sign permit shall be made upon forms provided by the Zoning Official, or his or her designee. The following information shall be required:
1. Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, as well as that of the property owner, if the applicant is not the property owner.
2. A sketch plan indicating the following:
a. Current zoning classification;
b. Location of the building, structure, or lot on which the sign is to be attached or erected;
c. Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures, and property lines.
3. A scale drawing of each sign, indicating the size, shape, message, lettering style, color and materials of the finished sign. All required copies must also be in color.
4. Plans, specifications and method of construction and attachment to the building or the ground;
5. Building elevation sketches showing the position and size of each sign on the building and the location and size of any existing sign(s) on the same structure.
Charter Township of Oxford 9-23 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
6. Copies of stress sheets and calculations, if deemed necessary by the Building Official, or his or her designee, showing the structure as designed for dead load and wind pressure.
7. Information concerning required electrical connections.
8. If the sign will be illuminated, plans shall include all details regarding the location, type of fixture, and color of the illumination, as well as the method of shielding.
9. Written consent of the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is to be erected.
10. Other information deemed necessary by the Zoning Official (or designee) or Planning Commission, on a case by case basis, to establish compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
C. Review by Zoning Official. Upon receipt of a completed sign permit application, the Zoning Official (or designee) shall review the sign permit application, and take one of the following actions:
1. Approval. Upon finding that the proposed signage conforms to all applicable standards found in this section and elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance, they shall approve the sign permit application, with or without conditions, and issue the sign permit. Should the approval be conditional, said conditions shall be satisfied within the time set by the Zoning Official, or his or her designee, or the permit will be considered to be denied.
2. Postpone. Upon finding that the proposed signage does not conform to all applicable standards found in this section and elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance, but could if revised or supplemented, the Zoning Official, or his or her designee, may postpone action on the sign permit application, until a revised application is submitted. If the Zoning Official, or his or her designee, chooses to postpone action on the sign permit application, the deficiencies of the application shall be explained to the proprietor in writing.
3. Denial. Upon finding that the proposed signage does not conform to all applicable standards found in this section and elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Official, or his or her designee, may deny the sign permit application. Should the sign permit application be denied, the reason(s) for rejection of the application shall be explained to the proprietor in writing.
D. Review by Planning Commission Concurrent with Site Plan. Sign permit applications submitted in conjunction with proposed site improvements that require site plan review and approval may be reviewed by the Planning
Charter Township of Oxford 9-24 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Commission concurrent with site plan review. If approval of a proposed sign is desired by the applicant at the time of site plan review, the sign must be shown on the site plan, including all information required for a sign permit application listed above under item B. The applicant shall have the option of submitting sign permit applications to the Zoning Official, or his or her designee, separate from site plan review, as provided above under item C, above.
9.13 Inspection and Maintenance. In accordance with Article 16 of this Ordinance, the Zoning Official (or designee) shall be charged with the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Section.
A. Inspection of New Signs. All signs for which a permit has been issued shall be inspected by the Zoning Official, or his or her designee, when erected. Approval shall be granted only if the sign has been constructed in compliance with the approved plans and applicable Zoning Ordinance and Building Code standards. Failure to receive the Zoning Official’s approval for a completed sign shall constitute a determination that the sign is in violation of this Ordinance, in which case the owner and/or erector of such sign may be subject to legal action.
In cases where fastenings or anchorages are to be eventually bricked in or otherwise enclosed, the sign erector shall advise the Zoning Official, or his or her designee, when such fastenings are to be installed so that inspection may be completed before enclosure.
B. Sign Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in a condition similar to that which existed at the time of their erection. At minimum, all signs and all awnings with sign components shall be kept clean, free of missing or loose parts, free of blistering or peeling paint, and without missing or obsolete sign panels.
C. Inspection of Existing Signs. The Zoning Official, or his or her designee, shall have the authority to routinely enter onto property to inspect existing signs, in accordance with Article 16. In conducting such inspections, the Zoning Official, or his or her designee, may determine whether the sign is maintained in accordance with item B, above, and that it is adequately supported, painted to prevent corrosion, and so secured to the building or other support as to safely bear the weight of the sign and pressure created by the wind.
D. Correction of Defects. If a sign falls out of compliance with the provisions of this Section, it shall be the responsibility of the sign owner to bring the sign back into compliance or remove the sign entirely.
9.14 Non-Conforming Signs. No non-conforming signs shall be altered or reconstructed, unless the alteration or reconstruction is in compliance with this
Charter Township of Oxford 9-25 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ordinance, except that non-conforming signs shall comply with the following regulations:
A. Repairs and Maintenance. Normal maintenance shall be permitted, provided that any non-conforming sign that is destroyed by any means to an extent greater than fifty (50) percent of the sign's pre-catastrophe fair market value, exclusive of the foundation, shall not be reconstructed. Normal maintenance shall include painting of chipped or faded signs; replacement of faded or damaged surface panels, name changes, repair or replacement of electrical wiring or electrical devices.
B. Change of Copy. A non-conforming sign may undergo a “change of copy” or the replacement of names, logos, symbols, numbers or other graphic items of information as long as the structural characteristics, including size, shape, and frame, are not modified.
C. Non-conforming Changeable Copy Signs. The message on a non-conforming changeable copy sign or non-conforming bulletin board sign may be changed provided that the change does not create any greater nonconformity.
D. Substitution. No non-conforming sign shall be replaced with another non-conforming sign.
E. Modifications to the Principal Building. Whenever the principal building on a site on which a non-conforming sign is located is modified to the extent that site plan review and approval is required, the non-conforming sign shall be removed. However, a change of use or occupant, when not accompanied by a change in the principal building, shall not necessitate the removal of non-conforming signs.
9.15 Removal of Prohibited Signs in Public Places. The Charter Township of Oxford Zoning Official, or his or her designee, shall have the authority to remove any sign determined to be in violation of the preceding section that is located upon public property. Notification of the sign owner shall not be required. Such signs shall be held at the Township offices for five (5) days upon removal. A ten dollar ($10.00) service fee shall be required prior to the release of any sign removed by the Township.
9.16 Removal of Unauthorized Signs from Public Rights-of-Way. In the interest of public health, and safety, the Charter Township of Oxford Zoning Official, or his or her designee, shall have the authority to immediately remove any unauthorized sign from all public rights-of-way without notification of the sign owner. Such signs shall be held at the Township offices for five (5) days upon removal. A ten dollar ($10.00) service fee shall be required prior to the release of any sign removed by the Township.
Charter Township of Oxford 9-26 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
9.17 Appeals. Any party who has been refused a sign permit for a proposed sign may file an appeal with the Zoning Board of Appeals, in accordance with Article 17 of this Ordinance.
Charter Township of Oxford 10-1 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ARTICLE 10
ENVIRONMENTAL PROVISIONS
10.1 Environmental Performance Regulations.
A. Purpose. Environmental performance regulations are established in order to preserve the short and long-term environmental health, safety, and quality of the Township. These regulations are established as minimum requirements to be maintained. Nothing contained herein is intended to restrict farming operations in accordance with the Michigan Right to Farm Act, PA 93 of 1981.
B. Smoke and Air Contaminants. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to permit the emission of any smoke or air contaminant from any source whatsoever to a density greater than that permitted by Federal Clean Air Standards and those standards promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality according to Act 348 of 1965, either of which act may be amended or superseded from time to time. There shall not be discharged from any source whatsoever such quantities of air contaminants or other material which would, individually, cause injury, detriment or nuisance to the public or which endanger comfort, repose, health, or safety of persons or which cause injury or damage to business or property.
C. Gases. The escape or emission of any gas that is injurious or destructive, harmful to person or property, or explosive shall be unlawful and shall be abated.
D. Odors. Any condition or operation which results in the creation of odors of such intensity and character as to be detrimental to the health and welfare of the public or which interferes unreasonably with the comfort of the public shall be removed, stopped, or so modified as to remove the odor. Certain agricultural operations may be regulated under the State of Michigan, Department of Agriculture's Generally Accepted Agricultural Management Practices (GAAMPS).
E. Dust, Dirt, and Fly Ash. No person, firm, or corporation shall operate any process, device, or equipment in a manner that causes dust, dirt, or fly ash to settle upon or otherwise interfere with the use of other properties.
F. Glare or Heat.
1. Glare from any process (such as or similar to arc welding or acetylene torch cutting) which emits harmful ultraviolet rays shall be
Charter Township of Oxford 10-2 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
performed in such a manner as not to be seen from any point beyond the property line, and as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines.
2. The design and/or screening of the development shall insure that glare from automobile and commercial or industrial vehicle headlights shall not be directed into any adjacent property, particularly residential property.
3. Any operation which produces intense glare or heat, shall be conducted within an enclosure so as to completely obscure and shield such operation from direct view form any point along the lot lines. If heat is a result of an industrial operation, it shall be so insulated as to not raise the temperature at any property line at any time.
4. Exterior doors shall be located, operated, and maintained so as to prevent any glare and light from creating a nuisance or safety hazard to operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and neighboring land uses.
5. Exterior lighting shall be installed, maintained and operated in accordance with the requirements of Section 10.2.
G. Radioactive Materials Radioactive materials and wastes, and including electro- magnetic radiation such as x-ray machine operation, shall not be emitted to exceed quantities established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of Standards, when measured at the property line.
H. Electrical Disturbance, Electromagnetic, or Radio Frequency Interference. No use shall:
1. Create any electrical disturbance that adversely affects any operation or equipment other than those of the creator of such disturbance.
2. Cause, create, or contribute to the interference with electronic signals (including television and radio broadcasting transmission) to the extent that the operation of any equipment not owned by the creator of such disturbance is adversely affected.
I. Fire and Explosive Hazards. Any activity involving the storage, handling or use of flammable or explosive materials shall comply with the Rules and Regulations of the State of Michigan.
Charter Township of Oxford 10-3 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
J. Noise.
1. No operation or activity shall cause or create noise that exceeds the sound levels prescribed below, using an A-weighted decibel scale dB(A), when measured at the lot line of any adjoining use, based upon the following maximum allowable levels for each use district:
Zoning of Adjoining Land Use
Maximum Allowable Noise Level
measured in dB (A)
7 am to 9 pm
9 pm to 7 am
R-1A, R-1, R-2, R-3, SF-1, SF-2, SF-3, MHP, RM, AG, R
60
50
O, C-1, C-2
70
60
I-1, I-2, RO
85
75
Noise level measurements for comparison with the above limits shall be made using A-Weighted fast response measurements, using the “Max-Hold” feature of a spectrum analyzer.
For the purposes of this sub-section J., the term “adjoining use” shall include properties directly across any private or public road from the use whose noise is being measured (in addition to those which actually abut the property line of the use).
2. Residential Lawn Care Exemption. Noise created by the reasonable use of equipment for the purposes of residential lawn care shall be exempt from the regulations of this sub-section J. concerning the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.; such noise shall be subject to the regulations of this sub-section J. concerning the hours of 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
K. Vibration. No operation or activity shall cause or create vibration that exceeds the vibration levels prescribed below when measured at the lot line or any adjoining use* based upon the following maximum allowable levels:
Charter Township of Oxford 10-4 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Daytime 7:00 a.m. – 10:00 p.m.
Frequency Range:
Vibration Metric:
Vibration Limit:
(Level Shall Not Exceed)
6 Hz. And below
Acceleration
8000 ? meters/sec2
Above 6 Hz.
Velocity
200 ? meters/sec
Nighttime 10:00 p.m. – 7:00 a.m.
Frequency Range:
Vibration Metric:
Vibration Limit:
(Level Shall Not Exceed)
6 Hz. And below
Acceleration
4000 ? meters/sec2
Above 6 Hz.
Velocity
100 ? meters/sec
*For the purposes of this subsection 10.1(K), the term “adjoining use” shall include properties directly across any private or public road from the use whose vibration is being measured (in addition to those which actually abut the property line of the use).
10.2 Exterior Lighting.
A. Purpose. This section provides standards for various forms of outdoor lighting so as to properly illuminate buildings and sites for safety and security without contributing to light pollution, intrusive artificial light or degradation of the natural nighttime visual environment.
B. Applicability. The standards in this Section shall apply to any light source that is visible from any property line, or beyond, for the site from which the light is emanating. Whenever a person is required to obtain a building permit, electrical permit for outdoor lighting or signage, a special land use permit, subdivision approval or site plan approval from the Township, the applicant shall submit sufficient information to assure the Zoning Administrator and/or Planning Commission that the proposed lighting can comply with this Section. Applicant shall bear responsibility for the actual performance of lighting in compliance with these requirements.
C. Definitions. The following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meaning given in Article 2 of this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires:
Charter Township of Oxford 10-5 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Canopy Structure Luminaire
Foot-candle Luminous Tube Lighting
Glare Photometric Grid or Study
Lamp Shielded Fixture
Light Fixture Spill Light
Light Pollution Useful Light
Light Trespass
D. Lighting Plan Submittal Requirements. The following information must be included on all site plan submissions:
1. Provide locations of all freestanding, building-mounted and canopy light fixtures on the site plan and/or building elevations. Include a legend that identifies the fixtures and their intended accessories by manufacturer and model numbers.
2. Provide a photometric grid overlaid on the proposed site plan indicating the light intensity throughout the site (in foot-candles). The Planning Commission is authorized to waive the requirement of a photometric grid when it is determined that such information is not necessary for site plan review.
3. Provide all manufacturers’ published specifications and cut sheets for the type of fixture being proposed including the total luminance output, type of lamp and voltage, method of shielding and all applicable accessories.
4. Any other information deemed necessary to determine the appropriateness of illumination by the Zoning Administrator and/or Planning Commission.
E. Lighting Standards. Unless exempted under this Section, all lighting must comply with the following standards:
1. Freestanding Pole Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be fully shielded and directed downward to prevent off-site glare. The intensity of light at the base of a light fixture shall not exceed twenty (20) foot-candles unless lights are recessed within an overhead roof or canopy structure.
a. Site Lighting. Properties adjacent to residential properties shall be designed and maintained such that illumination levels shall not exceed 0.3 foot-candles at or beyond property lines.
Charter Township of Oxford 10-6 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Lighting for uses adjacent to non-residential properties shall be designed and maintained such that illumination levels do not exceed 1.0 foot-candles at or beyond property lines.
b. Parking Lot Lighting. Parking lot illumination shall average no less than the following minimum levels over the entire area measured five (5) feet above the surface:
Parking Lot Size
Parking Lot Average Illumination
(in foot-candles, minimum)
Small (5-10 spaces)
0.4
Medium (11-99 spaces)
0.6
Large (100+ spaces)
0.9
c. Metal halide, incandescent, fluorescent or mercury vapor fixtures shall be used in an effort to maintain a unified lighting standard throughout the Township and reduce light pollution. Suitable applications for high pressure sodium and low-pressure sodium fixtures may be used but only with color corrected and shielded lenses.
d. The Planning Commission may approve decorative or historic light fixtures as an alternative to shielded fixtures when it can be proven that there will be no off-site glare and the proposed fixtures will be more consistent with the character of the site.
e. The maximum height of pole fixtures shall be twenty (20) feet, or the height of the building, whichever is less, measured from the ground level to the centerline of the light source. Fixtures should provide an overlapping pattern of light at a height of seven (7) feet above ground level. The Planning Commission may permit a maximum height of thirty (30) feet in a commercial or industrial district where fixtures are no closer than two hundred (200) feet to any residential property.
f. All outdoor lighting fixtures, existing or hereafter installed and maintained upon private property within commercial, industrial and office zoning districts shall be automatically turned off or reduced by no less than 50% in intensity between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, except where active use continues after 11:00 p.m., but only for so long as such use continues.
g. No exposed luminous tube lighting shall be used.
Charter Township of Oxford 10-7 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
2. Building-Mounted Lighting.
a. Building-Mounted lighting shall be fully shielded and directed downward to prevent off-site glare. The intensity of light shall not exceed twenty (20) foot-candles unless lights are recessed within an overhead roof or canopy structure. Light shall not exceed 0.3 foot-candles beyond new and existing residential property lines and 1.0 foot-candles beyond non-residential property lines.
b. Metal halide, incandescent, fluorescent or mercury vapor fixtures shall be used in an effort to maintain a unified lighting standard throughout the Township and prevent light pollution. Sodium vapor fixtures may be used but only with color corrected and/or shielded lenses.
c. Lighting fixtures mounted to the underside of gas station canopies or other such shelters shall be recessed into the canopy, such that the lens of the lighting fixture is flush with the underside of the canopy.
d. The Planning Commission may approve decorative or historic light fixtures as an alternative to shielded fixtures when it can be proven that there will be no off-site glare and the proposed fixtures will be more consistent with the character of the site.
e. Luminous tube and exposed bulb fluorescent lighting is prohibited as an architectural detail on all buildings, e.g. along the roof line and eaves, around windows, etc. The Planning Commission may approve internally illuminated architectural bands or external lighting directed on buildings where it can be shown that the treatment will serve a legitimate function and will not adversely impact neighboring properties or create glare offsite.
3. Sign/Canopy Lighting.
a. Sign lighting may be directed upward, downward or may be internal to the sign.
b. Downward and upward directed sign lighting shall illuminate the sign only, and light spill over shall not exceed 1.0 foot-candles along non-residential property lines, and 0.3 foot-candles along residential property lines.
Charter Township of Oxford 10-8 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
c. Upward sign lighting shall illuminate the sign only, and any point source or glare of light shall not be visible from adjacent properties, adjacent roadways or safety paths. Light shall not spill past the sign to the extent that it is visible from beyond the property.
d. All internal sign lighting shall illuminate the sign only. Internal lighting shall be evenly distributed over the sign so as not to cause glare. Internal light sources shall not be directly visible from any location. Projected sign illumination intensity shall not exceed one (1) footcandle as measured four (4) feet above the ground and ten (10) feet from the base of the sign.
e. All internally lit translucent or fabric awnings shall be prohibited within any zoning district, unless the Planning Commission determines that the following conditions are met:
i Internal light sources are not directly visible from the road rights-of-way.
ii Light levels comply with other ordinance provisions and are not offensive to the adjoining neighbors.
iii Any proposed signage on a translucent or fabric awning, whether illuminated or not, shall comply with Section 9.8(C).
F. Single-Family Residential Lighting Standards. All outdoor lighting in single-family residential zoning districts shall be shielded or directed in a manner which reduces glare and shall be so arranged as to prevent objectionable lighting from intruding upon any adjacent residential district or adjacent residence, but shall otherwise be exempt from the provisions of this Section.
G. Non Residential Uses in Residential Zoning Districts. For non-residential uses allowed in residential zoning districts such as churches, schools and municipal facilities, etc., all illumination shall be subject to Section 10.2.
H. Prohibited Lighting Types. The following lighting types are prohibited within Township:
1. The use of search lights or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertisement or entertainment.
2. Flashing, moving or intermittent type lighting.
Charter Township of Oxford 10-9 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3. Building or roof mounted lighting intended to attract attention to a building and/or use, which is not strictly designed for security purposes or architectural accent, or which projects light beyond the property.
4. Exterior exposed luminous tube lighting.
I. Exemptions. The following are exempt from the lighting requirements of this Section, except where, upon consideration of the extent, intensity and duration of glare or light trespass created, the Zoning Administrator determines that the regulation of such is necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
1. Swimming pools.
2. Holiday decorations.
3. Lighting of roadways and lights within the public road right-of-way.
10.3 Natural Feature Setback.
A. For any use requiring site plan approval, condominiums subdivision plan approval, plat approval, private or public road approval, or a Land Improvement Permit under Ordinance No. 108A as amended, there shall be maintained in all districts a natural features setback, as provided herein, unless and to the extent, it is determined to be in the public interest not to maintain such a setback. The intent of this provision is to require a minimum setback from wetlands and watercourses, and to regulate property within such setback in order to:
1. Prevent physical harm, impairment or destruction of or to such wetlands and watercourses. It has been determined that, in the absence of such a minimum setback, intrusions in or on to such areas would occur, resulting in harm, impairment or destruction of the same contrary to the public health, safety and general welfare.
2. Protect unique wildlife habitat and habitat transition, including, without limitation, feeding, nesting, resting and traveling areas for numerous animals.
3. Protect surface water run-off and water quality for pollution prevention purposes, and assist in beneficial water recharge for drinking, irrigation and other purposes.
4. Provide water storage area in storm events.
Charter Township of Oxford 10-10 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
5. Provide areas for recreational or other functional uses which are unique due to geographic relationship to natural feature.
6. Preserve aesthetic views and areas for the enjoyment of natural resources.
7. Preserve threatened and endangered species habitat, including upland species.
8. Reduce the need for on-site and off-site storm water storage capacity based upon the availability of a greater area of absorption and a smaller impervious area.
9. Stabilize and protect soil resources, including the prevention of erosion and prohibition of the loss due to moving water resulting in destruction of upland, structures and infrastructure on the upland, and prevention of the alteration of the course of moving waters.
This regulation is based on the police power, for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, including the authority granted in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (P.A. 110 of 2006).
B. For purposes of this regulation the terms "wetland" or "watercourse" shall be defined as set forth in Charter Township of Oxford Ordinance No. 80B. The setback required to be maintained by this regulation shall be twenty-five (25) feet from the boundary of a wetland, and twenty-five (25) feet from the ordinary highwater mark of a watercourse.
C. Within an established wetland or watercourse setback subject to this Section, unless and only to the extent determined to be in the public interest by the body undertaking plan review, there shall be no deposition of any material, removal of any soils, minerals and/or vegetation, dredging, filling or land balancing, or construction of any temporary or permanent structures.
D. In determining whether proposed activities are in the public interest, the benefit which would reasonably be expected to accrue from the proposal shall be balanced against the reasonably foreseeable detriments of the construction or other activity, taking into consideration the local, state, and national concern for the protection and preservation of the natural feature in question. If, as a result of such a balancing, there remains a debatable question whether the proposal is clearly in the public interest, authorization for the construction or other activity within the setback shall not be granted. The following general criteria shall be applied in undertaking this balancing test:
Charter Township of Oxford 10-11 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
1. The relative extent of the public and private need for the proposed activity.
2. The availability of feasible and prudent alternative locations and methods to accomplish the expected benefits from the activity.
3. The extent and permanence of the beneficial or detrimental effects which the proposed activity may have on the public and private use to which the area is suited, including the benefits the wetland or watercourse setback provides.
4. The probable impact of the proposed construction or other activity in relation to the cumulative effect created by other existing and anticipated activities in the wetland or watercourse to be protected.
5. The probable impact on recognized historic, cultural, scenic, ecological, or recreational values, and on fish, wildlife and the public health.
6. The size and quantity of the wetland or watercourse setback being considered.
7. The amount and quantity of the remaining wetland or watercourse setback.
8. Proximity of the proposed construction and/or operation in relation to the wetland or watercourse, taking into consideration the degree of slope, soil type and the nature of the wetland or watercourse to be protected.
9. Economic value, both public and private, of the proposed construction and/or operation, and economic value, both public and private, if the proposed construction and/or operation were not permitted.
10. The necessity for the proposed construction and/or operation.
E. If and to the extent the Township is prohibited by law or ordinance from regulating the proposed activity in or on the respective wetland or watercourse, regulation under this Section shall be exempted.
10.4 Open Dumping.
A. No garbage, sewage, filth, refuse, waste, trash, debris, or rubbish, including cans, bottles, waste paper, cartons, boxes, and crates, or other offensive or obnoxious matter shall be piled, placed, stored or dumped on any land
Charter Township of Oxford 10-12 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
within the township until the operator has obtained a solid waste permit from the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality and Township Board approval.
B. All uses in every zoning district shall place waste materials in an appropriate covered container and properly dispose of same at least once each month in accordance with all applicable laws and ordinances.
C. Nothing contained herein shall prevent the reasonable use of fertilizers, manures, and similar materials for the improvement of land utilized for agricultural purposes, provided that such is done in accordance with the Generally Accepted Agricultural Management Practices (GAAMPs), as set forth by the Michigan Department of Agriculture pursuant to the Right to Farm Act.
10.5 Outdoor Storage.
A. The outdoor storage of commercial vehicles, equipment, supplies, materials or similar items shall be permitted in industrial districts (I-1 and I-2) only when illustrated on a site plan approved by the Planning Commission pursuant to Article 12. Such outdoor storage shall be prohibited in all other districts, with the exception of commercial vehicles and equipment on residentially-zoned and used property as provided in Section 8.8(A).
B. Outdoor storage, as permitted under Section 10.5(A), shall be subject to the following standards:
1. Outdoor storage shall be limited to the rear yard area.
2. Outdoor storage shall be completely fenced with chain link fence at least eight (8) feet in height. The Planning Commission has the ability to deviate from this requirement provided it is demonstrated that an alternative fence height and/or landscape screen can be provided which achieves the same effect as a conventional eight (8) foot fence.
3. Outdoor storage shall be screened from view from adjacent public road rights-of-way and adjacent residentially zoned or used properties in accordance with Section 7.4(E).
C. This Section shall not apply to open air businesses and the outdoor sales and display of products, which are regulated under Section 6.13.
D. This Section shall not apply to seasonal and temporary outdoor sales operations, which are regulated under Section 6.15.
Charter Township of Oxford 10-13 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
10.6 Safety. Existing hazards or potential hazards and nuisances, as listed below, shall be enclosed by suitable fencing or barriers so as not to endanger public health, safety and welfare:
A. Construction or demolition sites;
B. Junk yards, landfills, and sanitary landfills;
C. Unused basements, abandoned wells and cisterns;
D. Sand, gravel, and stone pits or piles;
E. Uses or activities similar to those listed above.
Charter Township of Oxford 10-14 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
[This Page Intentionally Left Blank]
Charter Township of Oxford 11-1 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ARTICLE 11
PRIVATE ROADS
11.1 Intent. This Article is intended to protect and promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the Charter Township of Oxford by regulating the location and design of private roads and establishing minimum standards and specifications for the construction of private roads. Such regulations and minimum standards are necessary to ensure that private roads remain passable in all weather conditions and are adequate to provide safe, year-round access by fire, police and other pubic and emergency vehicles. Such regulations and minimum standards are also necessary to ensure proper layout and design of roads in order to form a functional street transportation network; promote and coordinate effective and energy efficient development; and prevent duplication of roads.
11.2 General Requirements.
A. Private roads shall not be constructed, altered, relocated, widened or maintained in the Charter Township of Oxford except in conformance with this Article and the Engineering Design Standards Ordinance set forth in Chapter 42, Article IV of the Oxford Charter Township Code, as amended.
B. Subject to the terms and exceptions set forth in Section 16.3 of this Ordinance with regard to zoning compliance permits, any lot or parcel vacant at the effective date of this Ordinance provision shall not be used, nor may any use of a lot or parcel without a structure existing at the effective date of this Ordinance provision be changed to any other use, unless the lot or parcel has frontage, as required under Section 8.1 of this Ordinance, on either a public road or a private road approved and constructed in accordance with the standards of this Article and the Engineering Design Standards Ordinance set forth in Chapter 42, Article IV of the Oxford Charter Township Code, as amended.
C. Building permits shall not be issued by the Charter Township of Oxford unless the proposed building, structure or improvement requiring building permit approval is located on a lot or parcel having the required frontage on either a public road or a private road approved and constructed in accordance with the standards of this Article and the Engineering Design Standards Ordinance set forth in Chapter 42, Article IV of the Oxford Charter Township Code, as amended.
D. Private roads that create or increase non-conformities on any lot or parcel shall not be approved.
Charter Township of Oxford 11-2 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
E. No lot or parcel of land shall be sold or otherwise conveyed within the Charter Township of Oxford unless said lot or parcel fronts upon either a public road or a private road meeting the standards of this Article and the requirements of Section 8.1 of this Ordinance, or unless said land contract, deed or other document conveying the lot or parcel contains the following language:
“In accordance with Zoning Ordinance No. 67A, as amended, of the Charter Township of Oxford (“Zoning Ordinance”), this lot/parcel is not a buildable site and, in addition, shall not be used except for agricultural uses (if vacant at the time of conveyance) nor may any existing use be changed (except for agricultural uses) for the reason that said lot/parcel does not have required frontage on an acceptable ingress and egress in accordance with standards as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.”
11.3 Design and Construction Standards. Private roads shall conform to the following design and construction standards, as well as those contained in the Engineering Design Standards Ordinance set forth in Chapter 42, Article IV of the Oxford Charter Township Code, as amended.
A. Easement Width. Private road easements shall be no less than sixty (60) feet in width, with the exception of those intended to serve industrial properties, which shall be no less than seventy (70) feet in width. Where a cul-de-sac turnaround is provided, the private road easement shall be no less than sixty (60) feet in radius, except in the case of those intending to serve industrial properties, which shall be no less than eighty (80) feet in radius.
B. Road Length. Dead end private roads shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length, measured from the right-of-way or easement line of the intersecting road to the center of the cul-de-sac turn-around. Measurement of length shall be made down the centerline of the private road.
C. Connection to Public Roads.
1. The connection between private roads and adjacent public roads shall be designed and constructed in accordance with standards of the Road Commission for Oakland County (RCOC) or the Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT), as applicable. Evidence of RCOC or MDOT approval shall be provided prior to Planning Commission approval.
2. Roads serving more than 20 lots or units shall have two connections to an adjacent public or private roadway.
D. Roadway Surfacing.
Charter Township of Oxford 11-3 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
1. With the exception of item 2., below, all private roads in the Charter Township of Oxford shall be paved with either asphalt or concrete.
2. Notwithstanding item 1., above, private roads serving ten (10) or fewer single-family residential lots or parcels may be surfaced with aggregate, provided that all lots or parcels served have a net lot area of no less than two and one-half (2.5) acres. As a condition of approving an aggregate private road, it shall be required that deed restrictions be recorded for all properties serviced by the private road, indicating the following:
a. Any parcels accessed by the aggregate private road having less than two and one-half (2.5) acres in net lot area shall be deemed unbuildable;
b. Following development of the first ten (10) parcels accessed by the aggregate private road, all subsequent parcels shall be deemed unbuildable;
c. The property may only be used for single-family residential uses.
3. The required width of road surfacing shall be in accordance with the Engineering Design Standards Ordinance set forth in Chapter 42, Article IV of the Oxford Charter Township Code, as amended. Adequate width of road surfacing shall be provided to accommodate on-street parking, where proposed.
4. The proposed roadway shall be centered within the private road easement.
E. Turn-arounds. All dead-end private roads shall end in a cul-de-sac turn-around having a minimum radius as specified in the Engineering Design Standards Ordinance set forth in Chapter 42, Article IV of the Oxford Charter Township Code, as amended. This requirement may be waived or modified by the Planning Commission in the case of private roads having a boulevard cross-section and/or one (1) travel lane in each direction, and where it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer and Fire Chief that safe and efficient circulation will be maintained.
F. Intersections. Intersections between private roads shall be as close to ninety (90) degrees as possible, but no less than eighty (80) degrees nor greater than one hundred (100) degrees.
G. Sight Distance. Sight distances on horizontal and vertical curves and at intersections shall be in accordance with the Engineering Design Standards Ordinance set forth in Chapter 42, Article IV of the Oxford Charter Township Code, as amended.
Charter Township of Oxford 11-4 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
H. Grading and Drainage
1. Road grades shall be in accordance with the Engineering Design Standards Ordinance set forth in Chapter 42, Article IV of the Oxford Charter Township Code, as amended.
2. Private roads shall be adequately drained so as to prevent flooding and erosion of the roadway and to maintain a safe, passable condition, in accordance with the Engineering Design Standards Ordinance set forth in Chapter 42, Article IV of the Oxford Charter Township Code, as amended.
3. Curb and gutter shall be required for private roads serving single-family residential lots with lot widths of less than 120 feet. Private roads serving multiple-family residential and non-residential development shall also require curb and gutter. As a condition of approving a private road without curb and gutter, it shall be required that deed restrictions be recorded for all properties serviced by the private road, indicating that, should single-family lots having widths of less than 120 feet be accessed via the private road, the installation of curb and gutter shall be required.
I. Road Names and Signage.
1. Road names shall not be permitted which might cause confusion with names of existing roads in or near the Township. Roads that will serve as continuations of existing roads shall be called by the same names as such existing roads. All names shall be approved by the Charter Township of Oxford Fire Chief and the Road Commission for Oakland County.
2. Road name signage shall be erected by the Road Commission for Oakland County, at the applicant’s expense.
11.4 Review and Approval Process.
A. Filing of Application. To initiate review of a proposed private road, the applicant shall submit sufficient copies of the required materials as specified in Section 11.4(B), below, to the Zoning Official.
B. Submittal Requirements. All private road applications shall include the following plans and documents, and shall comply with the following application requirements:
1. Completed and signed application form. The application for approval of a private road shall be accompanied by a completed and signed application form; however, private roads proposed as part of a site plan or planned unit development (pursuant to Articles 12 or 14,
Charter Township of Oxford 11-5 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
respectively) shall not require a separate application. The application shall be signed by the applicant or agent thereof (in which case, it shall be accompanied by documentation that the person making the application is authorized to act on behalf of the applicant, and shall represent that the applicant is making the application on behalf of all persons having an interest in the proposed private road area, including mortgage holders and land contract vendors. The application shall be signed by all persons with legal or equitable title to any lot to be served by the private road.
2. Private road plan. The private road plan shall be drawn and sealed by a professional engineer or land surveyor registered in the State of Michigan. The scale shall not be less than one inch equals 50 feet. The following information shall be provided on the plan:
a. A legal description of each lot to be served by the private road, a legal description of the private road easement, and the names and addresses of all persons or parties owning an interest in the title to the lots and the private road easement, including mortgage holders and land contract vendors.
b. A survey drawing describing the outline of the proposed private road easement with the dimensions and bearings thereof.
c. The proposed road name.
d. A topographical survey, shown in one-foot contour intervals, of the proposed private road easement and all adjacent land within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed private road easement; or within such greater area as may be necessary, in the judgment of the Township Engineer, to determine what construction methods will be adequate to ensure proper drainage, detention or retention of storm water.
e. A description of the natural features, including soils, wetlands, trees in excess of eight (8) inches in diameter, streams, watercourses, lakes, ponds and existing drains within the proposed private road easement, and within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed private road easement, or within such greater area as may be necessary, in the judgment of the Township Engineer, to determine what drainage and construction methods will be adequate.
f. The location of existing structures on properties within 100 feet of the proposed private road easement.
Charter Township of Oxford 11-6 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
g. Plan and profile drawings and cross-sections clearly detailing all materials, grades, and dimensions of improvements proposed within the private road easement, prepared by a civil engineer registered in the State of Michigan, and bearing the seal of the same. These plans and drawings shall include the finish floor elevations of any existing or proposed buildings, as well as the dimensions of proposed driveway culverts, if necessary.
h. Details of proposed road drainage, and if necessary, proposed stormwater detention or retention systems.
i. Location of existing and anticipated utility lines, including, where applicable, electric, telephone, gas, cable television, water and sewer lines.
j. Other information deemed necessary by the Township to make the determination required by this Article, including, but not limited to, those items required under Section 12.3(C) for Final Site Plan submittals.
3. Private road easement agreement. A private road easement agreement shall be submitted in a recordable form which meets the minimum standards set forth in Section 11.5 of this Article.
4. Private road maintenance agreement. A private road maintenance agreement shall be submitted in a recordable form which meets the minimum standards set forth in Section 11.6 of this Article.
5. Public road agency approval. The location of the proposed private road connection to the existing public roadway shall be approved by the Road Commission for Oakland County (RCOC) or the Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT), as applicable. Evidence of such RCOC or MDOT approval shall be provided in the application submittal, in the form of an approved application for a permit from the appropriate road agency. This requirement shall not be construed to necessitate construction permit approval by these agencies prior to Township approval of the private road.
6. Fee. The application shall be accompanied by an application fee as established by resolution of the Township Board.
C. Procedures.
1. Consultant Review. Upon receipt, the Zoning Official shall forward the private road application and related plans and materials to the Township Planner, Township Engineer, Township Attorney, Fire Department and any other appropriate departments or persons for
Charter Township of Oxford 11-7 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
review. Such review shall consider compliance with this Article, sound planning and engineering principles and any other applicable ordinances. The Township Attorney shall review all private road easement and maintenance agreements. All reviews and recommendations shall be forwarded in writing to the Planning Commission.
2. Planning Commission Review and Determination. The Planning Commission shall review all private road applications, plans and other required materials, along with all consultant reviews and recommendations, and either approve, approve with conditions, postpone or deny the proposed private road. The Planning Commission shall consider compliance with this Article, the Engineering Design Standards Ordinance set forth in Chapter 42, Article IV of the Oxford Charter Township Code, as amended, and any other applicable ordinances. The Planning Commission may postpone action on any application which does not contain all of the information required under Section 11.4(B). In the case of a private road proposed as part of a site plan or planned unit development (pursuant to Articles 12 or 14, respectively) the Planning Commission may take action on both the site plan or PUD and the private road component simultaneously.
3. Recording of Easement and Maintenance Agreement. Upon approval by the Planning Commission, the approved private road easement agreement and maintenance agreement shall be recorded by the applicant at the office of the Oakland County Register of Deeds, and proof of such recording shall be submitted to the Township before construction may commence.
4. Conformance with Land Improvement Ordinance (No. 108A). Following approval of the private road by the Planning Commission and recording of the easement and maintenance agreement, all relevant provisions of the Charter Township of Oxford Land Improvement Ordinance (No. 108A) shall be complied with before construction may commence.
D. Expiration of Approval. If construction has not commenced within 12 months of Planning Commission approval of the proposed private road, or if construction has not been substantially completed within 12 months after issuance of a Construction Permit, the private road approval shall become null and void, and a new application shall be required. Prior to the expiration of said private road approval, the applicant may apply in writing to the Planning Commission for an extension of a private road approval of up to twelve (12) months. The Planning Commission may grant an extension if it finds that the approved site plan adequately represents current conditions and conforms to current ordinance standards. The Township Board may
Charter Township of Oxford 11-8 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
levy upon the performance guarantee deposited by the applicant pursuant to the Land Improvement Ordinance (No. 108A) and complete the private road at the Applicant’s complete and sole expense. Any outstanding costs over and above the amount of surety to complete construction of a private road due to the Applicant's actions shall become a lien on the land of all the lots served by the private road. Upon payment of the outstanding costs, the Township shall discharge all liens.
11.5 Private Road Easement Agreements. A private road easement agreement in recordable form shall be required for all private roads. Such agreement shall meet the following minimum requirements:
A. Legal description. A detailed legal description of the private road easement shall be submitted with the private road permit application.
B. Dedication. The Private Road Easement Agreement shall specify those adjoining properties which are entitled to be accessed via the private road. If a parcel adjoining said private road easement is not to be served by said right-of-way, then the Private Road Easement Agreement shall specifically provide for that exclusion, and said adjoining property owner shall not share in the ownership of the right-of-way.
C. Emergency and public vehicle access. The easement shall provide for unrestricted access for emergency and public vehicles used in performance of necessary public services.
D. Stormwater management easements. The Private Road Easement Agreement shall include all easements necessary to permit the operation and maintenance of necessary stormwater management facilities.
E. Public utility easements. The Private Road Easement Agreement shall include an easement granted to the Charter Township of Oxford for the purposes of constructing, operating, inspecting, maintaining, repairing, altering, replacing, and/or removing pipelines, mains, conduits and other installations of a similar character for the purpose of providing public utilities, including conveyance of sewage, water and storm water runoff across, through and under the property subject to said easement, and excavating and refilling ditches and trenches necessary for the location of said structures.
F. Noninterference. The terms of the easement agreement shall prohibit any property owner served by the road from restricting or interfering with the normal ingress and egress of other property owners, their families, guests, invitees, trades people and other persons traveling to or leaving any of the properties served by the private road.
Charter Township of Oxford 11-9 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
G. Future connections. The terms of the easement agreement shall provide that the Township may require that future abutting private roads or public roads shall be connected to the existing private road.
H. Setback from existing structures. New private road easements shall be located to provide a sufficient distance from all existing conforming structures and legally nonconforming structures so that such structures comply with the front yard setback requirements for the zoning district in which they are located.
11.6 Private Road Maintenance Agreements. Continued maintenance of private roads and road drainage facilities shall be the responsibility of the property owners served by such roads. Prior to issuance of construction permits for the private road, such property owners shall enter into a legally-binding private road maintenance agreement, which shall contain the following:
A. Maintenance costs. The private road maintenance agreement shall acknowledge that the road surface and easement area are privately owned, and therefore, all construction and improvements within the easement will be contracted and paid for by the signatories to the agreement or their successors or assigns.
B. Method of apportioning maintenance costs. The Private Road Maintenance Agreement shall describe the method by which maintenance costs and costs of improvements will be apportioned among those properties accessing the private road.
C. Assessment. The private road maintenance agreement shall contain a provision to permit the Township Board to authorize the repair and/or maintenance of any private road which is not being maintained adequately to permit safe access by users and emergency vehicles, and to assess the cost of such repair and/or maintenance, including the costs of engineering and administration, to the signatories to the private road maintenance agreement on an equitable basis. The decision to authorize repair or maintenance of a private road shall be at the Township Board's sole discretion.
D. Township not responsible. The provisions of the private road maintenance agreement shall in no way be construed to obligate the Township to perform regular inspections of the easement area, or to provide necessary repairs or maintenance.
E. Maintenance needs. The private road maintenance agreement shall acknowledge the responsibility of the signatories to such agreement to maintain the surface grading and resurfacing at regular intervals; snow and ice removal; repair of potholes; maintenance of road drainage and stormwater management systems; maintenance of unobstructed vision at
Charter Township of Oxford 11-10 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
any intersection with another private road or a public road; annual dust control; and regular cutting of weeds and grass within the easement.
F. Continuing obligation. The private road maintenance agreement shall specify that the obligation to maintain the easement shall be an obligation running with the land to be served by the private road, and shall be binding upon the owners of such land and their heirs, successors and assigns.
11.7 Existing Nonconforming Roads. The issuance of building permits for the construction of new single-family residences, or building permits for any other type of use (other than single-family residential), on a lot or parcel served by an existing private road that does not comply with the standards of this Article or the Engineering Design Standards Ordinance set forth in Chapter 42, Article IV of the Oxford Charter Township Code, as amended, shall be prohibited.
11.8 Extension of Existing Private Roads. Where an existing private road is proposed to be extended, such extension shall be approved only if the existing private road is brought up to the standards of this Article and the Engineering Design Standards Ordinance set forth in Chapter 42, Article IV of the Oxford Charter Township Code, as amended. Further, the applicant for such an extension shall obtain written consent from all parties having either an ownership interest in the existing private road easement, or a right to access their property therefrom. Evidence of such written consent shall be submitted to the Building Department in addition to those items required under Section 11.4(B). Such consent shall provide:
A. That the consenting party consents to the extension of the roadway pursuant to the application; and,
B. That the consenting party consents to the following:
1. Upgrading of the existing roadway to the standards set forth herein;
2. Entering into any private road maintenance agreements required for the extended private road;
3. Deeding such easements or rights-of-way as are necessary to upgrade said road, where applicable.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not vary this requirement.
11.9 Variances and Appeals. Variances from the provisions of this Article, or appeals from decisions rendered pursuant to this Article, may be sought from the Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to Article 17.
11.10 Fees. The Township Board shall determine a fee schedule for private road applications. The amount of such fee shall take into account the cost of the review, including any consultant reviews, required in this Article.
Charter Township of Oxford 11-11 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Charter Township of Oxford 12-1 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ARTICLE 12
SITE PLAN REVIEW
12.1 Purpose. It is the purpose of this Article to require site plan approval for certain, developments, buildings, structures, and uses that can be expected to have a significant impact on natural resources, traffic patterns, adjacent parcels and land uses, and on the character of future development. It is further the purpose of this Article to achieve, through site plan review, safe and convenient traffic movement, both within a site and in relation to access streets; harmonious relationships of buildings, structures, and uses, both within a site and with adjacent sites; safe and efficient provision of public and private utilities; and to conserve natural features and resources. It is also the purpose of this Article to delegate certain aspects of site plan review authority to the Planning Commission, within the standards and requirements set forth in this Article.
12.2 Site Plan Approval Required.
A. Site plan review and approval is required for all new construction, structural alteration, or substantial change in use (as determined by the Zoning Planning Commission) involving the following:
1. All principally-permitted uses in the RM, MHC, C-1, C-2, O, RO, I-1, I-2, and R zoning districts.
2. All special land uses.
3. Any other use for which the establishment of an off-street parking lot is required.
4. Any condominium project, including building condominiums, site condominiums, and condominium conversions.
B. The Building Official shall not issue a building permit for the construction of, or addition to, any of the above listed developments, until a Final Site Plan has been reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission pursuant to Section 12.3(C).
C. Single-family dwellings (and accessory buildings thereto) and farm operations shall be exempt from the site plan approval requirements contained in this Article. Essential services shall also be exempt from these site plan approval requirements, to the extent provided under Section 6.8.
D. No grading, removal of trees or other vegetation, land filling, or construction of improvements shall commence for any development which requires site plan approval, until a Final Site Plan is approved and is in effect.
Charter Township of Oxford 12-2 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
12.3 Review and Approval Procedures. The procedure for processing site plans includes three (3) phases: a pre-application conference, Preliminary Site Plan review and Final Site Plan approval.
A. Pre-application Conference. Prior to the submission of an application for Site Plan approval, a pre-application conference shall be held at a regularly-scheduled or special meeting of the Planning Commission. The purpose of this conference shall be to address the site plan review process and informational requirements, as outlined in this Section, and shall not constitute any form of official review or approval of the site plan project. Nor shall this conference in any way circumvent, replace, or supersede the review and approval powers of the Planning Commission regarding the site plan application. For the pre-application conference, the applicant shall, at minimum, present a sketch plan of the proposed project, including the following information:
1. Total size of the project.
2. A statement of the number of residential units, if any.
3. The number and type of non-residential uses.
4. The size of the area to be occupied by each type of use.
5. The known deviations from ordinance regulations to be sought.
6. The number of acres to be preserved as open or recreational space.
7. All known natural or historic features to be preserved.
8. Anticipated demand for public sanitary sewer and water service.
9. The extent of known soil or groundwater contamination on the site.
B. Preliminary Site Plan. Following the pre-application conference, the applicant shall submit a Preliminary Site Plan and application for the proposed project. The purpose of such preliminary review is to evaluate compliance with Township ordinances and other federal, state and county laws and regulations, and to identify changes that may be necessary prior to Final Site Plan approval.
1. Submittal. To initiate the Preliminary Site Plan review process, the applicant shall submit sufficient copies of the materials required under Section 12.3(B)(2), below, to the Zoning Official.
2. Information Required. Every Preliminary Site Plan submitted for review under this Section shall contain all of the following data for review and approval. Submittals shall be made in both digital and
Charter Township of Oxford 12-3 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
paper formats. The contents of digital and paper submittals shall be identical to one another. Digital submittals shall be provided in PDF file format on CD-RW or other media currently acceptable to the Zoning Official. Paper submittals shall be provided with a sheet size of at least 24" x 36". The scale of all plan view drawings shall be a maximum of 1" = 50' for property less than five (5) acres, or a maximum of 1" = 100' for property five (5) or more acres. Included on the Preliminary Site Plan shall be all relevant dimensions and the following information, except where specifically waived by the Planning Commission:
a. General Information.
i. Proprietors', applicants’, and owners' names, addresses and telephone numbers.
ii. Date (month, day, year), including revisions.
iii. Title block.
iv. Scale.
v. Northpoint.
vi. Legal description and certified survey.
vii. Location map drawn at an acceptable scale with north point and indicating the proximity of the site to major roads and intersections.
viii. The seal of an Architect, Engineer, Surveyor, Landscape Architect, or Planner licensed in the State of Michigan.
ix. Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas, etc., on the parcel, and within one hundred (100) feet of the site.
x. Proposed lot lines, property lines and all structures, parking areas, etc. within the site, and within one hundred (100) feet of the site.
xi. Centerline and existing and proposed right-of-way lines of any street.
xii. Zoning classification and land use of petitioner's parcel and all abutting parcels.
Charter Township of Oxford 12-4 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
xiii. Gross and net lot area figures.
xiv. A map or figure illustrating the distance of the site from major thoroughfares and section corners.
xv. Evidence of public water and sewer capacity allocation from the Building Official.
b. Physical Features.
i. Acceleration, deceleration and passing lanes and approaches.
ii. Proposed locations of roadways, access drives, driveway locations, sidewalks, safety paths, curbing and areas for public use.
iii. Traffic Impact Study, where required pursuant to Section 8.4(B).
iv. Location of existing and proposed service facilities above and below ground, including:
• Well sites.
• Septic systems and other wastewater treatment systems. The location of the septic tank and the primary and reserve drain fields (soil absorption system) should be clearly distinguished.
• Water main systems, hydrants, pump houses, standpipes and building.
• Sanitary sewers and pumping stations.
• Storm water management systems and structures including storm sewers, swales, retention and detention basins, drainage ways and other facilities, including preliminary calculations for sizes.
• Chemical and fuel storage tanks and containers.
• Storage, loading, and disposal areas for chemicals, hazardous substances, salt and fuels.
• Location of all easements.
Charter Township of Oxford 12-5 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
v. All structures, including typical floor plans with dimensions, setback and yard dimensions, and typical elevation views.
vi. Dimensioned parking spaces and calculations pursuant to Section 8.6, drives and method of surfacing.
vii. Conceptual illustration of existing and proposed landscaping, berms, fencing and walls.
viii. Trash receptacle pad/enclosure location.
ix. Transformer pad location.
x. Dedicated road or service drive locations.
xi. Designation of fire lanes.
xii. Historic structures as identified by the State of Michigan and/or national registry of historic places pursuant to U.S. Department of the Interior.
xiii. Any other physical features having a substantial impact on the site.
c. Natural Features.
i. Soil characteristics of the parcel to at least the detail provided by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service "Soil Survey of Oakland County, Michigan".
ii. Existing topography with a maximum contour interval of two (2) feet. Topography on the site and beyond the site for a distance of one hundred (100) feet in all directions should be indicated.
iii. Conceptual grading plan utilizing, at minimum, spot elevations and directional arrows to illustrate anticipated cutting, filing and grading.
iv. Location of existing drainage courses and associated bodies of water, on and off site, and their elevations.
v. Location of all existing wetlands, as defined in the Townships’ Wetlands Ordinance, Ordinance No. 80B.
Charter Township of Oxford 12-6 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
vi. Location of 100-year floodplain areas, as certified by a licensed engineer using acceptable engineering practice, subject to review by the Township and the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ).
vii. The location of trees and wooded areas found on the property.
viii. Listing of rare or endangered species of flora or fauna, as available from the State of Michigan, the Michigan Natural Feature Inventory (MNFI).
d. Additional Requirements for Residential Developments.
i. Designation of units by type and number of units in each building.
ii. Density of dwelling units per acre, based upon the net lot area, broken down by unit type.
iii. Density of bedrooms per acre, based upon the net lot area, for multiple-family residential projects.
iv. Location of carports, where proposed.
v. Specific amount of recreational facilities and the acreage and location of recreation spaces.
e. Additional Requirements for Commercial and Industrial Developments.
i. Loading/unloading areas.
ii. Total and usable floor area.
iii. Number of employees in peak usage.
iv. Nature of anticipated tenants.
f. Additional Requirements for Site Condominium Developments. In addition to the information required elsewhere in this Section for Preliminary Site Plan submittals, all information required under Sections 402(1)(B), (C), and (D) of the Charter Township of Oxford’s Land Division Regulations Ordinance (Ord. No. 103) shall be provided where a site condominium project is proposed.
Charter Township of Oxford 12-7 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3. Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall review the Preliminary Site Plan and shall take one of the following actions:
a. Approval. Upon finding that the Criteria for Site Plan Review set forth in Section 12.5 are satisfied by the Preliminary Site Plan, the Planning Commission shall approve the Preliminary Site Plan.
b. Approval with Changes or Conditions. The Planning Commission may grant conditional approval of the Preliminary Site Plan, subject to modifications to be performed by the applicant.
c. Postponement. Upon finding that the Criteria for Site Plan Review set forth in Section 12.5 are not satisfied by the Preliminary Site Plan, but could be if the plans were revised or further documentation was submitted, the Planning Commission may postpone action on the proposal until a revised Preliminary Site Plan is submitted. Upon making such action, the Planning Commission shall determine whether resubmittals made pursuant to a postponement shall be reviewed by Township consultants, or be returned to the Planning Commission without further review by Township consultants. Resubmittal pursuant to a postponement shall be made within 365 days from the date of postponement or the application shall be void.
d. Denial. Upon finding that the Preliminary Site Plan does not and/or will not meet the Site Plan Approval Criteria set forth in Section 12.5, the Planning Commission shall deny the Preliminary Site Plan.
4. Effect of Approval. Approval of a Preliminary Site Plan allows the applicant to submit a Final Site Plan for review and approval pursuant to Section 12.3(C). Preliminary Site Plan approval shall expire and be of no effect after three hundred sixty-five (365) days following approval by the Planning Commission.
C. Final Site Plan Review. Following Planning Commission approval of the Preliminary Site Plan, the applicant shall submit a Final Site Plan and application for the proposed project.
1. Submittal. To initiate the Final Site Plan review process, the applicant shall submit sufficient copies of the materials required under Section 12.3(C)(2), below, to the Zoning Official.
Charter Township of Oxford 12-8 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
If a Final Site Plan is not submitted by the applicant for approval within 365 days of Preliminary Site Plan approval by the Planning Commission, the Preliminary Site Plan approval becomes null and void.
2. Information Required. Every Final Site Plan submitted for review under this Article shall contain all of the following data prior to its submission to the Planning Commission for review and approval. Submittals shall be made in both digital and paper formats. The contents of digital and paper submittals shall be identical to one another. Digital submittals shall be provided in PDF file format on CD-RW or other media currently acceptable to the Zoning Official. Paper submittals shall be provided with a sheet size of at least 24" x 36". The scale of all plan view drawings shall be a maximum of 1" = 50' for property less than five (5) acres, or a maximum of 1" = 100' for property five (5) or more acres. Included on the Final Site Plan shall be all relevant dimensions and the following information, except where specifically waived by the Planning Commission:
a. All information required under Section 12.3(B)(2).
b. Final grading plan, showing finished contours at a maximum interval of two (2) feet, correlated with existing contours so as to clearly indicate required cutting, filing and grading.
c. Dimensioned floor plans and elevation views of all proposed buildings and structures, including proposed building materials and colors.
d. Detailed lighting plan(s) illustrating all information required under Section 10.2(D).
e. Detailed landscape plan(s) illustrating all information required under Section 7.9.
f. Details of proposed trash receptacle and transformer pad screening.
g. Signage details, including all information required under Section 9.11(B), if approval of proposed signs is desired as part of site plan approval.
h. Details of proposed recreation facilities to be provided, including play structures, benches, and the like.
i. Parking Easement Agreement(s) for off-site parking areas pursuant to Section 8.5(C).
Charter Township of Oxford 12-9 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
j. Collective Parking Agreements for shared parking areas pursuant to Section 8.5(I)(2).
k. Where any condominium project is proposed, the following additional items shall be provided:
i. All information required by Section 66 of the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978).
ii. Draft Master Deed and Bylaws, prepared pursuant to Section 13.8.
3. Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall review the Final Site Plan and shall take one of the following actions:
a. Approval. Upon finding that the Application and Site Plan meet the Criteria of Site Plan Review in Section 12.5, the Planning Commission shall approve the site plan.
b. Approval with Changes or Conditions. Upon finding that the Application and Site Plan meet the Criteria of Site Plan Review in Section 12.5, except for minor revisions, the Planning Commission may approve the site plan conditioned upon said revisions being made by the applicant and reviewed by appropriate Township staff and/or consultants.
c. Postponement. Upon finding that the Application and Site Plan do not meet the Criteria of Site a Plan Review in Section 12.5, but could upon the making of revisions or submittal of further documentation, the Planning Commission may postpone action until the revised Plan is resubmitted. Upon making such action, the Planning Commission shall determine whether resubmittals made pursuant to a postponement shall be reviewed by Township consultants, or be returned to the Planning Commission without further review by Township consultants. Resubmittal pursuant to a postponement shall be made within 365 days from the date of postponement or the application shall be void.
d. Denial. Upon finding that the Application and Site Plan do not meet one (1) or more of the Criteria of Site Plan Review in Section 12.5, and that revisions necessary to meet said Criteria are so extensive as to require the preparation of a new Site Plan, the Planning Commission shall deny the site plan.
4. Filing of Approved Site Plan. Upon approval of the Final Site Plan, the applicant and/or owner(s) of record, and the Planning Commission Chair or his/her designee, shall sign five (5) copies of
Charter Township of Oxford 12-10 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
the approved plan, and shall transmit one (1) such signed copy of the approved Final Site Plan each to the Building Official, Zoning Administrator, Township Clerk, and to the applicant. One (1) such copy shall be retained in the Planning Commission files.
5. Effect of Approval. Approval of a Final Site Plan authorizes issuance of a building permit pursuant to Section 16.4 or, in the case of uses without buildings or structures, issuance of a zoning compliance permit pursuant to Section 16.3, provided that all conditions of Final Site Plan approval have been satisfied. Approval shall expire and be of no effect after three hundred sixty-five (365) days following approval by the Planning Commission, unless a building permit, when required, is applied for and granted within that time period, and construction has begun and is being diligently pursued to completion.
D. Concurrent Preliminary and Final Site Plan Review. Projects of limited scope, intensity or complexity may pursue Preliminary and Final Site Plan approval concurrently, at determined by the Planning Commission. Such determination shall be made at the time of the Pre-Application Conference required under Section 12.3(A).
12.4 Administrative Review and Approval Procedures for Minor Site Plans and Minor Site Plan Amendments. The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to conduct administrative review of minor site plans, evaluating such plans for approval, conditional approval, referral to Planning Commission or denial, upon consultation with the chair of the Planning Commission, the Township Engineer and the Township Planner. These minor site plans (or minor site plan amendments) shall be subject to all other site plan criteria, requirements and standards as included in this Article.
A. A minor site plan (or minor site plan amendment) may be applied for in any of the following cases:
1. Accessory uses incidental to a conforming existing use where said use does not require any variance, or site modifications;
2. Expansions and/or additions to existing conforming structures or addition of principle buildings and accessory buildings less than two thousand (2,000) square feet or not more than ten (10) percent of the existing floor area, whichever is less.
3. Provision for additional parking, loading/unloading spaces and landscape improvements as required by Ordinance.
B. At the direction of the Zoning Administrator, any information required for Final Site Plan approval in Section 12.3(C)(2) may be required for administrative site plan approval. However, at a minimum, submissions for administrative site plan approval shall include the following information:
Charter Township of Oxford 12-11 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
1. Proprietors', applicants, and owners names, addresses and telephone numbers.
2. Date (month, day, year), including revisions.
3. Title Block and Scale.
4. Northpoint.
5. Proposed and existing structures, parking areas, etc. on the parcel, and within one hundred (100) feet of the parcel.
C. The Zoning Administrator shall consider the criteria set forth in Section 12.5 in the review of the site plans submitted under this Section.
12.5 Criteria for Site Plan Review. Site Plans shall be reviewed and approved upon a finding that the following criteria are met:
A. The proposed use will not be injurious to the general health, safety and welfare of the Township and surrounding neighborhood.
B. The location of buildings, outside storage receptacles, parking areas, screen walls and utility areas is such that the adverse effects of such uses will be minimized for the occupants of that use and surrounding areas.
C. The design of stormwater management systems, roads, parking lots driveways, water mains, sanitary sewer systems and other site improvements meets the design and construction standards of the Township and other appropriate agencies.
D. Proper access to all portions of the site and all sides of any structure is provided. All structures or groups of structures shall be so arranged as to permit emergency vehicle access by some practical means to all sides. Site features such as, but not limited to, trees and other plant materials, fences, retaining walls, berms, outdoor furniture, outdoor structures, and natural and artificial water bodies shall be arranged to permit adequate emergency vehicle access.
E. Site planning and design of specific improvements will accomplish the preservation and protection of existing natural resources and features such as lakes, ponds, streams, wetlands, floodplains, steep slopes, groundwater, trees, and wooded areas, including understory trees.
F. The proposed development respects the natural topography to the maximum extent possible by minimizing the amount of cutting, filling and grading required.
Charter Township of Oxford 12-12 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
G. The proposed development will not cause soil erosion or sedimentation. The drainage plan is adequate to handle anticipated stormwater runoff.
H. A stormwater management system and facility will preserve the natural drainage characteristics and enhance the aesthetics of the site to the maximum extent possible, and will not substantially reduce or increase the natural retention or storage capacity of any wetland, water body or water course, or cause alterations which could increase flooding or water pollution on or off site.
I. Wastewater treatment systems, including on-site septic systems, will be located to minimize any potential degradation of surface water or ground water quality.
J. Sites which include storage of hazardous materials waste, fuels, salt, or chemicals shall be designed to prevent spills and discharges of polluting materials to the surface of the air or to the ground, groundwater or nearby water bodies, with a specific plan to achieve such objectives being incorporated as part of the site plan.
K. The location of buildings, parking, drives, landscaping and other improvements on the site shall not be injurious to users of the property or adjacent properties given the lot size, shape and general location.
L. Landscaping, including grass, trees, shrubs and other vegetation is provided to maintain and improve the aesthetic quality of the site and area.
M. The means of ingress and egress to and from the site shall be planned with the objective of achieving recognized planning, engineering and safety standards, and shall not result in an unreasonable risk of danger to persons and/or property on the site and/or off the site. In general, this standard shall be met based upon the design of ingress and egress in terms of the number, location and design of access(es), and utilization of acceleration, deceleration and passing lanes and approaches. The Planning Commission shall review the ingress and egress proposed for the purpose of promoting and protecting traffic safety.
N. The site plan complies with all federal, state and county laws and regulations, and all Township Ordinances and other regulations, including but not limited to the Zoning Ordinance and the Sidewalk and Safety Path Ordinance (Ordinance No. 117).
O. Feedback on the proposed site plan from external agencies having authority over the project, including but not limited to the Road Commission for Oakland County, Oakland County Drain Commissioner, Oakland County Department of Health and Human Services, Michigan Department of Environmental Quality and the Michigan Department of Transportation, is
Charter Township of Oxford 12-13 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
sufficient to suggest that the site plan will be able to meet their requirements and be approved substantially as presented.
12.6 Amendment of Approved Site Plans. Except as provided for in Section 12.4, a site plan may be amended upon application and in accordance with provisions and the procedures provided in Section 12.3(C) for a Final Site Plan. Site plans amended in order to be brought into compliance with the requirements of governmental agencies of authority, other than the Charter Township of Oxford, are subject to the provisions of this ordinance. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to determine if a proposed change is substantive and therefore requires an amendment to the approved site plan.
12.7 Modifications During Construction. All improvements shall conform to the approved Final Site Plan. If the applicant chooses to make any changes in the development in relation to the approved Final Site Plan, he shall do so at his own risk, without any assurance that the Township will approve the changes. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to notify the Zoning Administrator of any such changes. The Zoning Administrator may require the applicant to correct the changes so as to conform to the approved Final Site Plan.
12.8 Phasing of Development. An applicant may divide a proposed development into two (2) or more phases with the approval of the Planning Commission. Where such phasing is proposed, each phase shall conform with Section 12.3(C)(5). Future phases of development beyond those for which site plan approval is requested shall not be depicted on the submitted Final Site Plan.
12.9 Performance Guarantees. Pursuant to Section 16.8, the Planning Commission may require that a performance guarantee be deposited with the Township to insure faithful completion of improvements depicted on a proposed site plan
Charter Township of Oxford 12-14 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
[This Page Intentionally Left Blank]
Charter Township of Oxford 13-1 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ARTICLE 13
CONDOMINIUM REGULATIONS
13.1 Intent. This Article shall regulate the development of condominiums to promote the public health, safety and general welfare; to further the orderly layout and use of land; to require that land be suitable for building sites, public and private improvements and that there be adequate drainage thereof; to provide for proper ingress to and egress from buildings; to provide standards and a procedure for condominium approval, to insure that condominium developments meet the standards of this Ordinance, and, except where otherwise provided for in this Article, assure that site condominiums meet the standards and requirements of the Charter Township of Oxford Land Division Regulations Ordinance No. 103, as amended.
13.2 Applicability. The provisions of this Article shall apply to all condominium projects authorized under the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978), including contractible, expandable and conversion condominiums and mobile home condominium projects.
13.3 Definitions. The following terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall have the meaning given in Article 2 of this Ordinance or the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978) itself, unless the context otherwise requires:
Building Condominium Co-Owner
Condominium Documents Expandable Condominium
Condominium Project General Common Elements
Condominium Subdivision Plan Limited Common Elements
Condominium Unit Master Deed
Contractable Condominium Mobile Home Condominium Project
Conversion Condominium Site Condominium
Convertible Area Site Condominium Lot
13.4 Building Condominiums. No permits for erosion control, grading, utility installation, paving, building construction or the installation of any other improvements shall be issued for property in a condominium development until a Final Site Plan and associated master deed has been approved by the Planning Commission. The requirements of this Section shall include contractible, expandable and conversion building condominiums. In addition to the review and approval provisions of Article 12, the following standards shall apply to building condominiums:
Charter Township of Oxford 13-2 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
A. Internal Vehicular Circulation System. Internal vehicular circulation systems provided in building condominium projects, including drives, parking lots and loading areas, shall conform to the requirements of Article 11, Private Roads, except that deviations in the geometry of proposed paved area and easement are permissible, subject to a determination of adequate circulation by the Police and Fire Departments. In the case of internal circulation systems serving building condominium projects, the “private road easement” required by Article 11 shall not apply for the calculation of setbacks or the determination of required road frontage.
B. Detached Single-Family Residential Development Prohibited. The development of detached single-family residential units shall not be done as a building condominium.
13.5 Site Condominiums. No permits for erosion control, grading, utility installation, paving, building construction or the installation of any other improvements shall be issued for property in a site condominium development until a Final Site Plan and associated master deed has been approved by the Planning Commission. This requirement shall include contractible and expandable site condominiums.
A. Review and Approval Procedures. Site condominium projects shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with Article 12, Site Plan Review, except that actions taken by the Planning Commission to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a Preliminary and Final Site Plans for site condominium projects shall be treated as recommendations to the Township Board, who shall have final authority to approve or deny such plans.
B. General Requirements.
1. Internal Road System. Where public roads are proposed to provide access to site condominium lots, they shall conform to the standards of the Road Commission for Oakland County. Where private roads are proposed, they shall conform to the requirements of Article 11, Private Roads. In the case of internal roads serving site condominium projects, the “private road easement” required by Article 11 shall be used for the purposes of calculating setbacks and determining required road frontage.
2. Street Trees. Street trees within site condominiums shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements:
a. The frontage of all internal public or private streets shall be landscaped with the equivalent of one (1) tree for every fifty (50) lineal feet.
Charter Township of Oxford 13-3 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
b. Street trees shall be placed between the sidewalk and curb within the street right-of-way. Where tree location in the right-of-way is not possible due to conflicts with utilities, stormwater management facilities, or other conflicts, or where sidewalks are not required, street trees may be located on private property just beyond the front lot line, or in a location deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission.
c. Street trees shall meet the Standards for Landscape Materials contained in Section 7.5.
d. Existing trees within street rights-of-way or trees on the same building lot which meet the Standards for Landscape Materials contained in Section 7.5 may be counted as street trees for the purposes of this Section.
3. Site Condominium Lots. Each site condominium lot shall be considered equivalent to a single lot and shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. Not more than one (1) principal building shall be located on a site condominium lot, nor shall a principal building be located on a site condominium lot with any other principal structure or use except in a PUD district. Required yards shall be measured from the boundaries of a site condominium lot. Lot coverage and floor area ratio shall be calculated using the land area of the site condominium lot.
4. Sidewalks. Sidewalks at least five (5) feet in width shall be required on both sides of public and private streets internal to the development, subject to the Subdivisions and Other Divisions of Land Ordinance (Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances). Sidewalks shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the Safety Paths and Sidewalks Ordinance (Article III of Chapter 42). Sidewalk maintenance provisions shall be provided within associated condominium documents.
The Planning Commission may waive this standard for single-family residential developments where one (1) or more of the following criteria is met:
a. The development contains twenty (20) or fewer units; or
b. The net density of the development is one (1) dwelling unit per acre, or less.
5. Relation to the Land Division Regulations Ordinance. The design provisions of Division III of the Township’s Subdivisions and Other Divisions of Land Ordinance (Chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances)
Charter Township of Oxford 13-4 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
shall apply to site condominiums and are incorporated herein by reference. In applying these provisions, the standards and requirements that are intended to apply to lots in a subdivision shall apply instead to site condominium lots. Nothing in this Section shall be construed as requiring a site condominium to obtain plat approval under the Charter Township Subdivision and Other Divisions of Land Ordinance or the Land Division Act.
6. Road Rights-of-Way or Easements. Road rights-of-way or easements shall be described separately from individual site condominium lots, and shall be accurately delineated by bearings and distances on the condominium subdivision plan and final site plan. The right-of-way shall be for roadway and other transportation purposes and for the purposes of locating, installing, maintaining, and replacing of public utilities. The developer shall dedicate easements to the Township for all necessary public services.
7. Water and Sanitary Service. Each condominium lot shall be connected to water supply and sanitary sewer facilities when available, or shall have a well, septic tank, and drain field approved by the Oakland County Environmental Health Division where water and sanitary sewer services are not available. The well, septic tank and drain field serving a condominium unit shall be located within that unit, as described in the master deed, except in a PUD district, in which case this requirement may be waived by the Township Board as a part of its approval of the PUD district rezoning petition.
13.6 Projects Having Both Building and Site Condominium Units. Combinations of building and site condominium units shall not be included within a single condominium project. Where an overall development will contain both building condominium units and site condominium units, each respective type of unit shall be subject to their respective regulations, and shall be governed by separate master deeds.
13.7 Conversion Condominiums. Conversion condominium projects shall be subject to the review and approval provisions of Article 12 and the following provisions:
A. Conformance with Original Site Plan. Prior to the approval of a conversion condominium project, conformance with the original site plan approval (as well as any amendments thereto) for the existing development shall be required, where such was required prior to the existing development and the original site plan remains on file with the Township.
B. Outstanding Ordinance Violations. All outstanding violations of this Ordinance shall be addressed prior to the approval of a conversion condominium project.
Charter Township of Oxford 13-5 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
C. Nonconformities. Legal nonconformities associated with existing development that is proposed for condominium conversion may continue to exist as part of an approved conversion condominium project, in accordance with Article 15, unless they pose a significant public health, safety, and/or welfare concern.
D. Submittal Requirements.
1. All materials required under Sections 12.3(B)(2) and 12.3(C)(2) for Preliminary and Final Site Plan approval, respectively, shall be submitted for the review of proposed conversion condominium projects, except as deemed unnecessary by the Planning Commission. At minimum, a master deed meeting the requirements of Section 13.8 shall be provided for review and approval.
2. Where detailed architectural plans and specifications for the existing buildings and structures are not available, the developer of a conversion condominium project shall submit an affidavit to the Township stating such.
13.8 Standards for Master Deeds. The master deed (and exhibits) associated with a condominium project proposed pursuant to this Article shall adhere to the following provisions:
A. Required Provisions. Master deeds submitted for approval of any condominium project pursuant to this Article shall include all items required under Sections 8, 31, 32, 33 and 54 of the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978), as applicable, as well as the following:
1. Description of all easements, including but not limited to:
a. Public road right-of-way or private road easements;
b. Easements for water systems, sanitary sewer systems, stormwater management systems and franchise utilities.
i. In site condominium projects, such easements shall be provided as set forth in the Charter Township of Oxford Land Division Ordinance (No. 103);
ii. In building or conversion condominium projects, such easements shall be provided as “blanket easements” covering the entire condominium project except unit areas and designated common areas.
2. Provisions to ensure the maintenance of all roads, utilities and stormwater management facilities.
Charter Township of Oxford 13-6 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3. A provision indicating that any future changes made to the master deed must be approved by Planning Commission pursuant to Section 13.9(I).
4. A provision requiring that all aspects of the development, operation and maintenance of the condominium project shall be subject to all Township ordinances.
5. A provision indicating the time or circumstance by which all responsibilities of the developer transfer to the Condominium Association.
B. Prohibitions. Provisions contained within a proposed master deed shall not cause or require any of the following:
1. Contradiction with any requirement of the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978);
2. Violation of Township, County, State or Federal laws and regulations;
3. Impairment of the public health, safety or welfare;
4. Impairment of the effective operation of the Condominium Association it establishes.
13.9 Additional Requirements for Condominium Projects.
A. Information Required Prior to Building Permit Issuance. Prior to the issuance of building permits for any condominium units, the applicant shall submit the following to the Zoning Official:
1. A copy of the master deed (including exhibits), as recorded with the Oakland County Register of Deeds.
2. A copy of any restrictive covenants, as recorded with the Oakland County Register of Deeds.
3. Evidence of completion of improvements associated with the site condominium project, including two (2) dimensionally-stable copies of the record drawings, to be approved by the Township Engineer.
B. Information to Be Kept Current. Until applicable certificates of occupancy have been issued, all information required by this Ordinance shall be kept current and furnished to the Zoning Official.
Charter Township of Oxford 13-7 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
C. Mobile Home Condominium Projects. Mobile home condominium projects shall conform to all requirements of this Ordinance and shall be located only in Manufactured Housing Community (MHC) zoning districts.
D. Compliance with Township Standards. All proposed improvements in a condominium shall comply with the current edition of the Engineering Design Standards Ordinance set forth in Chapter 42, Article IV of the Oxford Charter Township Code, as amended.
E. Encroachment Prohibited. Encroachment of one condominium lot upon another as described in Section 40 of the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978) shall be prohibited in the master deed. In addition, no common elements shall be permitted within the limited common elements of an individual condominium lot.
F. Relocation of Condominium Unit Boundaries. Relocation of boundaries between adjoining condominium units, if permitted in the master deed, as provided in Section 48 of the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978), shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which they are located, and shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator. These requirements shall be made a part of the bylaws and recorded as part of the master deed.
G. Division of Condominium Units. Each condominium unit that results from a subdivision of another condominium unit, if such subdivision is permitted by the master deed, as provided in Section 49 of the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978), shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which they are located, and shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator. These requirements shall be made a part of the condominium bylaws and recorded as part of the master deed.
H. Revision of Condominium Subdivision Plan. If the condominium subdivision plan is revised, the Final Site Plan shall be revised accordingly and submitted for review to the Planning Commission pursuant to Section 12.3(C). The Planning Commission shall approve the revised Final Site Plan before a building or land improvement permits may be issued, where such permits are required.
I. Amendment of Master Deed or Bylaws. Any amendment to a master deed that affects the approved Final Site Plan, or any conditions of approval of the Final Site Plan, shall be reviewed and approved by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission must approve any amendment of the master deed before any building permit may be issued, where such permit is required. The Planning Commission may require its review of an amended condominium plan if, in its opinion, such changes in the master deed or bylaws require corresponding changes in the approved condominium plan.
Charter Township of Oxford 13-8 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
J. Construction in a General Common Element. Any application for a building permit for construction to be located in a general common element shall include written authorization from the Condominium Association.
[This Page Intentionally Left Blank]
Charter Township of Oxford 14-1 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ARTICLE 14
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
14.1 Intent. A Planned Unit Development (PUD) may be applied for in any zoning district. The granting of PUD approval (pursuant to Section 14.6) shall constitute both site plan and rezoning approval, in which the resultant zoning is tied to the details contained in the accompanying site plan in addition to any other conditions attached to the PUD approval by the Township.
It is the intent of this Article to authorize the use of Planned Unit Development (PUD) regulations as an alternative to traditional development for the purposes of encouraging the use of land in accordance with its character and adaptability; conserving natural resources, natural features and energy; encouraging innovation and greater flexibility in land use planning and design; providing enhanced housing, employment, shopping, traffic circulation, farmland preservation, and recreational opportunities for the people of this Township; encouraging a less sprawling form of development; and ensuring compatibility of design and use between neighboring properties. The PUD is designed to give the Township and applicant more flexibility than would be allowed under the existing zoning, encouraging development of the property according to its unique characteristics.
The provisions of this Article are not intended as a device for ignoring the Zoning Ordinance and specific standards set forth therein, or the planning upon which it has been based. To that end, provisions of this Article are intended to result in land use development substantially consistent with the existing zoning and existing Charter Township of Oxford Master Plan, with modifications and departures from generally applicable requirements made in accordance with standards provided in this Article to ensure appropriate, fair, and consistent decision-making. Requirements stated in this Article are development guidelines that the Planning Commission, Township Board and Township staff will use to determine the merits of a particular application. The Planning Commission may recommend variations from these guidelines when an applicant has demonstrated that doing so will result in a corresponding benefit to the community.
14.2 Eligibility Criteria. To be eligible for Planned Unit Development (PUD) approval, the applicant shall demonstrate that the following criteria will be met:
A. Recognizable Benefit. The PUD will result in a recognizable and substantial benefit, both to the end users of the development and the overall quality of life in the Township. These benefits can be provided through site design elements in excess of the requirements of this Ordinance, such as one or more of the following:
Charter Township of Oxford 14-2 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
1. Preservation of natural features, specifically, but not limited to, woodlands, specimen trees, riparian systems, wetlands, open spaces and the connectivity thereof.
2. Improvements in traffic patterns, such as the provision of unified access or improvement of the adjacent road system.
3. Mitigation, remediation or restoration of disturbed areas or contaminated sites.
4. Improvements in the aesthetic qualities of the development itself, such as unique site design features and extensive landscaping.
5. Provision of pedestrian connectivity, via internal sidewalks, perimeter safety paths and other greenway corridors.
6. Improvements in public safety or welfare through better water supply, sewage disposal, stormwater management, or control of air and water pollution.
7. High quality architectural and landscape design.
8. Public amenities, such as plazas, parks, courtyards, water features, streetscape improvements, outdoor sculpture, clock towers, etc.
9. Provision of transitional areas between adjacent residential land uses.
10. Preservation of farmland.
11. Preservation of historic buildings.
Economic benefit to the community shall not, by itself, be deemed sufficient to allow eligibility, but may be considered in conjunction with the benefits listed above.
B. Density Impact. The proposed type, intensity or density of use shall not result in an unreasonable increase in the need for or impact to public services, facilities, roads, and utilities in relation to the use or uses otherwise permitted by this Ordinance, and shall not pose an unreasonable impact to the subject site; surrounding land, property owners and occupants; and/or the natural environment. The Planning Commission may require that the applicant prepare an impact statement documenting the significance of any environmental, traffic or socio-economic impacts resulting from the PUD. The potential impact of the proposed PUD project shall be evaluated in relation to the impacts associated with conventional development. To this end, the Planning Commission may require that the applicant prepare a quantitative comparison of the impacts of a conventional development and
Charter Township of Oxford 14-3 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
the PUD plan to assist in making this determination (such as an overlay of the conceptual development plans on a natural features map, illustrating other site development options to demonstrate that the impacts have been minimized to the extent practical). If the cumulative impact creates or contributes to a significant problem relative to the provision of public services or environmental degradation, mitigation shall be provided to alleviate the impacts associated with the PUD.
C. Master Plan. The proposed development shall be consistent with the intent and spirit of the Charter Township of Oxford Master Plan, and further its implementation. If the proposed development is not consistent with the Master Plan but there has been a change in conditions in the area that will explain why the proposed PUD is a reasonable use of land, the Planning Commission can consider a deviation from the Master Plan concurrent with the review and approval of the proposed PUD, pursuant to the standards provided in Section 14.5(F).
D. Guaranteed Open Space. The proposed PUD shall include the perpetual preservation of usable open space in accordance with the provisions of Section 14.3(I).
E. Economic Impact. In relation to the existing zoning, the proposed development shall not result in an unreasonable material negative economic impact upon surrounding properties, as determined by the Planning Commission.
F. Unified Control. The proposed development shall be under single ownership and/or control, such that there is a single person or entity having proprietary responsibility for the full completion of the project. The applicant shall provide sufficient documentation of ownership or control in the form of agreements, contracts, covenants, and/or deed restrictions that indicate that the development will be completed in its entirety as proposed.
14.3 Project Design Standards.
A. Location. A PUD may be applied for within any zoning district.
B. Permitted Uses or Combination of Uses. A PUD is permitted for the following types of uses: single-family detached, attached residential dwellings, commercial uses, office uses, industrial uses and mixed-use projects containing some combination of the above stated land uses.
C. Special Uses. For all special uses, regulations applicable to each respective use shall apply. The Township Board, in its discretion, shall resolve all ambiguities as to applicable special land use regulations. Deviations with respect to regulations applicable to such special land uses may be granted as part of the overall approval of the PUD, provided there are features or elements deemed adequate by the Township Board
Charter Township of Oxford 14-4 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
designed into the project plan for the purpose of achieving the objectives of this Article.
D. Base Zoning Regulations. Unless specifically waived or modified by the Planning Commission and Township Board, all Zoning Ordinance requirements for the underlying zoning district in existence upon application for PUD consideration, and other Township regulations, shall remain in full force.
E. Regulatory Flexibility. To encourage flexibility and creativity consistent with the PUD concept, the Planning Commission may recommend, and the Township Board may grant, specific departures from the dimensional, design or procedural requirements of the Zoning Ordinance as a part of the PUD approval process.
Any regulatory modifications shall be approved through findings by the Planning Commission and Township Board that the deviations shall result in a higher quality of development than would be possible using conventional zoning standards. Regulatory modifications are not subject to variance approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals. No part of a PUD plan may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals. This provision shall not preclude the owner of an individual lot within a PUD from seeking a dimensional variance following final approval of the PUD, provided such variance does not involve alterations to the common elements as shown on the approved PUD site plan.
A table shall be provided on the site plan which specifically details all deviations from the established zoning area, height, and setback regulations, off-street parking regulations, general provisions, or subdivision regulations that would otherwise be applicable to the uses and development proposed in the absence of this PUD Article. This specification should include ordinance provisions from which deviations are sought, and the reason and mechanisms to be utilized for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare, in lieu of the regulations from which deviations are sought. Only those deviations consistent with the intent of this Ordinance shall be considered.
F. Minimum Lot Size without Centralized Sewer. The minimum single-family residential lot size of any PUD that is not served by centralized sanitary sewer and water is one (1) acre, or as permitted by the Oakland County Department of Health and Human Services.
G. Density. Any application for a PUD shall be accompanied by three (3) plans: (1) a plan based on the property’s existing zoning at the time of application, (2) a density plan prepared in accordance with this sub-section, and (3) a PUD plan. The density allowable within a PUD shall be
Charter Township of Oxford 14-5 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
determined through preparation of the density plan, which shall have the following requirements:
1. The applicant shall prepare, and present to the Planning Commission for review, a density plan for the project that is consistent with State, County, and Township requirements and design criteria for a tentative preliminary plat or site condominium, whichever is appropriate. The density plan shall meet all standards for lot size, lot width and setbacks as normally required for the underlying zoning district, as applicable, public roadway improvements and private parks, and contain an area which conceptually would provide sufficient area for stormwater management. Lots in the density plan shall provide sufficient building envelope size without impacting floodplains and wetlands regulated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality.
The density plan shall be drawn at a scale not greater than 1"=100' and contain the following elements:
a. Layout of roads and rights-of-way.
b. Lot lines.
c. Wetland boundaries, submerged lands.
d. Floodplains.
e. Lot numbers and a schedule of lot areas.
f. Areas proposed for stormwater management.
2. The Planning Commission shall review the design and determine the number of lots that could be feasibly constructed under the density plan. This number, as determined by the Planning Commission, shall provide a guideline for the maximum number of dwelling units allowable for the PUD project. The Planning Commission may, however, recommend approval for a density credit for exemplary projects that meet the conditions outlined in Section 14.4.
3. The overall density of the project shall be determined by use of the density plan using the existing zoning designation of the property. The applicant may propose other underlying zoning categories as part of the PUD proposal for the consideration of density, subject to the Planning Commission’s acceptance. In considering whether an alternate underlying zoning category proposed by an applicant is acceptable, the Planning Commission shall take into consideration the following factors:
Charter Township of Oxford 14-6 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
a. Consistency with the Township’s adopted Master Plan;
b. Changes in the condition of the adjacent road network;
c. Changes in the condition and extent of the Township’s utility system;
d. Preservation of significant open space, farmland or natural features.
e. Overall benefit to the Township.
The ultimate density shall be recommended by the Planning Commission and determined by the Township Board and shall be based upon the existing zoning category of the subject property, or the alternate zoning category as accepted by the Planning Commission, as well as any density credit (if applicable, per Section 14.4).
4. If open space is proposed to be preserved on property that is not contiguous to the remainder of the development, pursuant to Section 14.3(I)(15), such property may be included in the density plan for purposes of calculating maximum allowable density for the overall project. Density contributed by such non-contiguous open space shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of Sections 14.3(G)(1), (2) and (3), above.
H. Natural Features. To the maximum extent feasible, the development shall be designed so as to preserve natural resources and natural features. In the interpretation of this provision, natural resources and natural features may be impaired or destroyed only if it is clearly in the public interest to do so. In determining whether an action is in the public interest, the benefit, which would reasonably be expected to accrue from the proposal, shall be balanced against the reasonably foreseeable detriments of the activity, taking into consideration the local, state, and national concern for the protection and preservation of the natural resources or features. To accomplish the desired balance, the following criteria shall be applied:
1. The availability of feasible and prudent alternative methods of completing the development;
2. The extent and permanence of the beneficial or detrimental effects of the proposed activity; and
3. The size, quality, and rarity of the natural resources or natural features that would be impaired or destroyed.
Charter Township of Oxford 14-7 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
The Planning Commission and Township Board may require the submittal of a tree inventory (showing the location, size and species of all trees measured six (6) inches DHB or greater), where significant woodlands or landmark trees are expected to be significantly impacted by the development. Further, if animal or plant habitats of significant value exist on the site, the Planning Commission and Township Board may require that the PUD plan preserve these areas in a natural state and adequately protect them within conservation easements having limited access. The Planning Commission and Township Board shall require a minimum twenty-five (25) foot wide undisturbed setback from the edge of any lake, pond, river, stream or wetland, as provided in Section 10.3; provided, however, that the Planning Commission and Township Board may permit trails, boardwalks, observation platforms, or other similar structures than enhance the passive enjoyment of the site’s natural amenities, within the setback.
I. Open Space. Open space shall be preserved within PUD projects as follows:
1. Residential Planned Unit Developments, or portions thereof, shall maintain at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the Gross Buildable Area of the subject property (prior to development) as permanently protected, usable open space.
2. Non-residential Planned Unit Developments, or portions thereof, shall maintain at least ten percent (10%) of the Gross Buildable Area of the subject property (prior to development) as permanently protected, usable open space.
3. Usable open space preserved pursuant to this Section shall include both active and passive areas, and may consist of natural features, recreational areas, landscaped greenbelts or farmland. However, the following are not considered usable open space:
a. The area of all roads, public or private, and accompanying right-of-way or easement.
b. The area of any lot or site condominium unit proposed within the development.
c. Wetlands regulated by either the MDEQ or under the Township’s Ordinance No. 80B, lakes or other submerged lands.
d. The required setbacks surrounding any structure, residential or otherwise, that is not located on an individual lot or site condominium unit.
Charter Township of Oxford 14-8 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
e. Stormwater management facility, including detention, retention and sedimentation basins.
f. The area of any utility easements, unless such easements could be used for building.
4. Open space shall be centrally located, located along the road frontage of the development, located to preserve significant natural features, or located to connect open spaces throughout the development.
5. Open space must be left in its natural condition, provided with recreational amenities, provided for active farming, or landscaped. Preserved open space shall not be left primarily as lawn.
6. Open space provided along exterior public roads shall generally have a depth of at least one hundred (100) feet, measured from the road right-of-way, and be either landscaped or left in a natural, wooded condition. In either case, open space along exterior public roads shall be provided with a minimum of one (1) evergreen or canopy tree for each twenty (20) feet of road frontage. Such plantings shall be planted in staggered rows or clustered into natural groupings to provide a natural appearance. Preservation of existing trees may be credited towards meeting this frontage landscaping requirement. Where the Planning Commission determines that a significant natural viewshed exists on the subject property, they may, in their discretion, require the preservation of such viewshed and prohibit the removal or disturbance of the natural landscape along the adjacent roadway where the viewshed is observed.
7. Open space must be accessible. Access can be provided via sidewalks and pathways throughout the development or where open space abuts road rights-of-way within the development.
8. Connections with adjacent open space, public land or existing or planned pedestrian/bike paths may be required by the Planning Commission.
9. Views of open spaces from lots (or units) and roads within the development are encouraged.
10. Where lakes, ponds or streams are located within or abut a development, the Planning Commission may require open space to provide waterfront access.
11. Preservation of Open Space. Open space shall be set aside by the developer through an irrevocable recorded document that is found
Charter Township of Oxford 14-9 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
acceptable to the Planning Commission and Township Board, such as:
a. Recorded deed restrictions;
b. Covenants that run perpetually with the land;
c. Dedication to a land conservancy approved by the Planning Commission; or,
d. A conservation easement established per the State of Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994 , as amended (MCL 324.2140).
12. Preservation of open space as described above under 14.3(I)(11) shall assure that open space will be protected from all forms of development, except as shown on an approved site plan, and shall never be changed to another use. The recorded document utilized shall:
a. Indicate the proposed allowable use(s) of the preserved open space. The Planning Commission and Township Board may require the inclusion of open space restrictions that prohibit the following:
i. Dumping or storing of any material or refuse;
ii. Activity that may cause risk of soil erosion or threaten any living plant material;
iii. Cutting or removal of live plant material except for removal of dying or diseased vegetation;
iv. Use of motorized off-road vehicles;
v. Cutting, filling or removal of vegetation from wetland areas;
vi. Use of pesticides, herbicides or fertilizers within or adjacent to wetlands.
b. Require that the preserved open space be maintained by parties who have an ownership interest in the open space.
c. Provide standards for scheduled maintenance of the open space.
Charter Township of Oxford 14-10 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
d. Provide for maintenance to be undertaken by the Charter Township of Oxford, at the Township’s option, in the event that the preserved open space is inadequately maintained, or is determined by the Township to be a public nuisance, with the assessment of costs upon the property owners.
13. Continuing Obligation. The preserved open space shall forever remain open space, subject only to uses approved by the Township on the approved site plan or plat. Further subdivision of open space land or its use for other than recreation, conservation or agricultural purposes, except for easements for utilities and septic systems, shall be strictly prohibited.
14. Allowable Structures. Any structure(s) or building(s) accessory to a recreation, conservation or agriculture use may be erected within the preserved open space, subject to the approved site plan. Accessory structures may include:
a. Recreation structures (gazebos, boardwalks, docks, etc.);
b. Maintenance buildings;
c. Clubhouses;
d. Other structures as approved by the Planning Commission.
These accessory structures or buildings, together with their associated parking lots and access roads, shall not exceed, in aggregate, one (1) percent of the required open space area.
15. Off-Site Provision of Required Open Space. At the option of the applicant, and subject to the acceptance of the Planning Commission and Township Board, open space required pursuant to this Section may be satisfied through the acquisition and permanent preservation of open space or agricultural lands that are not contiguous to the proposed project area. Such non-contiguous open space must still adhere to the standards of Section 14.3(I)(3), (4) and (5), and should further the objectives of preserving natural features, preserving agriculture, or providing recreational opportunities addressed in the Charter Township of Oxford Master Plan and Parks and Recreation Plan.
In the event that a proposal entails the preservation of such non-contiguous open space, the property upon which the non-contiguous open space is proposed shall be included in the calculation of required open space described above under Sections 14.3(I)(1) and (2). For example, if a property to be developed consisted of 80 acres of gross buildable area, and a property proposed to be preserved as
Charter Township of Oxford 14-11 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
non-contiguous open space consisted of 20 acres of gross buildable area, the percentage of open space required under Sections 14.3(I)(1) and (2) would be based upon 100 acres of gross buildable areas (i.e. the aggregate of all property involved in the proposal). Thus, for a residential PUD, a minimum of 25 acres of buildable land would be required, while a non-residential PUD would require a minimum of 10 acres.
The preservation of non-contiguous open space as part of a residential PUD shall not result in neighborhood(s) devoid of recreational facilities. At minimum, access to a park designed for active recreation of at least one (1) acre in size shall be provided within one-quarter (¼) of a mile from all proposed residences.
J. Agricultural or Equestrian Activities. Where a proposed PUD is located adjacent or in proximity to areas of the Township that where agricultural or equestrian activities are predominant land uses, measures shall be taken to minimize conflict between such uses and promote the continued use of adjacent lands for such purposes. Such measures could include, but are not limited to, one or more of the following:
1. Preservation of open space in proximity of existing agricultural or equestrian operations;
2. Maintenance of lower density and intensity of land use in proximity to existing agricultural or equestrian operations;
3. Continued use of preserved open space having proximity to existing agricultural or equestrian operations for such purposes;
4. Design of traffic circulation systems so as not to conflict with existing agricultural or operations;
5. Use of design elements, such as split rail fencing and other features drawing from the agricultural and/or equestrian vernacular of the Oxford area.
K. Infrastructure and Public Services. The proposed PUD shall not exceed the capacity of existing and available public services, including utilities, public roads, police and fire protection services, unless the project proposal contains an acceptable plan for providing necessary services or evidence that such services will be available by the time the PUD is completed. Thoroughfare, drainage, and utility design shall meet or exceed the standards otherwise applicable in connection with each of the respective types of uses served. There shall be underground installation of utilities, including electricity, telephone and cable, unless determined unfeasible to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission and Township Board.
Charter Township of Oxford 14-12 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
L. Traffic Impact. The PUD shall be designed to minimize the impact of traffic generated by the proposed development on surrounding uses. In determining whether this requirement has been met, a traffic study shall be submitted as part of the PUD, and consideration shall be given to:
1. Access to, and capacity of, adjacent roads and thoroughfares.
2. Proximity and relation to intersections.
3. Estimated traffic to be generated by the proposed development.
4. Existing and projected levels of service on the adjacent road network.
5. Adequacy of driver sight distances.
6. Capacity of gravel roadways.
7. Need for current or future improvement to the adjacent road network.
8. Location of and access to off-street parking.
9. Required vehicular turning movements.
10. Provisions for pedestrian traffic.
M. Roads Master Plan. Evidence shall be provided that the proposed PUD is consistent with the proposed roads and road improvements included in the Charter Township of Oxford Roads Master Plan.
N. Access. Direct access onto a public road right-of-way shall be required of a PUD. The nearest edge of any entrance or exit drive shall be located no closer than two hundred (200) feet from any existing street or road intersection (as measured from the nearest intersection right-of-way line).
O. Internal Roads. Internal roads within a PUD may be public or private.
1. Public roadways within a PUD shall meet the design requirements of the Road Commission for Oakland County.
2. Private roadways within a PUD shall meet the requirements of Article 11.
3. It shall be indicated on the plans whether on-street parking is proposed for internal road within the PUD. Road widths shall be coordinated to insure that adequate road width is provided to allow safe and efficient circulation of vehicles through the development.
4. Both sides of all internal roads shall be landscaped with street trees. For road frontages of individual lots or condominium sites, a
Charter Township of Oxford 14-13 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
minimum of two (2) canopy trees shall be provided per residential dwelling. For sections of road that do not abut lots or condominium sites, a minimum of one (1) canopy tree shall be provided per side for every fifty (50) feet of road frontage. Existing trees to be preserved within five (5) feet of the road right-of-way or easement may be credited towards meeting this requirement, at the discretion of the Planning Commission, when a tree survey has been provided in accordance with Section 14.3(H).
P. Parking. Parking shall be so designed as to minimize imperviousness, minimize visual impacts onto neighboring property and the public right-of-way, and promote safety and accessibility. In accomplishing these objectives, a PUD shall incorporate one (1) or more of the following:
1. Reduce parking and impervious areas to the minimum necessary to serve the proposed use(s).
2. Bank parking where it is not foreseen to be needed in the immediate future.
3. Design parking so it may be shared between two (2) or more uses or buildings where it can be shown that all uses or buildings will have sufficient parking at the times of day when such parking is needed.
4. Concentrate parking to the sides and/or rear of the development, as opposed to the front of the building(s) adjacent to the road right-of-way.
5. Provide perimeter or arterial collector drives that are free from parking spaces and provide direct, safe, and efficient circulation of vehicles in and out of proposed parking areas.
Q. Pedestrian Circulation. The PUD plan shall provide pedestrian access to all open space areas from all residential/development areas, connections between open space areas, public thoroughfares and connections between appropriate on-site and off-site uses, subject to the following:
1. Trails within the PUD may be constructed of gravel, wood chips or other similar materials, but the Planning Commission and Township Board may require construction of an eight (8) foot wide asphalt safety path through portions of the development.
2. Safety paths shall be provided along all perimeter roads, pursuant to the Safety Paths and Sidewalks Ordinance (Article III of Chapter 42 of the Code of Ordinances) as well as along new collector and arterial roads.
Charter Township of Oxford 14-14 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3. Sidewalks at least five (5) feet in width shall be provided on both sides of public and private streets internal to the development and shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the Safety Paths and Sidewalks Ordinance (Article III of Chapter 42 of the Code of Ordinances). Sidewalk maintenance provisions shall be provided within associated development agreements and condominium documents.
In instances where new sidewalks will not promote adequate pedestrian linkages/circulation, the Township Board may waive or modify this requirement after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission.
4. In all cases, where separation can be accomplished without significantly reducing the kind and density of uses, the pedestrian circulation system, and its related walkways and safety paths, shall be separated from vehicular thoroughfares and roadways.
5. Pedestrian and other non-motorized transportation routes identified in the Township’s Master Plan shall be incorporated into the pedestrian circulation system, as applicable.
R. Compatibility with Adjacent Uses. The proposed PUD shall set forth specifications with respect to height, setbacks, density, parking, circulation, landscaping, views, and other design and layout features which demonstrate due regard for the relationship of the development to surrounding properties and the uses thereon, as well as the relationship between residential and non-residential uses within the PUD project itself. In determining whether this requirement has been met, consideration shall be given to:
1. The bulk, placement, and materials of construction of proposed structures.
2. The location and screening of vehicular circulation and parking areas in relation to surrounding development.
3. The location and screening of outdoor storage, outdoor activity or work areas, loading areas, and mechanical equipment in relation to surrounding development.
4. The hours of operation of the proposed uses.
5. The provision of landscaping and other site amenities.
S. Buffering and Transition Areas. Where the PUD abuts land zoned or used for residential purposes, the Planning Commission and Township Board may require a transition area. The Planning Commission may review the
Charter Township of Oxford 14-15 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
proposed transition area to ensure compatibility, with consideration of the particular scale of the proposed project, magnitude of disparity between the proposed PUD and the existing residential land, and other relevant factors. The Planning Commission and Township Board may require that the transition area consist of one (1) or more of the following:
1. One or more rows or clusters of single-family residential lots or units similar to the adjacent single-family developments in terms of density, lot area, lot width, setbacks and building spacing.
2. Woodlands, natural features and/or a landscaped greenbelt sufficient to provide an obscuring effect.
3. Open or recreational space.
4. Berming or other significant changes in topography, which provide an effective buffer.
5. If the PUD project includes non-residential uses adjacent to a district authorizing residential uses, a perimeter setback shall be established with a dimension from the property line of up to one hundred (100) feet, at the discretion of the Planning Commission and Township Board, taking into consideration the use or uses in and adjacent to the development. The setback distance need not be uniform at all points on the perimeter of the development.
In order to evaluate whether the proposed transition area is suitable, the Planning Commission and Township Board may require the submission of cross-section illustrations at points along the property line(s) in question, illustrating existing and proposed buildings, grades, lighting, landscaping, parking and loading, mechanical units, and the like. Perspective renderings from adjacent residential units are encouraged.
In all cases where non-residential uses abut residentially-zoned or used property, noise reduction and visual screening mechanisms such as earthen berms, landscape screens and/or decorative walls shall be employed. The Planning Commission and Township Board, at their discretion, shall review and approve the design and location of such mechanisms in an effort to maximize, to a reasonable extent, the screening and buffering of existing or proposed residential property.
T. Architectural and Site Element Design.
1. Residential facades shall not be dominated by garages; a portion of proposed residential units shall have side-entry garages, rear-entry garages, or recessed garages where the front of the garage is at least five (5) feet behind the front line of the living portion of the principal dwelling. The intent of encouraging recessed or side-entry
Charter Township of Oxford 14-16 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
garages is to enhance the aesthetic appearance of the development and minimize the visual impact resulting from the close clustering of units allowed under these regulations.
2. Building elevations shall be required for all structures other than custom-built single-family dwellings.
3. Signage, lighting, entryway features, landscaping, building materials for the exterior of all structures, and other features of the project, shall be designed and completed with the objective of achieving an integrated and cohesive development, consistent with the character of the community, surrounding development, and natural features of the area. The Planning Commission and Township Board may require street or site lighting where appropriate.
U. Traditional Design Concept. Where a PUD is proposed adjacent or in proximity to areas where historic, traditional settlement patterns persist, the Planning Commission may require a proposed PUD, or portion thereof, to extend such settlement patterns. Traditional settlement patterns can include, but are not limited to, rectilinear street grids broken into blocks of reasonable size, pedestrian amenities and orientation, traditional architecture, etc.
V. Existing Structures. When a tract or parcel of land proposed for PUD consideration contains structures or buildings deemed to be of historic, cultural, agricultural, or architectural significance, as determined by the Planning Commission and Township Board, and are suitable for rehabilitation, the structures shall be retained. Adaptive reuse of existing structures for residential or non-residential use or permitted accessory uses shall be encouraged.
W. Impervious Surface Reduction/Infiltration Enhancement. The Township recognizes that, due to the specific requirements of any given development, inflexible application of the design standards may result in development with excessive paving and stormwater runoff and a waste of space which could be left as open space.
Through procedures prescribed by these PUD regulations, the Township may permit deviations from requirements allowing for reduction in impervious surfaces whenever it finds that such deviations are more likely to meet the intent and standards of this Ordinance and accommodate the specific characteristics of the use in question. Measures that reduce impervious surface and increase infiltration may include, but are not limited to, the following:
1. Streets and Access.
Charter Township of Oxford 14-17 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
a. Design residential streets with the minimum required pavement width needed to support travel lanes, on-street parking, and emergency, maintenance, and service vehicle access and function based on traffic volumes.
b. Decrease the total length of residential streets by examining alternative street layouts to determine the best option for increasing the number of homes per unit length.
c. Minimize the number of street cul-de-sacs and where cul-de-sacs do exist, provide landscape center islands.
d. Use vegetated open channels in the street right-of-way/private road easements to convey and treat stormwater runoff.
e. Use alternative driveway surfaces and shared driveways that connect two or more sites.
2. Parking.
a. Base parking requirements on the specific characteristics of the use, land-banking in open space parking required to satisfy Ordinance requirements.
b. Reduce the overall imperviousness associated with parking lots by providing compact car spaces, minimizing stall dimensions, incorporating efficient parking lanes, and using pervious materials in the spillover parking areas where possible.
c. Encourage shared parking between compatible users.
3. Site Design.
a. Direct rooftop runoff to pervious areas such as yards, open channels, or vegetated areas and avoid routing rooftop runoff to the roadway and the stormwater conveyance system.
b. Create a naturally vegetated buffer system which may vary in width as determined by the Township along all drainage ways. Critical environmental features such as the one hundred (100) year floodplain, steep slopes, and wetlands shall be considered.
Charter Township of Oxford 14-18 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
c. Minimize clearing and grading of woodlands and native vegetation to the minimum amount needed to build lots, allow access, and provide fire protection.
d. Conserve trees and other vegetation at each site by planting additional vegetation, clustering tree areas, and promoting the use of native plants.
X. Additional Considerations. The Planning Commission shall take into account, in considering approval or denial of a particular project, the following considerations, as the same may be relevant to a particular project: drainage and utility design; underground installation of utilities; achievement of an integrated development with respect to signage, lighting, landscaping and building materials; and noise reduction and visual screening of mechanical equipment.
14.4 Density Credit for Exemplary Projects.
A. The Planning Commission and Township Board may allow an exemplary Planned Unit Development (PUD) to include a variable density credit of up to fifteen (15) percent pursuant to this Section. In order to qualify for such increase in density, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission and Township Board that the proposed project exhibits design excellence and exceeds the minimum standards for PUD eligibility under Section 14.2.
B. In order to qualify for development under the optional provisions of this Section, architectural standards shall be subject to review by the Planning Commission and Township Board. Buildings shall be harmonious with adjacent uses in terms of texture, materials, roof lines and mass, but there shall be a variation of front facade depth and roof lines to avoid monotony. Building elevations shall be required for all structures, including single-family homes.
C. Projects qualifying for a density credit shall provide elements such as the following:
1. A high level of clustered development, where at least forty (40) percent of the gross buildable area of the site is preserved as common open space.
2. Providing perimeter transition areas or greenbelts around all sides of the development that are at least one hundred (100) feet in depth.
3. The proposed plan is designed to enhance surface water quality and ground water quality.
4. Provisions and design that preserve and enhance natural features.
Charter Township of Oxford 14-19 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
5. Donation or contribution of land or amenities that represent significant community benefit.
6. Other similar elements as determined by the Planning Commission and Township Board.
14.5 Project Approval Criteria. In considering any application for approval of a Planned Unit Development (PUD) plan, the Planning Commission and Township Board shall make their determinations on the Criteria for Site Plan Approval set forth in Section 12.5, as well as the following standards and requirements:
A. Consistency with PUD Concept and Design Standards. The overall design and land uses proposed in connection with a PUD plan shall be consistent with the intent of the PUD concept, as well as with specific design standards set forth herein.
B. Compatibility with Adjacent Uses. The proposed PUD plan shall set forth in detail, all specifications with respect to height, setbacks, density, parking, circulation, landscaping, views, and other design features that exhibit due regard for the relationship of the development to surrounding properties, the character of the site, and the land uses. In determining whether this requirement has been met, consideration shall be given to:
1. The bulk, placement, and materials of construction for the proposed structures.
2. Pedestrian and vehicular circulation.
3. The location and screening of vehicular use or parking areas.
4. The provision of landscaping and other site amenities.
C. Impact of Traffic. The proposed PUD shall be designed to minimize the impact of traffic generated by the PUD on surrounding uses.
D. Protection of Natural Environment. The proposed PUD shall be protective of the natural environment. It shall comply with all applicable environmental protection laws and regulations.
E. Compliance with Applicable Regulations. The proposed PUD shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations.
F. Township Master Plan. The proposed PUD shall be consistent with, and further the implementation of, the Township Master Plan. If the proposed PUD is not consistent with the Master Plan, the Planning Commission and Township Board may consider reasons for deviating from the Master Plan. This could include one or more of the following:
Charter Township of Oxford 14-20 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
1. Changes in surrounding land use or zoning.
2. Changes in the condition or extent of infrastructure, such as roads, sewers, etc.
3. Township benefit.
4. Design excellence.
14.6 Procedures for Review and Approval. The planned unit development approval process shall constitute a rezoning coupled with a site plan, in which the resultant PUD zoning designation is strictly tied to the details contained on the associated site plan, those provisions of the Zoning Ordinance that have not been specifically modified by the proposed PUD, and any other conditions imposed upon the PUD approval. Planned unit development proposals shall adhere to the following procedures for review and approval, which have been summarized in the flowchart below:
Optional
Optional PrePre--Application Confer-Application Confer-ence ence with the with the Planning CommissionPlanning Commission
Submittal of
Submittal of
Preliminary
Preliminary PUD PlanPUD Plan Pursuant to Section Pursuant to Section 14.14.6(B)6(B)
Action on
Action on PreliminaryPreliminary PUD PlanPUD Plan by by Planning Commission and Planning Commission and Township BoardTownship Board
Action on
Action on FinalFinal PUD PlanPUD Plan by by Planning Commission and Town-Planning Commission and Town-ship Boardship Board
Execution of
Execution of PUD AgreementPUD Agreement following approval of the Final following approval of the Final PUD and any related conditionsPUD and any related conditions
Submittal of
Submittal of Final Final PUD PlanPUD Plan Pursuant to Section Pursuant to Section 14.14.6(6(CC))
Public Hearing
Public Hearing held by held by Planning Commission Planning Commission
Charter Township of Oxford 14-21 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
A. Pre-Application Conference. Prior to the submission of an application for Planned Unit Development (PUD) approval, an optional pre-application conference may be held at a regularly-scheduled or special meeting of the Planning Commission. The purpose of this conference shall focus on the PUD process and required information, as outlined in this Section, and shall not constitute any form of official review and approval of the PUD project. Nor shall this conference in any way circumvent, replace, or supersede the review and approval powers of the Planning Commission and Township Board regarding the PUD application. The applicant shall present at such conference, or conferences, at least a sketch plan of the proposed PUD, as well as the following information:
1. Total size of the project.
2. A statement of the number of residential units, if any.
3. The number and type of non-residential uses.
4. The size of the area to be occupied by each type of use.
5. The known deviations from ordinance regulations to be sought.
6. The number of acres to be preserved as open or recreational space.
7. All known natural or historic features to be preserved.
8. Anticipated demand for public sanitary sewer and water service.
9. The extent of known soil or groundwater contamination on the site.
B. Preliminary PUD Plan. Following the optional pre-application conference (if one was held), the applicant shall submit a Preliminary PUD Plan and application for the proposed PUD.
1. Submittal. The Preliminary PUD Plan, application form, and supplementary materials shall be submitted to the Building Department and shall be put on the next available Planning Commission agenda for consideration. Upon their initial consideration of the proposed Preliminary PUD Plan, the Planning Commission shall set a date for the required public hearing.
2. Information Required. Every Preliminary PUD Plan submitted for review under this Section shall contain all of the following data prior to its submission to the Planning Commission for review and approval. Submittals shall be made in both digital and paper formats. The contents of digital and paper submittals shall be identical to one another. Digital submittals shall be provided in PDF file format on CD. Paper submittals shall be provided with a sheet size of at least
Charter Township of Oxford 14-22 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
24" x 36". The scale of all plan view drawings shall be a maximum of 1" = 50' for property less than five (5) acres, or a maximum of 1" = 100' for property five (5) or more acres. Any of the following requirements may be waived by the Planning Commission when determined to be unnecessary, not applicable, or premature at this stage of review, given the nature, size, and scope of the development.
a. A narrative description of the project, discussing the market concept of the project, and explaining the manner in which the criteria set forth for eligibility and design have been met.
b. Provide evidence of compatibility with the Master Plan.
c. Provide evidence of compatibility with all adjacent uses.
d. An explanation of why the submitted PUD plan is superior to a plan that could have been prepared under strict adherence to related sections of this Ordinance.
e. Applicant’s name, address, and telephone number.
f. The name of the proposed development.
g. Common description of the property and complete legal description.
h. Dimensions of land, including width, length, acreage, and frontage.
i. Existing zoning and current land use of the property under consideration and zoning and current land use of all adjacent properties.
j. General location of all existing structures, roadways, and natural features including, but not limited to, topographical contours at two (2) foot intervals, lakes, streams, wetlands and/or other watercourses, specimen trees and/or stands of trees on and within one hundred (100) feet of the subject site.
k. Locations of existing culturally, historically, and architecturally significant structures.
l. Name, address, city and phone number of the firm or individual who prepared the plan; and the owner of the property.
m. The density plan as set forth in Section 14.3(G).
Charter Township of Oxford 14-23 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
n. The proposed underlying zoning district (if different than the existing zoning district in which the property is currently located).
o. Any proposed density bonus pursuant to Section 14.4.
p. Superimposed on the existing conditions drawing or by transparent overlay on such drawing or on a recent aerial photograph of the site, the general location of all proposed buildings, roadways, parking areas, and any other changes proposed to be made on the subject property. The drawing shall also indicate proposed preliminary spot grades in sufficient number to show the general intent of proposed grading, with emphasis on grading to be done in areas of existing natural features such as existing vegetation, trees, slopes or wetlands.
q. A traffic study, pursuant to Section 14.3(L).
r. Layout of proposed structures, parking lots, drives and other site improvements.
s. An outline of the design elements implemented to achieve compatibility with adjacent land uses, as necessary to determine compliance with Section 14.5(B).
t. A table outlining all proposed deviations from the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance that are embodied in the PUD proposal, as required under Section 14.3(E).
u. An outline of preliminary conditions and/or stipulations to be attached to the PUD proposal, revised to include those items agreed upon through negotiation between the applicant and the Planning Commission and Township Board.
v. Any additional graphics or written materials requested by the Planning Commission or Township Board, to assist the Township in determining the appropriateness of the PUD.
3. Public Hearing. The Preliminary PUD Plan shall be noticed for a public hearing before the Planning Commission, in accordance with the procedures, public notice, and hearing requirements for rezoning approval as set forth in Article 18. If any Planning Commissioner is unable to attend the public hearing, they may submit written comments to the Township Clerk, who will forward them to the Planning Commission for inclusion into the record of the hearing.
Charter Township of Oxford 14-24 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
4. Planning Commission Action. Following the public hearing, or at a subsequent Planning Commission meeting, the Planning Commission shall review the Preliminary PUD Plan and shall take one of the following actions:
a. Approval. Upon finding that the Preliminary PUD Plan meets the criteria set forth in the intent and this Section, the Planning Commission shall recommend approval of the Preliminary PUD Plan to the Township Board.
Approval by the Township Board shall constitute approval of the uses, density, and design concept as shown on the Preliminary PUD Plan but shall only confer upon the applicant the right to proceed to preparation of the Final PUD Plan. However, such Preliminary PUD approval shall not constitute final approval of the rezoning of the property to the PUD zoning designation. In no case shall a recommendation regarding the Preliminary PUD Plan by the Planning Commission bind the Township Board to approve or deny the Preliminary PUD Plan submittal.
b. Approval with Changes or Conditions. The Planning Commission may recommend conditional approval to the Township Board, subject to modifications as performed by the applicant.
c. Postponement. Upon finding that the Preliminary PUD Plan does not meet the criteria set forth in the intent of this Section, but could meet such criteria if revised, the Planning Commission may recommend that action on the proposal be postponed until a revised Preliminary PUD Plan is submitted.
d. Denial. Upon finding that the Preliminary PUD Plan does not meet the criteria set forth in the intent of this Section, the Planning Commission shall recommend denial of the Preliminary PUD Plan to the Township Board. Such recommendation shall be accompanied by findings of fact articulating those eligibility criteria, design standards and/or approval criteria that the Planning Commission believes are contradicted by the PUD proposal.
5. Township Board Action. Upon finding that the Planning Commission has issued a recommendation on the Preliminary PUD Plan, the Township Board may approve, approve with conditions, postpone or deny said Preliminary PUD Plan. Once the Township Board approves, approves with conditions, or denies the Preliminary PUD,
Charter Township of Oxford 14-25 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
the Clerk shall notify both the applicant and Planning Commission, in writing, of the Township Board’s action.
C. Final PUD Plan. Following Township Board action on the Preliminary PUD Plan, the applicant shall submit a Final PUD Plan and application for the proposed PUD. If a Final PUD Plan is not submitted by the applicant for final approval within twelve (12) months of Preliminary PUD Plan approval by the Township Board, the Preliminary PUD Plan approval becomes null and void. In the case of multi-phase projects, such application for final approval shall be submitted for at least one (1) phase in the project. The Planning Commission may, however, issue a waiver for greater periods of time if it is determined to be appropriate, as a condition of Preliminary PUD Plan approval. Such extension and request of waiver shall be made prior to the expiration date.
1. Submittal. The Final PUD Plan, application form, and supplementary materials shall be submitted to the Building Department and shall be put on the next available Planning Commission agenda for consideration.
2. Information Required. Every Final PUD Plan submitted for review under this Section shall contain all of the following data prior to its submission to the Planning Commission for review and approval. Submittals shall be made in both digital and paper formats. The contents of digital and paper submittals shall be identical to one another. Digital submittals shall be provided in PDF file format on CD. Paper submittals shall be provided with a sheet size of at least 24" x 36". The scale of all plan view drawings shall be a maximum of 1" = 50' for property less than five (5) acres, or a maximum of 1" = 100' for property five (5) or more acres. Any of the following requirements may be waived by the Planning Commission when determined to be unnecessary, not applicable, or premature at this stage of review, given the nature, size, and scope of the development.
a. All information required for Preliminary PUD plan submittal.
b. All submittal requirements for Final Site Plan review as specified in Section 12.3(C)(2) of this Ordinance.
c. Layout and typical dimensions of proposed lots, building footprints, and dimensions of proposed buildings and structures, and uses, with the acreage allotted to each use.
d. Proposed grades shown using contours of no greater than two (2) foot intervals.
Charter Township of Oxford 14-26 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
e. Detailed depiction of those natural features which are to be preserved, modified or disturbed, or destroyed, shown in relation to the limits of proposed grading and land disturbance.
f. Location, acreage and dimensions of areas to be preserved as open space, distinguishing between that open space which meets the standards of Section 14.3(I)(3), and that which does not.
g. A landscape plan, indicating the type, location, quantity, size and species of all plant materials proposed, along with details of non-plant landscape treatment. The landscape plan shall also note existing trees and landscaping to be retained.
h. Site improvements and amenities including, but not limited to, lighting, signage, play equipment, landscape features, pedestrian amenities, and the like, as well as those mechanisms designed to reduce audible and/or visual impacts.
i. A utility master plan for the entire PUD site, including the location and size of all public and private utilities, utility services, storm sewers, basins, and necessary easements.
j. Number, location and dimensions of proposed parking areas and individual spaces.
k. Cross-sections of proposed roads, paths, sidewalks and other paved areas, illustrating proposed construction materials and thicknesses thereof.
l. Proposed street names as approved by the Township Fire Chief and the Road Commission for Oakland County.
m. Proposed off-site road improvements, including, but not limited to, acceleration, deceleration, and passing lanes.
n. Architectural elevations, floor plans and building materials proposed for the exterior of buildings and structures proposed within the development.
o. Draft Master Deed, Bylaws, and Exhibit B drawings, or similar restrictions and covenants, as applicable, including all necessary provisions for the maintenance of proposed stormwater facilities, private roads, open space and other comment elements and/or facilities.
Charter Township of Oxford 14-27 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
p. The anticipated schedule of development and construction for the project, including proposed phasing.
q. Letters of preliminary or conceptual approval from all outside agencies having jurisdiction over the project, such as, but not limited to, the Road Commission for Oakland County, Oakland County Drain Commissioner, Oakland County Department of Health and Human Services, and Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. For those agencies that require final permit approval prior to construction, this shall not be construed to require evidence of such approval.
r. A delineation of all deviations from this Ordinance that would otherwise be applicable to the uses and development proposed in the absence of this PUD Section.
s. Evidence demonstrating that the conditions placed on the Preliminary PUD approval have been addressed.
t. Draft PUD Agreement, prepared by the Township’s Attorney and Planner, encompassing all conditions, benefits, zoning deviations, etc., negotiated as part of the proposal.
u. Any additional graphics or written materials requested by the Planning Commission or Township Board, to assist the Township in determining the appropriateness of the PUD.
v. Signatures of all parties having an interest in the property.
w. Copies of all drawings and materials larger than an 8½” x 11” sheet of paper shall be provided to the Township in an acceptable digital format.
3. Consistency with Preliminary PUD Approval. The Final PUD Plan shall be consistent with the approved Preliminary PUD Plan, in terms of land use, layout, density, open space preservation and any other consideration addressed under the Preliminary PUD. If, upon submittal of the Final PUD Plan, the Planning Commission determines that such consistency has not been maintained, another public hearing shall be held pursuant to Section 14.6(B)(3), and the Planning Commission shall reaffirm their approval of the Preliminary PUD before proceeding with consideration of the Final PUD Plan. The foregoing requirement shall not preclude the Planning Commission from holding additional public hearings as they deem necessary.
4. Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall review the Final PUD Plan and shall take one of the following actions:
Charter Township of Oxford 14-28 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
a. Approval. Upon finding that the Final PUD Plan meets the approval criteria of this Article, the Planning Commission shall recommend Final PUD Plan approval to the Township Board.
b. Approval with Changes or Conditions. The Planning Commission may recommend conditional approval to the Township Board, subject to modifications as performed by the applicant.
c. Postponement. Upon finding that the Final PUD Plan does not meet the approval criteria of this Article, but could meet such criteria if revised, the Planning Commission may recommend that action on the proposal be postponed until a revised Final PUD Plan is submitted.
d. Denial. Upon finding that the Final PUD Plan does not meet the approval criteria of this Article, the Planning Commission shall recommend denial of the Final PUD Plan to the Township Board.
5. Township Board Action. The Township Board shall review the Final PUD Plan and shall take one of the following actions:
a. Approval. Upon finding that the Final PUD Plan meets the approval criteria of this Article, the Township Board may approve the Final PUD.
b. Approval with Changes or Conditions. The Township Board may conditionally approve the Final PUD, subject to modifications as performed by the applicant.
c. Postponement. Upon finding that the Final PUD Plan does not meet the approval criteria of this Article, but could meet such criteria if revised, the Township Board may postpone action until a revised Final PUD Plan is submitted.
d. Denial. Upon finding that the Final PUD Plan does not meet the approval criteria of this Article, the Township Board shall deny the Final PUD.
6. All actions on the Preliminary PUD Plan or Final PUD Plan by the Planning Commission and the Township Board shall state the reasons for approval, conditional approval, postponement, or denial within the body of the motion.
7. Upon approval of the Final PUD Plan, with any related conditions having been reviewed and approved, the Township may finalize and sign the final copy of the PUD Agreement and plan set. This shall
Charter Township of Oxford 14-29 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
not occur, however, until all exhibits (such as the final version of the Final PUD plans and building elevations; conservation, road and utility easement documents; recorded Master deeds or similar restrictions, etc.) are properly prepared and made available to the Township. The PUD (and corresponding zoning change) shall not be considered finalized until the executed PUD Agreement has been recorded with the County.
8. Following approval by the Township Board, and recording of the executed PUD Agreement, the Clerk shall direct the planning consultant to amend the Township Zoning Map to reflect the PUD approval by amending the zoning designation of the subject project.
D. Relationship between PUD Review and Acreage Division, Platting and Condominium Review. In the event that a planned unit development involves the partitioning of land into separate parcels, lots or condominium units, as enabled by Ordinance 104A, Ordinance 103, or Article 13 of this Ordinance, respectively, such review procedures may occur concurrent with PUD consideration. With respect to the platting process, tentative preliminary and final preliminary plat approval may be pursued concurrent with preliminary and final PUD approval, respectively, as provided for in this Section. Land division or condominium approval may be pursued concurrent with either preliminary or final PUD approval.
E. PUD Conditions.
1. Reasonable conditions may be required by the Township Board before the approval of a PUD, to the extent authorized by law, for the purpose of ensuring that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, protecting the natural environment and conserving natural resources and energy, ensuring compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and promoting the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. The conditions of approval shall be drafted in writing, specifying conditions of approval and use, and incorporated in the PUD Agreement executed upon Final PUD approval.
2. Conditions may stipulate that the PUD may only be used for selective land uses, provided the restraints advance, rather than injure, the interests of adjacent landowners; are a means of harmonizing private interests in land, thus benefiting the public interest; are for the purposes of ensuring that the PUD fulfills the purposes and intent of this Section and thus, benefits the public interest; and/or possess a reasonable relationship to the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare.
Charter Township of Oxford 14-30 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3. Conditions imposed shall be designed to protect natural resources and the public health, safety, and welfare of individuals in the project and those immediately adjacent, and the community as a whole; reasonably related to the purposes affected by the PUD; and, necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this Ordinance, and be related to the objective of ensuring compliance with the standards of this Ordinance. All conditions imposed shall be made a part of the written record of the Final PUD Plan that shall include a site plan and written development agreement signed by the Township Supervisor, the Township Clerk and the applicant.
4. In the event that conditions set forth herein are not complied with, then the Zoning Enforcement Official shall have the right to compel a show cause hearing by the Planning Commission or issue a violation pursuant to Article 16 of this Ordinance. At the show cause hearing, additional conditions may be imposed by the Township and/or a new PUD application required.
14.7 Phasing and Commencement of Construction.
A. Phasing. Where a project is proposed for construction in phases, the planning and designing shall be such that, upon completion, each phase shall be capable of standing on its own in terms of the presence of services, facilities, and open space, and shall contain the necessary components to ensure protection of natural resources and the health, safety, and welfare of the users of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) and the residents of the surrounding area. In addition, in developments which include residential and non-residential uses, the relative mix of uses and the scheduled completion of construction for each phase shall be disclosed and determined to be reasonable in the discretion of the Township Board, after recommendation from the Planning Commission. Similarly, the schedule upon which any and all community benefits proposed in association with the development will be installed or otherwise become available shall be disclosed and determined to be reasonable at the discretion of the Township Board.
B. Commencement and Completion of Construction. Construction shall be commenced within one (1) year following the date of Final PUD Plan approval and shall proceed substantially in conformance with the schedule set forth by the applicant and in accordance with this Ordinance. If construction is not commenced within such time, any previous PUD plan approval shall expire and become null and void unless an extension is granted. An extension for up to one (1) year may be granted by the Planning Commission, upon good cause shown, if such request is made to the Planning Commission prior to the expiration of the initial period. Moreover, in the event the PUD plan approval has expired, a new application shall be
Charter Township of Oxford 14-31 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
required, and shall be reviewed according to existing and applicable law and ordinance provisions at the time of any subsequent submission.
14.8 Effect of Approval.
A. If and when approved, the Final PUD Plan for the Planned Unit Development (PUD), with any conditions imposed, shall constitute the land use authorization for the property, and all improvements and uses shall be in conformity with the approved plan. Subsequent to approval of the Final PUD Plan, the Zoning Official shall not issue building permits or Certificates of Occupancy unless the Zoning Official determines that all subsequent working drawings and plans comply with the approved Final PUD Plan and the Planning Commission's resolution of approval. However, once a PUD receives final approval, the Township shall not refuse to issue the necessary permits if the development proceeds in conformance with the approved plan, even though the PUD regulations and procedures may be changed or amended.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain all other applicable Township, County, and State permits for all phases of the project prior to commencing any clearing, earthwork, or other site development related work.
C. Since eligibility for a PUD rests entirely upon proof of specific substantial benefits to the community, as well as to the applicant, these benefits shall be considered part of the contract between the Township and the applicant. The benefits agreed upon by the Township and the applicant shall be listed on the plans and incorporated into the PUD Agreement.
Any breach, such as modification, disturbance, or destruction of natural features designated to remain untouched, shall cause approval of the PUD to be held null and void and shall result in suspension of all permits issued until the breach has been remediated to a condition as close as possible to that designated in the PUD plan.
Alternatively, the applicant may, at his discretion, commence the approval process again from the beginning. In this event, however, the Township shall be under no obligation whatsoever to approve the new project. Approval shall be entirely at the discretion of the Township, which may impose additional conditions on the applicant.
14.9 Modifications to Approved Final PUD Plans.
A. Deviations shall be reviewed by a Planned Unit Development Committee comprised of the Township Supervisor and one additional representative of the Township Board, the Planning Commission Chairperson and one additional representative of the Planning Commission, and the Township
Charter Township of Oxford 14-32 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Zoning Official. Meetings of the PUD Committee shall be noticed and conducted in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, P.A. 267 or 1976.
B. An applicant or property owner who has been granted Final PUD approval shall notify the Planned Unit Development Committee of any proposed amendment to such approved site plan or Planned Unit Development conditions.
C. Minor Modifications. Minor modifications may be approved by the Planned Unit Development Committee upon certification in writing to the Planning Commission and Township Board that the proposed revision does not alter the basic design nor any conditions of the plan imposed upon the original approval by the Planning Commission and Township Board. In considering such a determination, the Planned Unit Development Committee shall consider the following to be a minor change:
1. Such changes will not adversely or substantially affect the initial basis for granting approval.
2. Such minor changes will not adversely or substantially affect the overall PUD, in light of intent and purpose of such development as set forth in Section 14.1.
3. For residential buildings, the size of structures may be decreased, or increased by up to ten (10) percent provided that the overall density of units does not increase.
4. Square footage of non-residential buildings may be decreased, or increased by up to ten (10) percent or 10,000 square feet, whichever is smaller.
5. Horizontal and/or vertical elevations may be altered by up to five (5) percent.
6. Movement of a building or buildings by no more than ten (10) feet.
7. Areas of disturbance may be decreased.
8. Plantings approved in the final PUD landscape plan may be replaced by similar types of landscaping on a one-to-one or greater basis.
9. Improvements to site access or circulation, such as inclusion of deceleration lanes, boulevards, curbing, pedestrian/bicycle paths, etc.
10. Changes of building materials to another of higher quality.
11. Changes in floor plans which do not alter the character of the use.
Charter Township of Oxford 14-33 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
12. Slight modification of sign placement or reduction of size.
13. Relocation of sidewalks and/or refuse storage stations.
14. Internal rearrangement of parking lots that does not affect the number of parking spaces or alter access locations or design.
15. Changes required or requested by the Township for safety reasons shall be considered a minor change, provided that they do not result in substantive changes in the approved PUD design.
D. Major Modifications. Modifications other than those noted above are considered major changes and shall be treated as a rezoning, requiring resubmittal to the Township and a new public hearing held pursuant to Section 14.6(B)(3). The procedures outlined in this Article shall apply in all such cases, however the Township may allow concurrent Preliminary and Final PUD review for major modifications to previously-approved PUD projects.
14.10 Recording of Planning Commission and Township Board Actions.
A. Each action taken with reference to a Planned Unit Development (PUD) shall be duly recorded in the minutes of the Planning Commission and Township Board. The reasons for the action taken shall also be recorded in the minutes.
B. A notice of adoption of the PUD shall be filed with the Oakland County Register of Deeds.
14.11 Costs Associated with PUD Review. Costs incurred by the Township associated with the processing of PUD proposals and the preparation of PUD Agreements (including review by the Township’s consultants) shall be covered in full through the collection of appropriate fees and escrows by the Township. The Township Board may from time to time establish an appropriate fee schedule for PUD Review and PUD Agreement drafting by Resolution.
Charter Township of Oxford 14-34 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
[This Page Intentionally Left Blank]
Charter Township of Oxford 15-1 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ARTICLE 15
NONCONFORMITIES
15.1 Intent. It is the intent of this Ordinance to permit nonconforming lots, structures, or uses to continue until they are removed but not to encourage their survival.
It is recognized that there exists within the districts established by this Ordinance and subsequent amendments, uses which were lawful before this Ordinance was passed or amended which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Ordinance or future amendments. Such uses are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this Ordinance that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this Ordinance by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be prohibited generally in the district involved.
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction material in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved.
15.2 Nonconforming Lots.
A. In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this Ordinance, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record legally existing at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area, or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district; provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Yard requirement variances may be obtained through approval of the Board of Appeals.
Charter Township of Oxford 15-2 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
B. Where multiple lots of record in an existing subdivision plat have been combined, they may be redivided to match the same lot boundaries shown on the original plat, without prior approval of variances from the ZBA for minimum lot width or area requirements.
15.3 Nonconforming Uses of Land. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this Ordinance as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance.
B. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance.
C. If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this Ordinance for the district in which such land is located.
15.4 Nonconforming Structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this Ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity; for example, existing residences on lots of a width less than required herein may add a rear porch provided that other requirements relative to yard space and land coverage are met.
B. Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its replacement cost, exclusive of the foundation at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
C. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located after it is moved.
15.5 Nonconforming Uses of Structures and Land. If a lawful use of a structure, or of structures and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, that would not be allowed in the district under the
Charter Township of Oxford 15-3 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
terms of this Ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this Ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
B. Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
C. In any district, if no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or a more restricted classification provided that the Zoning Board of Appeals, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Zoning Board of Appeals may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of this Ordinance. Where a nonconforming use of a structure, land, or a structure and land in combination is hereafter changed to a more restrictive classification, it shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted classification.
D. Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
E. When a nonconforming use of a structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or ceases to exist for six (6) consecutive months, or for eighteen (18) months during any three year period, the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. Structures occupied by seasonal uses shall be excepted from this provision.
F. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.
15.6 Repairs and Maintenance. On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this Ordinance shall not be
Charter Township of Oxford 15-4 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
increased. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting public safety, upon order of such official.
15.7 Uses Allowed as Special Land Uses Not Nonconforming Uses. Any use which is permitted as a special land use as provided in this Ordinance shall not be deemed a nonconforming use but shall without further action be deemed as a conforming use in such district.
15.8 Change of Tenancy or Ownership. There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, structures and premises provided there is no change in the nature or character of such nonconforming uses.
Charter Township of Oxford 16-1 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ARTICLE 16
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
16.1 Zoning Administrator.
A. The office of Zoning Administrator is hereby created. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this Ordinance, and shall be appointed by the Charter Township of Oxford Board of Trustees.
B. Duties and Powers of the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator, or their authorized designees, shall have the following duties and powers:
1. The Zoning Administrator shall interpret, administer, and enforce all provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and shall issue all necessary notices or orders to insure compliance with said provisions, except as otherwise provided elsewhere in this Ordinance.
2. The Zoning Administrator shall receive applications for and issue Zoning Compliance Permits in accordance with this Ordinance and shall authorize issuance of Certificates of Occupancy by the Building Official as required herein.
3. The Zoning Administrator shall make all inspections required by this Ordinance, and all inspections necessary to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance and may engage the assistance of the Township Fire Chief, Building Official, Planner and Engineer as deemed necessary in making such inspections. The Zoning Administrator may engage other expert opinion to assist in making such inspections, subject to approval of the Charter Township of Oxford Board of Trustees.
4. The Zoning Administrator shall identify and process all violations of the Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for making inspections of the Township or parts thereof for the purpose of identifying violations of this Ordinance.
5. The Zoning Administrator shall keep official records of applications received, certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued.
6. The Zoning Administrator shall submit to the Township Board and Planning Commission an annual report in which a summary of the activities of the office is presented.
Charter Township of Oxford 16-2 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
C. Referral to Planning Commission. Whenever the Zoning Administrator is required to render a decision pursuant to this Ordinance, he or she shall have the ability to seek the opinion or interpretation of the Planning Commission on the matter at hand prior to rendering said decision.
16.2 Ordinance Enforcement Officer. The Zoning Administrator may be assisted in the enforcement of this Ordinance by the Township’s Ordinance Enforcement Officer, as established in Ordinance No. 63. The Ordinance Enforcement Officer shall have, in addition to all power and authority granted to him or her by Michigan law and/or any Township Ordinances, the same enforcement authority granted to the Zoning Administrator in this Ordinance.
16.3 Zoning Compliance Permits.
A. Zoning Compliance Permits Required. The review and approval of Zoning Compliance Permits by the Zoning Administrator, as provided for in this Section, shall be required under the following circumstances:
1. Where Building Permits Are Required. All plans to be submitted to the Building Official for a building permit shall first be submitted for review and approval to the Zoning Administrator to determine compliance with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. No building permit shall be issued unless a Zoning Compliance Permit has been issued by the Zoning Administrator.
2. Where Certificates of Occupancy Are Required. Where a Certificate of Occupancy from the Building Official is required, the Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued unless a Zoning Compliance Permit has been issued by the Zoning Administrator.
3. Use of Lot without Structure. Any lot vacant at the effective date of this Ordinance shall not be used, nor may any use of a lot without a structure existing at the effective date of this Ordinance be changed to any other use, unless a Zoning Compliance Permit shall have first been issued for the new or different use. A Zoning Compliance Permit shall not be required for agriculturally used lands, such as cropland, pasture land, and woodland.
4. Establishment of or Change in Use of Structure. A structure, or part thereof, shall not be changed to or occupied by a use different from the use that exists at the effective date of this Ordinance unless a Zoning Compliance Permit is first issued for the different use.
5. New or Altered Structure. A structure, or part thereof, which was erected or altered after the effective date of this Ordinance, shall not be occupied by, or devoted to a use different from the use that is existing at the effective date of this Ordinance, unless a final Zoning Compliance Permit is issued for the different use, or unless the
Charter Township of Oxford 16-3 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
Zoning Administrator shall have established a reasonable time schedule for corrections.
B. Procedures.
1. Application. Application for a Zoning Compliance Permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator. Application for a Zoning Compliance Permit may be made by the owner, or authorized agent of the owner, of the use or structure. If the application is made by a person other than the owner, it shall be accompanied by a duly verified affidavit of the owner that the proposed work or operation is authorized by the owner and that the applicant is authorized to make such application. The full names and addresses of the owner and authorized agent of the owner shall be stated in the application.
2. Submittal Requirements. Zoning Compliance Permits shall be applied for on an application form provided by the Zoning Administrator, and shall be accompanied either by a plot plan as required in this Section, or by a site plan as required under Article 12, whichever applies. If a site plan is not required under Article 12 herein, a plot plan shall be submitted, containing the following information:
a. Scale, date, and north directional arrow.
b. Location map showing major intersections, and dimensioned diagram of the lot or parcel.
c. Locations, outlines, and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, and the location and extent of all land uses not involving structures.
d. A clear description of the existing and intended uses of the lot and all existing or proposed structures, including documentation of any legal non-conforming uses and structures.
e. Additional information as required by the Zoning Administrator for the purposes of determining compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
3. Review. The Zoning Administrator shall examine all applications for Zoning Compliance Permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing. If the application or the plans do not conform to all requirements of this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefore. If the application or plans conform, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a Zoning Compliance Permit, attaching
Charter Township of Oxford 16-4 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
his/her signature to each permit issued. The Zoning Administrator shall stamp and endorse all sets of corrected and approved plans submitted with such application as "Approved.”
4. Conditions for Issuance. Issuance of a Zoning Compliance Permit shall be subject to the following conditions:
a. A Zoning Compliance Permit shall not be issued until the required fees have been paid.
b. All work or use shall conform to the approved application and plans for which the Zoning Compliance Permit has been issued and any approved amendments thereto.
c. All work or use shall conform to the approved Site Plan, where required.
C. Plan Amendments. Subject to the limitations of Section 16.3(B)(4), herein, approved amendments to a plan, application, or other records accompanying the same may be filed at any time with the Zoning Administrator before completion of the work for which the permit was approved and before a Certificate of Occupancy is issued; and such amendments, if approved, shall be deemed part of the original application and shall be filed therewith. Site plans required by Article 12 shall be amended in accordance with the provisions of that Article.
D. Abandonment and Extensions. An application for a Zoning Compliance Permit shall be deemed to have been abandoned six (6) months after the date of filing unless such application has been diligently pursued or a building permit shall have been issued, or a Certificate of Occupancy shall have been issued for a use not requiring a building permit. The Zoning Administrator may, for reasonable cause, grant one or more extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding ninety (90) days each. Any permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after time of commencing the work.
E. False Statements or Misrepresentation. In case of any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the plans on which the permit was based, any Zoning Compliance Permit issued thereto shall be deemed null and void.
F. Non-Conforming Uses, Lots or Structures. A Zoning Compliance Permit shall be issued for a legally non-conforming use or structure upon application where determined to meet all other requirements. A Zoning Compliance Permit shall not be issued for any illegal non-conforming use or structure.
Charter Township of Oxford 16-5 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
16.4 Building Permits.
A. No structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered unless the appropriate building permit(s) has/have been issued therefore by the Building Official.
B. No building permit shall be issued by the Building Official for the erection, structural alteration, moving or repair of any structure or part thereof which does not comply with all provisions of this Ordinance and unless a Compliance Permit has been issued by the Zoning Administrator, except as provided in subsection C, below.
C. Where repairs to a single-family dwelling and/or residential accessory building are exclusive of structural, mechanical or electrical modifications, the Zoning Administrator shall not require a Certificate of Zoning Compliance.
D. Where the review of construction engineering drawings by the Township Engineer, and calling of a pre-construction meeting, is required pursuant to the Charter Township of Oxford Land Improvement Ordinance (No. 108A), no building permit shall be issued until these steps have been taken.
16.5 Certificates of Occupancy. No building, structure or use for which a Zoning Compliance Permit has been issued shall be used or occupied until the Zoning Administrator has, after final inspection, issued a Certificate of Occupancy indicating his/her opinion that all provisions of this Ordinance are being complied with at the time of issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. The issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy shall in no case be construed as waiving any provisions of this ordinance.
A. Certificates of Occupancy shall not be issued for any building, structure, or use unless and until:
1. A Zoning Compliance Permit has been issued which certifies that the building, structure, and/or use proposed conform to the requirements of this Ordinance and the Building Code at the time of issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy.
2. The developer of a residential, commercial or industrial multi-unit development has submitted record drawings of all applicable improvements (including landscaping and that portion of the completed water system or sewer system servicing the development at issue), and the required record drawings have been approved and accepted by the Township Engineer. The record drawings shall conform to the requirements of the Sewer Operational Ordinance and Water Supply Ordinance, respectively.
Charter Township of Oxford 16-6 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3. A Certificate of Completion has been issued in the event any owner of land or agent having the written authorization of the Owner has applied for a Land Improvement Permit pursuant to the terms of the Township’s Stormwater Drainage and Land Improvement Control Ordinance.
4. For any new building or structure, that new building or structure has been connected to the Township Water System and/or Sewer System where required to do so pursuant to the Township Sewer Operational Ordinance and/or Water Supply Ordinance, and the appropriate charges for connection to Water System or Sewer System have been paid.
B. Temporary Certificates of Occupancy.
1. Temporary Certificates of Occupancy may be considered for issuance by the administrative official where all of the following conditions are met:
a. Site construction is substantially completed in full conformance with approved plans, and record drawings have been submitted to the Township.
b. Remaining site improvements are not related to health, safety, or Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) barrier-free compliance requirements.
c. Remaining site improvements are related to landscaping, paving, or similar features which, due to their unique characteristics, cannot be completed due to weather conditions.
d. Submittal of a performance guarantee, in conformance with Section 16.8, which is equal to the full cost of all incomplete site work as estimated by the Township, utilizing standard construction cost estimating publications.
2. Temporary Certificates of Occupancy are not intended to permit occupancy of a building or use of a site during fair weather seasons if site improvements are not complete. The owner/applicants scheduling of an opening date prior to completion of site work does not constitute grounds for issuance of a Temporary Certificates of Occupancy.
3. Temporary Certificates of Occupancy shall be granted for a period not to exceed six (6) months. Said period shall be based on a reasonable estimate of the time necessary to accommodate fair
Charter Township of Oxford 16-7 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
weather installation of all remaining improvements. No extensions of Temporary Certificates of Occupancy shall be granted.
4. Failure to complete all required site improvements will result in further action by the Township to ensure compliance with approved plans and the provisions of any temporary certificate of occupancy.
16.6 Compliance with Plans. Building permits and Certificates of Occupancy issued by the Building Department on the basis of plans and applications approved by the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission and/or Township Board authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance.
16.7 Fees.
A. The Township Board shall establish a schedule of fees for administering this Ordinance. The schedule of fees shall be on public display in the office and may be changed from time to time by resolution of the Township Board. No certificate or permit shall be issued unless required fees have been paid in full. Such fees may include, but are not limited to, fees to be held in escrow for, by way of illustration and not limitation, the monitoring of the compliance of uses or proposed uses with the terms of Sections 10.1(J) and (K) of this Ordinance governing sound and vibration limitations.
B. Review Costs
1. An applicant for any approval or petitioner for any action under this ordinance shall be responsible for the cost of any professional review of such application performed by or on behalf of the Township.
2. Trust and Agency Accounts
a. Upon an application for any approval or petition for any action under this ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall require the applicant or petitioner to pay a sum of money into a trust and agency account, which shall function as an escrow account, with such sum of money required being a reasonable estimate as to the professional review costs for the application for which the applicant is responsible under Section 16.7(B)(1). The Township may draw upon the trust and agency account in order to defray the costs to the Township of such professional reviews, and the Zoning Administrator shall require additional deposits into the trust and agency account in order to ensure that sufficient funds will be available to defray anticipated professional review costs.
Charter Township of Oxford 16-8 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
b. All approvals under this ordinance shall be conditioned upon the applicant’s or petitioner’s compliance with Section 16.7(B)(1), either through the use of the trust and agency account or through payments to the Township other than deposits into the trust and agency account. No zoning compliance permits, building permits, or certificates of occupancy shall be issued until such time as an applicant has met its requirement under Section 16.7(B)(1).
c. Upon a determination that the Township will incur no further professional review costs for a given application, the Zoning Official shall release any funds remaining in the trust and agency account to the applicant or petitioner.
d. Neither the insufficiency of a trust and agency balance nor the issuance of any permit or approval shall excuse an applicant or petitioner from its obligation under Section 16.7(B)(1). The Township may enforce its right to collect such costs by suit or by placing a lien upon the property.
16.8 Performance Guarantees.
A. Intent and Scope of Requirements. To insure compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance or any conditions imposed thereunder, the Planning Commission or Township Board may require that a performance guarantee be deposited with the Township to insure faithful completion of improvements, in accordance with Section 505 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, P.A. 110 of 2006, as amended, when one or more of the following conditions apply:
1. Failure to complete the improvements would be detrimental to future users of the property, adjacent properties, or the community as a whole;
2. The improvements are integral to community benefits associated with a proposal.
3. The improvements are likely to be phased or staged over a significant period of time.
B. Improvements for which the Township may require a performance guarantee include, but are not limited to, landscaping, berms, walls, lighting, driveways and parking, acceleration/deceleration lanes, traffic control devices, sidewalks, and land reclamation activities.
C. General Requirements. The performance guarantee shall meet the following requirements:
Charter Township of Oxford 16-9 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
1. The performance guarantee shall be in the form of an irrevocable bank letter of credit or cash escrow. If the applicant posts a letter of credit, the credit shall require only that the Township present the credit with a sight draft and an affidavit signed by the Township Supervisor attesting to the Township’s right to draw funds under the credit. If the applicant posts a cash escrow, the escrow instructions shall provide that the escrow agent shall have a legal duty to deliver the funds to the Township whenever the Township Supervisor presents an affidavit to the agent attesting to the Township’s right to received funds whether or not the applicant protests that right. If the applicant cannot produce a letter of credit with terms suitable to the Township, then a cash escrow shall be provided.
2. The performance guarantee shall be submitted at the time of issuance of the permit authorizing the activity or project. If appropriate based on the type of performance guarantee submitted, the Township shall deposit the funds in an interest-bearing account in a financial institution with which the Township regularly conducts business.
3. The amount of the performance guarantee shall be sufficient to cover the estimated cost of the improvements for which the performance guarantee is required, as well as the cost to prepare all required record drawings. The applicant shall provide an itemized schedule of estimated costs to complete all such improvements. The exact amount of the performance guarantee shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator.
4. The entire performance guarantee shall be returned to the applicant following inspection by the Zoning Administrator and a determination that the required improvements have been completed satisfactorily. The performance guarantee may be released to the applicant in proportion to the work completed on various elements, provided that a minimum of ten percent (10%) shall be held back on each element until satisfactory completion of the entire project.
5. An amount not less than ten percent (10%) of the total performance guarantee may be retained for a period of at least one (1) year after installation of landscape materials to insure proper maintenance and replacement, if necessary. This amount shall be released to the applicant upon certification by the Zoning Administrator that all landscape materials are being maintained in good condition.
D. Unsatisfactory Completion of Improvements. Whenever required improvements are not installed or maintained within the time stipulated or in accordance with the standards set forth in this Ordinance, the Township may complete the necessary improvements itself or by contract to an
Charter Township of Oxford 16-10 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
independent developer, and assess all costs of completing said improvements against the performance guarantee. Prior to completing said improvements, the Township shall notify the owner, site plan review applicant, or other firm or individual responsible for completion of the required improvements.
E. Trust and Agency Accounts. If an applicant fails to comply with the requirement of Section 16.7(B)(1), and its Trust and Agency account as provided for in Section 16.7(B)(2) has insufficient funds for the Township to draw upon in order to defray the costs of reviewing the applicant’s application, then the Township may assess such costs against the performance guarantee.
16.9 Notice of Public Hearing. All applications requiring notice of a public hearing (including zoning ordinance text and map amendments, planned unit developments, special land use permits and ZBA hearings) shall comply with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (P.A. 110 of 2006), and the provisions of this Section with regard to public notification.
A. Responsibility. When the provisions of this Ordinance or the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act require that notice be published, the Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for preparing the content of the notice, having it published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Charter Township of Oxford and mailed or delivered as provided in this Section.
B. Content. All mail, personal and newspaper notices for public hearings shall include the following:
1. Nature of the Request. The notice shall identify whether the request is for a rezoning, text amendment, special land use, planned unit development, variance, appeal, ordinance interpretation or other purpose.
2. Location. The notice shall indicate the property that is the subject of the request, hereinafter referred to as the “subject property.” The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the subject property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the subject property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used such as a tax parcel identification number, identifying the nearest cross street, or including a map showing the location of the subject property. No street addresses must be listed when eleven (11) or more adjacent properties are proposed for a zoning amendment, or rezoning, or when the request is for an ordinance interpretation not involving a specific property.
Charter Township of Oxford 16-11 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
3. Time and Place of Hearing. The notice shall indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing(s).
4. Written Comments. The notice shall include a statement describing when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. Include a statement that the public may appear at the public hearing in person or by counsel.
5. Handicap Access. The notice shall information concerning how handicap access will be accommodated if the meeting facility is not handicap accessible.
C. Publication of Notice in Newspaper. When notice of a public hearing is required pursuant to the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (P.A. 110 of 2006) or the provisions of this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall cause such notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the Charter Township of Oxford not less than fifteen (15) days before the scheduled date of the public hearing.
D. Personal and Mailed Notice.
1. General. When the provisions of this Ordinance or state law require that personal or mailed notice be provided, such notice shall be provided to:
a. The owners of the subject property, and the applicant, if different than the owner(s) of the property.
b. To all persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property, and to all occupants of structures within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property, regardless of whether the property or occupant is located within the boundaries of the Charter Township of Oxford. Notification of owners and occupants as provided herein shall not be required for zoning amendment requests involving eleven (11) or more adjacent properties or ordinance interpretation requests that do not involve a specific property.
i. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification.
ii. Notification need not be given to more than one (1) occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one (1) dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, one (1) occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of
Charter Township of Oxford 16-12 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
a single structure containing more than four (4) dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure.
c. All neighborhood organizations, public utility companies, railroads and other persons which have requested to receive notice pursuant to Section 16.9(E).
2. Notice by Mail, Affidavit. Notice shall be deemed mailed by its deposit in the United States mail, first class, properly addressed, postage paid. The Zoning Administrator shall prepare a list of property owners and registrants to whom notice was mailed, as well as of anyone to whom personal notice was delivered.
3. Timing. Unless otherwise provided in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (P.A. 110 of 2006) or this Ordinance where applicable, notice of a public hearing shall be provided, whether via mail or in person, not less than fifteen (15) days before the scheduled date of the public hearing.
E. Registration to Receive Notice by Mail.
1. General. Any neighborhood organization, public utility company, railroad or any other person may register with the Zoning Administrator to receive written notice of all applications for development approval or written notice of all applications for development approval within the zoning district in which they are located. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for providing this notification. Fees may be assessed for the provision of this notice, as established by the Township Board.
2. Requirements. The requesting party must provide the Zoning Administrator information on an official form to ensure notification can be made. All registered persons must re-register annually to continue to receive notification pursuant to this Section.
16.10 Violations and Penalties.
A. Violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall constitute a municipal civil infraction. A person found responsible for a violation of this Ordinance shall be subject to a civil fine to be determined by the Michigan District Court with jurisdiction of this Township. The person responsible shall also be subject to costs, including all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the Township has been put to enforce this Ordinance, as provided by law. In the event a
Charter Township of Oxford 16-13 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
person responsible has been issued a civil fine and costs as set forth under court order, the Township may obtain a lien against the land, building(s) and/or structure(s) involved in the violation and such lien may be enforced and discharged subject to the procedures and limitations cited at MCL 600.8731(3). The penalties set forth in this section are otherwise controlled by the requirements of Public Acts 12 and 13 of 1994. The Township may further pursue injunctive remedies permitted at law to enforce this Ordinance.
B. The Zoning Administrator or his designee, including the Zoning Enforcement Officer, is authorized to issue notices of violation and appearance tickets for alleged violations of this Ordinance.
C. Stop-work Order. Upon notice from the Zoning Administrator or his designee that work on any structure or premises is being pursued contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance, such work shall be immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the person doing the work, or shall be posted conspicuously at the premises, and shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. Any person who shall continue any work in or about the structure or premises after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as he is directed by the Zoning Administrator to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be in violation of this Ordinance.
D. Each day that any person, premises, or location is in violation of this Ordinance shall constitute a separate violation of the Ordinance.
16.11 Completion of Construction.
A. Nothing in this Ordinance shall require a change in plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been carried on diligently. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be carried on diligently.
B. Where a building permit has been issued in accordance with the law prior to the effective date of this Ordinance and provided that construction is begun within three hundred sixty-five (365) days of such effective date and diligently pursued to completion, said building or structure may be completed in accordance with the approved plans on the basis of which the building permit was issued, and further, may upon completion, be occupied
Charter Township of Oxford 16-14 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
by the use for which it was originally designated, subject thereafter to the provisions of Article 15 of this Ordinance, if applicable. No basement, cellar, garage, or any incompletely constructed structure in use as a dwelling at the effective date of this Ordinance shall be used as a dwelling for more than twelve (12) months following said date, unless such structure has been completed in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located.
Charter Township of Oxford 17-1 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ARTICLE 17
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
17.1 Establishment. The Charter Township of Oxford Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established, hereinafter called the ZBA. The ZBA shall perform its duties and exercise its powers in accordance with this Article and Article VI of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (P.A. 110 of 2006), as amended, and in such a way that the objectives of this Zoning Ordinance shall be observed, public health, safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done.
17.2 Membership.
A. Composition. The ZBA shall consist of five (5) members, appointed by the Township Board. The first regular member of the ZBA shall be a member of the Township Planning Commission. The remaining members, and any alternate members, shall be representative of the population distribution and of the various interests in the Township. One regular member may be a member of the Township Board, however a member of the Township Board shall not serve as Chairperson of the ZBA. An employee or contractor of the Township Board may not serve as a member of the ZBA.
B. Alternate Members. The Township Board may appoint not more than two (2) alternate members for the same term as regular members to the ZBA. An alternate member may be called as specified to serve as a member of the ZBA in the absence of a regular member if the regular member will be unable to attend one (1) or more meetings. An alternate member may also be called to serve as a member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. The alternate member appointed shall serve in the case until a final decision is made. The alternate member has the same voting rights as a regular member of the ZBA.
C. Removal. A member of the ZBA may be removed by the Township Board for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after public hearing. A member shall disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest. Failure of a member to disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest constitutes malfeasance in office.
D. Terms of Office. The terms of office for members appointed to the ZBA shall be for 3 years, except for members serving because of their membership on the Planning Commission or Township Board, whose terms shall be limited to the time they are members of those bodies. A successor shall be appointed not more than 1 month after the term of the preceding
Charter Township of Oxford 17-2 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
member has expired. Vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled for the remainder of the term.
17.3 Meetings. Meetings of the ZBA shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at other times as the ZBA in its rules of procedure may specify. The chairperson or, in his or her absence, the acting chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The ZBA shall not conduct business unless a majority of its regular members are present.
17.4 Voting. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the ZBA is necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision, or determination of the administrative official or body, to decide in favor of the applicant on a matter upon which the ZBA is required to pass under the Zoning Ordinance, or to grant a variance of Zoning Ordinance requirements.
17.5 Minutes. The ZBA shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and be immediately filed in the office of the Township Clerk.
17.6 Jurisdiction. The ZBA shall hear and decide questions that arise in the administration of the Zoning Ordinance, including the interpretation of the Official Zoning Map, and may adopt rules to govern its procedures. The ZBA shall also hear and decide on matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance. It shall hear and decide appeals from and review any administrative order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official or body charged with enforcement of this Ordinance. The ZBA shall not have the power or authority to hear an appeal relative to any decision rendered on a planned unit development, or relative to any decision rendered on a special land use permit pursuant to the discretionary standards of Section 4.5. Decisions rendered on a special land use permit pursuant to any non-discretionary standard or requirement of this Ordinance may be appealed to the ZBA.
17.7 Appeals. The ZBA shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official or body in the enforcement of this Ordinance. An appeal to the ZBA may be taken by a person aggrieved, or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the Township. The ZBA shall not hear appeals of special land use or planned unit development decisions.
A. Filing of Appeal. An appeal under this section shall be taken within twenty-one (21) days, by the filing with the administrative body or official from whom the appeal is taken and with the ZBA of a notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The body or officer from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the ZBA all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
Charter Township of Oxford 17-3 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
B. Stay of Proceedings. An appeal to the ZBA stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the body or officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the ZBA after the notice of appeal is filed that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in the opinion of the body or officer cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings may be stayed by a restraining order issued by the ZBA or a circuit court.
C. Hearing. Upon receipt of a written request for an appeal of an administrative decision, the ZBA shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the request, not to exceed 30 days from the filing of the notice of appeal, and give notice as provided in Section 16.9. At the hearing, a party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
D. The ZBA shall overturn, wholly or in part, an order, requirement, decision or determination only if it finds that the appealed action was inconsistent with this Ordinance. To implement such action, the ZBA shall make such order, decision, or determination as ought to be made, consistent with the terms of this Ordinance, and to that end shall have the powers of the administrative body or official from whom the appeal is taken under appellate jurisdiction.
17.8 Variances. The ZBA may, on a case-by-case basis, authorize such nonuse variances from the terms of this Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in practical difficulties.
A. Variances Permitted. The ZBA shall have the authority to grant nonuse variances relating to the construction, structural changes, or alteration of buildings or structures related to dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance or to any other nonuse-related standard in this Ordinance. Under no circumstances shall the ZBA grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this Ordinance in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this Ordinance in said district.
B. Procedures. A variance from the terms of this Ordinance shall not be granted by the ZBA except in accordance with the following procedures:
1. Submittal of Application. A written application for a variance shall be submitted, demonstrating conformance with the standards outlined in Section 17.8(C).
2. Hearing. Upon receipt of the written application for a variance, the ZBA shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the request, not to exceed 30 days from the filing of the application, and give notice as
Charter Township of Oxford 17-4 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
provided in Section 16.9. At the hearing, a party may appear in person or by agent or attorney.
3. ZBA Findings.
a. The ZBA shall make findings of fact based upon competent evidence that practical difficulty has been demonstrated in accordance with the standards of Section 17.8(C) .
b. The ZBA shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of a variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure.
c. The ZBA shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.
C. Standards. Neither the nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district, nor either the permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in any other district(s) shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. In reviewing a request for variance, the following standards for determining practical difficulty shall be considered, with no single factor being determinative:
1. Strict compliance with restrictions governing area, setback, frontage, height, bulk, density or other non-use matters, will unreasonably prevent the owner from using the property for a permitted purpose or will render ordinance conformity unnecessarily burdensome.
2. The variance will do substantial justice to the applicant, as well as to other property owners.
3. A lesser variance than requested will not give substantial relief to the applicant and will not be more consistent with justice to other property owners.
4. The need for the variance is due to the unique circumstances peculiar to the property and not generally applicable in the area or to other properties in the same zoning district.
5. The problem and resulting need for the variance has not been self-created by the applicant and/or the applicant's predecessors.
D. Conditions and Safeguards. In granting any variance, the ZBA may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part
Charter Township of Oxford 17-5 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Ordinance and punishable under Article 16 of this Ordinance. Conditions imposed shall meet all of the following requirements:
1. Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety and welfare, and the social and economic well being of those who will use the building, land or activity under consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed building, land use or activity, and the community as a whole.
2. Be related to the valid exercise of the police power, and purposes which are affected by the proposed building, use or activity.
3. Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the Zoning Ordinance, be related to the standards established in the Ordinance for the building, land use or activity under consideration, and be necessary to insure compliance with those standards.
E. Expiration. Each variance approved shall become null and void unless a building permit has been issued for the construction authorized by the variance within 365 calendar days after the date of approval and construction has been pursued diligently to completion; or the occupancy of land or buildings authorized by the variance has commenced within 365 calendar days after the date of approval.
1. Where a building permit has been issued for construction authorized by a variance, the variance shall become null and void upon expiration of the building permit.
2. Where a variance has been approved for a project subject to site plan approval per Article 12 (Site Plan Review), the variance shall become null and void only upon expiration of an approved final site plan for the project.
3. The Board of Appeals may, upon written request by the petitioner with a showing of good cause, grant one (1) extension of variance approval for up to an additional 180 calendar days.
17.9 Appeals from the Zoning Board of Appeals. The decision of the ZBA shall be final. Any person or persons, or any taxpayer, department, board, or bureau of the municipality aggrieved by any decision of the ZBA may seek review by a court of record of such decision, in the manner provided by the laws of the State of Michigan.
Charter Township of Oxford 17-6 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
[This Page Intentionally Left Blank]
Charter Township of Oxford 18-1 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ARTICLE 18
AMENDMENT
18.1 Initiating Amendments. The Township Board may, from time to time, amend, modify, supplement, or revise the district boundaries or the provisions and regulations of this Ordinance. Amendments may be initiated by the Township Board, the Township Planning Commission, by petition of one or more property owners of the Charter Township of Oxford, or by one (1) or more persons acting on behalf of a property owner(s) of the Charter Township of Oxford. All proposed amendments shall be referred to the Township Planning Commission for review, public hearing, and recommendation before action may be taken thereon by the Township Board.
18.2 Amendment Procedure. The procedure for amending this Ordinance shall be in accordance with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (P.A. 110 of 2006), as amended, and the following:
A. Application for amendment shall be made by submitting the application, along with all information required under Section 18.3 and the required fee (as established by the Township Board), to the Zoning Administrator. The completion of such application shall not be required for zoning amendment initiated by officials or bodies of the Township.
B. After receipt of filing, the Zoning Administrator shall transmit a copy of the application and required information to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall establish a date for a public hearing on the application and give notice of the hearing pursuant to Section 16.9.
C. In reviewing any petition for a zoning amendment, the Planning Commission shall evaluate all factors relevant to the petition, and shall make its recommendations for disposition of the petition to the Township Board following the public hearing. Following receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the Township Board shall render a final decision on the proposed zoning amendment. All findings shall be made a part of the public records of the meetings of the Planning Commission and the Township Board.
18.3 Information Required.
A. If a petition involves an amendment to the Official Zoning Map, the petitioner shall submit the following information:
1. A legal description of the property, including a street address and tax ID number(s).
Charter Township of Oxford 18-2 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
2. A scaled map of the property, correlated with the legal description, and clearly showing the property's location.
3. The name and address of the petitioner, the record owner, and all other parties claiming an interest in said property.
4. The petitioners interest in the property. If the petitioner is not the record owner, the name and address of the record owner(s), and the record owner(s) and other interested parties signed consent to the petition. The consent of mortgagees, lienors, and similar such parties shall not be required.
5. Signature(s) of petitioner(s) and owner(s) certifying the accuracy of the information.
6. Identification of the zoning district requested and the existing zoning classification of property.
7. A vicinity map showing the location of the property, and adjacent land uses and zoning districts.
B. If a petition involves a change in the text of the Zoning Ordinance, the petitioner shall submit the following information:
1. A detailed statement of the proposed amendment, clearly and completely setting forth all proposed provisions and regulations, including all changes in the Zoning Ordinance necessary to accommodate the proposed amendment.
2. Name and address of the petitioner.
3. Reasons for the proposed amendment.
18.4 Publication. Following Township Board approval of a petition to amend the Zoning Ordinance, notice of the amendment shall be published within fifteen (15) days after adoption in a newspaper of general circulation within the Charter Township of Oxford. The notice of adoption shall include the following information:
A. Either a summary of the regulatory effect of the amendment, including the geographic area affected, or the text of the amendment.
B. The effective date of the amendment.
C. The place where and time when a copy of the amendment may be purchased or inspected.
Charter Township of Oxford 18-3 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
18.5 Conditional Rezoning.
A. Intent. It is recognized that there are certain instances where it would be in the best interests of the Township, as well as advantageous to property owners seeking a change in zoning classification, that certain conditions could be proposed by property owners as part of a request for rezoning. This is especially true since the Township must consider all potential uses which may be made of property when considering a traditional rezoning request, some of which may be inappropriate for a particular piece of property considering such items as, but not limited to, the surrounding land uses, the Township Master Plan, available infrastructure and utilities, and natural features. It is the intent of this Section to provide a process consistent with the provisions of Section 405 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006 as amended, MCL 125.3101 et. seq., by which the owner seeking a rezoning may voluntarily propose conditions regarding the use and/or development of land as part of the rezoning request.
B. Application and Offer of Conditions. An owner of land may voluntarily offer in writing conditions relating to the use and/or development of land for which a conditional rezoning is requested. This offer may be made either at the time the application for conditional rezoning is filed, or additional conditions may be offered at a later time during the conditional rezoning process as set forth below:
1. General Procedure. A request for conditional rezoning shall be commenced by filing an application with the Township Zoning Administrator or designee, on the required forms, accompanied by the specified fees. The application and process for considering a conditional rezoning request will be the same as that for considering a rezoning request without any conditions, except as modified by this Section. The application shall explicitly describe the proposed conditional rezoning and shall be signed by the owner of the property. Applications for conditional rezoning of a specific site shall be accompanied by a plot plan or survey which contains all the information required in Section 18.3 of this Ordinance. The applicant shall also present a preliminary plan showing the specific proposed use of the property and containing all the information outlined in Section 12.3(B) of this Ordinance.
2. Pre-Application Conference. Prior to filing a formal request for a conditional rezoning, and prior to a public hearing, the applicant shall informally meet with the Township Zoning Administrator or designee,
Charter Township of Oxford 18-4 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
and other representatives as deemed necessary by the Township, to discuss the proposed development. The Pre-Application Conference is intended to be informative and advisory in nature, and affords the applicant the opportunity to discuss the land use and planning policies of the Charter Township of Oxford. The applicant shall present a preliminary plan for the contemplated conditional rezoning at or before the Pre-Application Conference. Any and all statements made by the Charter Township of Oxford Board of Trustees, Zoning Administrator or designee, Planning Commissioners, Township employees, attorneys, agents, or representatives at the Pre-Application Conference have no legal force and are not legal and binding promises, commitments, or contracts.
C. Review Procedures. The offer of conditions may not purport to authorize uses or developments not permitted in the requested Zoning District. The owner’s offer of conditions shall bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the property for which the conditional rezoning is requested. Further, the Planning Commission and Township Board shall, at a minimum, consider all the review considerations contained in Section 18.2(C) of this Ordinance in rendering a decision on a request for conditional rezoning.
1. Other Required Approvals.
a. Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require a Special Land Use Permit under the terms of this Ordinance may only be commenced if a Special Land Use Permit for such use or development is ultimately granted in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
b. Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require a variance under the terms of this Ordinance may only be commenced if a variance for such use or development is ultimately granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with this Ordinance.
c. Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require site plan approval under the terms of this Ordinance may only be commenced if site plan approval for such use or development is ultimately granted in accordance with the terms of this Ordinance.
2. Amendment of Conditions. The offer of conditions may be amended during the process of conditional rezoning consideration, provided that any amended or additional conditions are entered voluntarily by the owner, and confirmed in writing. An owner may withdraw in
Charter Township of Oxford 18-5 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
writing all or part of its offer of conditions any time prior to final rezoning action of the Township Board provided that, if such withdrawal occurs subsequent to the Planning Commission’s Public Hearing on the original rezoning request, then the rezoning application shall be referred back to the Planning Commission for a new Public Hearing with appropriate notice and a new recommendation.
D. Planning Commission Review. The Planning Commission, after a public hearing and consideration of the factors for rezoning set forth in Section 18.2(C) of this Ordinance, may recommend approval, approval with recommended changes, or denial of the rezoning; provided however, that any recommended changes to the offer of conditions are acceptable to and thereafter offered to the owner in writing. In the event that any recommended changes to the offer of conditions are not subsequently offered by the owner in writing, the recommendation of the Planning Commission shall be considered by the Township Board to be a recommendation of denial of the proposed conditional rezoning.
E. Township Board Review. After receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the Township Board shall review the Planning Commission’s recommendation and deliberate upon the requested conditional rezoning, considering the factors for rezoning set forth in Section 18.2(C), and may approve or deny the conditional rezoning request. If the applicant initiates additional or different conditions not considered by the Planning Commission subsequent to the recommendation of the Planning Commission, then the Township Board shall refer such proposed additional or different conditions to the Planning Commission for report within a time specified by the Township Board, and the Township Board shall thereafter proceed to deny or approve the conditional rezoning.
F. Approval. If the Township Board finds the conditional rezoning request and offer of conditions acceptable, the offer of conditions shall be incorporated into a formal written Statement of Conditions acceptable to the owner and conforming in form to the provisions of this Section. The Statement of Conditions shall be incorporated by attachment or otherwise as an inseparable part of the Ordinance adopted by the Township Board to accomplish the requested conditional rezoning. The Statement of Conditions shall:
1. Be prepared in a form recordable with the Oakland County Register of Deeds;
2. Contain a legal description of the land to which it pertains;
3. Contain a statement acknowledging that the Statement of Conditions runs with the land, and is binding upon successor owners of the land;
Charter Township of Oxford 18-6 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
4. Incorporate by attachment the preliminary plan which formed the basis of the conditional rezoning;
5. Contain the notarized signatures of all the owners of the property, and that they voluntarily offer and consent to the provisions contained with the Statement of Conditions;
6. The Statement of Conditions may be reviewed and approved by the Township Attorney, with the applicant to pay all costs associated with such review and approval.
The approved Statement of Conditions shall be filed by the owner with the Oakland County Register of Deeds within thirty (30) days after approval of the conditional rezoning. The owner shall provide the Township with a recorded copy of the Statement of Conditions within thirty (30) days of receipt.
Upon the conditional rezoning taking effect, the Zoning Map shall be amended to reflect the new zoning classification, together with a designation that the land was a Conditional Rezoning with a Statement of Conditions. Upon the conditional rezoning taking effect, and after the required recording of the Statement of Conditions, unless waived, use of the land so rezoned shall conform thereafter to all the requirements regulating use and development within the new Zoning District as modified by any more restrictive provisions contained in the Statement of Conditions.
G. Compliance with Conditions. Any person who establishes development or commences a use upon land that has been conditionally rezoned shall continuously operate and maintain the development or use in full compliance with all the conditions set forth in the Statement of Conditions. Any failure to comply fully with the conditions contained within the Statement of Conditions shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance and be punishable accordingly. Additionally, any such violation shall be deemed a nuisance per se and subject to judicial abatement by law.
H. Time Period for Establishing Development or Use. The approved development and/or use of the land pursuant to building and other required permits must be commenced upon the land within twelve (12) months after the effective date by publication of the conditional rezoning action, and must thereafter proceed diligently to completion. This time limitation, may upon written request, be extended by the Township Board if:
1. It is demonstrated to the Township Board’s sole satisfaction that there is a strong likelihood that the development and/or use will commence within the period of extension and proceed diligently thereafter to completion, and
Charter Township of Oxford 18-7 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
2. The Township Board finds that there has been change in circumstances that would render the conditional rezoning with Statement of Conditions incompatible with other Zoning Districts and uses in the surrounding area or otherwise inconsistent with sound zoning policy.
I. Reversion of Zoning. If an approved development and/or use of the rezoned land does not occur within the time frame specified in Subsection H above, then the land shall revert to its former zoning classification as set forth in MCL 125.3405(2). The reversion process shall be initiated by the Township Board, and proceed pursuant to Section 18.2.
J. Subsequent Rezoning of Land. When land that is conditionally rezoned with the Statement of Conditions is thereafter rezoned to a different zoning classification, or to the same zoning classification but with a different or no Statement of Conditions, whether as a result of a reversion of zoning pursuant to Subsection I above, or upon application of the landowner, or otherwise, the Statement of Conditions imposed under the former zoning classification shall cease to be in effect. Upon the owner’s written request, the Township Clerk shall record with the Oakland County Register of Deeds a notice that the Statement of Conditions is no longer in effect.
K. Amendment of Conditions. During the time period for commencement of an approved development or use specified pursuant to Subsection H above, or during any extension thereof granted by the Township Board, the Township shall not add to or alter the conditions in the Statement of Conditions. The Statement of Conditions may be amended thereafter in the same manner as was prescribed for the original conditional rezoning and Statement of Conditions.
L. Township Right to Rezone. Nothing in the Statement of Conditions nor in the provisions of this Section shall be deemed to prohibit the Township from rezoning all or any portion of land that is subject to a Statement of Conditions to another zoning classification. Any rezoning shall be conducted in compliance with this Ordinance and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006 as amended, MCL 125.3101 et seq.
M. Failure to Offer Conditions. The Township shall not require an owner to offer conditions as a requirement for rezoning. The lack of an offer of conditions shall not affect an owner’s rights under this Ordinance.
Charter Township of Oxford 18-8 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
[This Page Intentionally Left Blank]
Charter Township of Oxford 19-1 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
ARTICLE 19
PLANNING COMMISSION
19.1 Authority of the Planning Commission. The Oxford Township Planning Commission is designated as the Planning Commission specified in Section 301 of Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended, which enables and governs the activities and procedures under this Ordinance.
19.2 Jurisdiction of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall have such powers, duties, and responsibilities as are expressly provided for in this Ordinance, the Michigan Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended), and the Michigan Planning Enabling Act (Public Act 33 of 2008, as amended).
19.3 Rules of Procedure of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall conduct business, organize meetings, and perform its duties as provided for in this Ordinance, the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended), the Michigan Planning Enabling Act (Public Act 33 of 2008, as amended), and the adopted Oxford Township Planning Commission Bylaws and Rules of Procedure.
19.4 Powers and Duties of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall discharge the following duties pursuant to this Ordinance:
A. Zoning Ordinance. The Planning Commission shall perform zoning duties of said commission as provided in Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended, and this Ordinance. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for formulation of the Zoning Ordinance, review of amendments to the Zoning Ordinance, holding hearings on a proposed Zoning Ordinance or amendments thereto, and reporting its findings and recommendations concerning the Zoning Ordinance or amendments to the Township Board.
B. Site Plan Review. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for reviewing site plans and site plan amendments, and making determinations to approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny applications for site plan approval in accordance with Article 12 (Site Plan Review).
C. Special Land Use Review. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for holding hearings, reviewing, and making determinations to approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny applications for special land uses (and amendments to special land uses) in accordance with Article 4 (special land uses).
D. Site and Building Condominium Plan Review. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for reviewing building and site condominium plans and building and site condominium plan amendments in accordance with Article 13 (Condominium Regulations). For site condominiums, the Planning Commission shall be responsible for making a recommendation to the Township Board to grant approval, approval with conditions, or denial of a proposed site condominium development and any amendments to a site condominium development.
Charter Township of Oxford 19-2 Zoning Ordinance (Effective 3/29/07)
E. Planned Unit Development Review. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for holding hearings and reviewing all applications for planned unit development approval in accordance with Article 14 (Planned Unit Development). The Planning Commission shall be responsible for making a recommendation to the Township Board to grant approval, approval with conditions, or denial of a proposed planned unit development and any amendments to a planned unit development.
F. Private Road Review. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for holding hearings, reviewing, and making determinations to approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny applications all applications for private road approval in accordance with Article 11 (Private Roads).
G. Other Duties and Responsibilities.
1. The Planning Commission shall submit an annual report to the Township Board concerning its operations and the status of planning activities, including recommendations regarding actions by the legislative body related to planning and development.
2. The Planning Commission shall prepare a Capital Improvement Plan.
3. The Planning Commission shall take such action on petitions, staff proposals and Township Board requests for amendments to the Master Plan.
4. The Planning Commission shall review subdivision proposals and recommend appropriate actions to the Township Board.
5. The Planning Commission shall be responsible for review of any other matters relating to land development referred to the Commission by the Township Board. The Planning Commission shall recommend appropriate regulations and action on such matters.
