CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF OWOSSO, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published in 1988 by Order of the Council 
____________ 
Adopted April 18, 1988 
Effective May 8, 1988 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF OWOSSO, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
James P. Capitan 
Mayor 
____________ 
Christine Mitchell 
Michael Dvorak 
Barbara Elow 
Loren Hartman 
Roy White 
Carl Woodbury 
Council 
____________ 
Alex R. Allie 
City Manager 
____________ 
Lewis D. Benson 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Therese M. Martin 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF OWOSSO, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Christopher T. Eveleth 
Mayor 
____________ Susan J. Osika 
Mayor Pro-Tem 
____________ 
Loreen F. Bailey 
Burton D. Fox 
Elaine M. Greenway 
Daniel A. Law 
Robert J. Teich 
City Council 
____________ 
Donald D. Crawford 
City Manager 
____________ 
William C. Brown 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Amy K. Kirkland 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Owosso, Michigan of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1977 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1977 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 3 is numbered 3-1 and the third section of Chapter 4 is 4-3. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he or she is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Bill Carroll, Editor-In-Chief, and Ron McLaughlin, Code Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers are most grateful to Miss Therese M. Martin, City Clerk, Mr. Lewis D. Benson, City Attorney, Mr. Sam Reiter, Associate City Attorney, and Mr. Alex R. Allie, City Manager, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION Tallahassee, Florida  
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
Motion by Councilwoman Mitchell to adopt the following ordinance: 
ORDINANCE NO. 452 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Owosso, Michigan; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and this Ordinance Shall Become Effective 
The City of Owosso Ordains: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Owosso, Michigan," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 38, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, enacted on or before August 3, 1987, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both, in the discretion of the court. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of license or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 3, 1987, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. The Code of Ordinances of the City of Owosso, Michigan, published by Municipal Code Corporation, is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.2084(2), Michigan Statutes Annotated. Said Code incorporates the Uniform Traffic Code for cities, townships and villages, promulgated by the Director of the State Police and published in the 1979 edition of the Michigan Administrative Code, and amendments as published in the Quarterly Supplements No. 5 to said edition, and also as amended by section 33-18 of said Code of Ordinances. A complete copy of the Code is available for inspection by the public at the office of the city clerk for the City of Owosso. 
    Section 8. This ordinance shall become effective twenty (20) days after passage. 
Motion supported by Councilman Teich. 
Roll call vote: 
AYES: Councilpersons Elow, Hartman, Mitchell, Teich, Woodbury, Mayor Capitan 
NAYS: None 
Adopted April 18, 1988 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 718 Included 49 720 Included 49 721 Included 49 722 Included 49 723 Included 50 724 Included 50 725 Included 50 726 Included 50 727 Included 51 728 Included 51 729 Included 51 730 Included 51 732 Included 51 733 Included 51 734 Included 51 735 Included 51 736 Omitted 52 737 Omitted 52 738 Omitted 52 739 Included 52 740 Included 52 741 Included 52 742 Included 52 743 Included 52 744 Included 53 745 Included 53 746 Included 53 747 Included 53 748 Included 53 749 Included 53 57-2014(Res.) Included 53 750 Included 54 751 Included 54 752 Omitted 54 753 Included 54 754 Included 54 755 Included 54 756 Omitted 54 757 Omitted 54 758 Included 54 759 Included 54 760 Included 54 761 Omitted 55 762 Included 55 763 Included 55 764 Included 55 765 Included 55 766 Included 55 767 Omitted 55 768 Included 55 769 Included 55 770 Omitted 55 771 Omitted 55 772 Omitted 55 773 Omitted 55 774 Omitted 55 775 Omitted 55 776 Omitted 55 777 Included 55 778 Omitted 56 779 Omitted 56 780 Included 56 781 Included 56 782 Included 56 783 Included 56 784 Included 56 785 Included 56 786 Included 56 787 Included 56 788 Omitted 56 789 Included 57 790 Included 57 791 Included 57 792 Included 57 793 Included 57 794 Included 57  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of the City of Owosso, mindful of the ideals and labors of our fathers in founding and developing this community, grateful to Almighty God for the blessings of freedom, peace, health, safety, and justice, and desirous of further securing these blessings to ourselves and our posterity, and to provide for the health, peace and safety of persons and property in the city, do hereby ordain and establish this charter for the City of Owosso. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Home Rule Charter of the City of Owosso, Michigan, adopted by the electors on April 6, 1964. Amendments are indicated by history notes in parentheses following the amended sections. Obvious misspellings have been corrected. Other changes made for clarity are enclosed in brackets [ ]. 

CHAPTER 1. - INCORPORATION AND BOUNDARIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Incorporation, consolidation of territory and alteration of boundaries of home rule cities, MCL 117.6 et seq., MSA 5.2085 et seq. 

Section 1.1. - Continuation of Existing Corporation. 
    The organized city, now existing as a Michigan municipal corporation, known as the City of Owosso, shall be and continue a body corporate under the name: "The City of Owosso." 
Section 1.2. - Boundaries. 
(a)  The city shall embrace the territory constituting the City of Owosso on the effective date of this charter, together with such annexations thereto and less any detachments therefrom. 
(b)  The current boundaries of the city are set forth in the appendix to this charter and such an appendix, setting forth the current boundaries of this city, shall be a part of each reprinting of this charter. 
(c)  The Clerk shall maintain and keep available in his office for public inspection and distribution copies of the official description and map of the current boundaries of the city. Such copies, published under his authority[,] shall be prima facie evidence of the boundaries of the city for all purposes. 
Section 1.3. - Wards. 
    The city shall constitute one ward. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for establishment of one (1) or more wards, MCL 117.3(e), MSA 5.2073(e). 
CHAPTER 2. - DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 2.1. - Definitions and Interpretations. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context, for the purposes of this charter: 
(1)  "Board" includes "commission"; 
(2)  "City" means the City of Owosso and all of its officers and departments; 
(3)  "Clerk" means the City Clerk as that term may be used in any law; 
(4)  "Council" means the City Council of the City of Owosso and includes "governing body" as that term may be used in any law; 
(5)  "Law" denotes applicable Federal law, the Constitution and statutes of Michigan, the applicable common law, and this charter; 
(6)  "Lien" includes security interest as defined by law or as brought into being by operation of law, or both; 
(7)  "Officer" includes the Mayor, the members of the Council, the Municipal Judges [3], the administrative officers named in this charter or created under authority of this charter and their deputies, and members of city boards created by or pursuant to law; 
(8)  "Person" may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate and to partnerships and associations, as well as to individuals; 
(9)  "Printed" and "printing" include printing, engraving, stencil duplicating, lithographing, typewriting, photostating, or any similar method of duplicating the written word; 
(10)  "Publish" or "published" include[s] publication of any matter, required to be published, in the manner provided by law, or where there is no applicable law at least once in one or more newspapers of the city qualified by law for the publication of legal notices, or when such newspaper publication is not available, by posting in at least one public place in each election precinct; 
(11)  "Public utility" shall include all public and private common carriers, water, sewage disposal, electric light, gas, electric power, telephone and telegraph lines and systems, garbage collection, garbage disposal and reduction plants, and such other and different enterprises as the law or the Council may determine to be or designate as public utilities; 
(12)  "Treasurer" means the City Treasurer as that term may be used in any law; 
(13)  "Written" and "in writing" include[s] hand written script, printing, typewriting, teletype and telegraphic communications, and other forms of graphic English language readable by the average literate person; 
(14)  Words and phrases which are not herein defined shall be taken in their ordinary signification and import and when there is doubt thereof, the meaning given in the latest edition of Webster's Standard Unabridged Dictionary, extant at the time the meaning is required, shall govern; 
(15)  All words indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this charter, but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement to which the provision is applied; 
(16)  The singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, and the masculine gender shall extend to and include the feminine gender and the neuter. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Municipal courts were abolished by MCL 600.9921, MSA 27A.9921, which created the district court system. 

Section 2.2. - Records to be Public. 
    All papers, books, or other records of any matter pertaining to the conduct of the affairs of the city shall be public records unless otherwise provided by law, shall be kept in city offices, except when required for official reasons or for purposes of safekeeping to be elsewhere, and shall be available at city offices for inspection, copying, or reproduction at all reasonable times. Such records, or copies duly certified to be true copies by the Clerk, shall be prima facie evidence of their contents. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide that all records of the municipality shall be public, MCL 117.3(l), MSA 5.2073(l); freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq., MSA 4.1801(1) et seq. 
Section 2.3. - Official Performance. 
    Whenever this charter requires the performance of any act by an officer, the act may also be performed by a deputy or by a subordinate under the officer's direction, unless otherwise provided or required by law. 
Section 2.4. - Quorum, Effectiveness of Board Actions. 
    Except as otherwise expressly provided in this charter, a quorum of any board established by or under authority of this charter shall consist of a majority of the number of its members, as established by this charter or by the ordinance establishing such board. The concurring vote of a majority of such established number of members of each such board shall be necessary for official action by it. No action by any board of the city, except the Board of Review, shall be effective, until a copy of the minutes of the meeting in which such action was taken, showing such action, is filed with the Clerk. Such filing shall be made within one week after the date of the meeting. 
Section 2.5. - Sundays and Holidays. 
    Except as otherwise expressly provided in this charter, whenever the date fixed by law or ordinance for the doing or completion of any act falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, such act shall be done or completed on the next succeeding day, which is not a Sunday or legal holiday. 
Section 2.6. - Penalties for Violations of Charter. 
    Any person found guilty of any violation of this charter may be punished by a fine which, in addition to court costs, shall not exceed five hundred dollars, or imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Imprisonment for violations of this charter may be in the city or county jail, or any correctional institution which is authorized by law to receive prisoners of the city. This section shall not operate to limit or prejudice the power to remove officers or discharge employees as provided in this charter. 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i, MSA 5.2082. 
Section 2.7. - Chapter and Section Headings. 
    The chapter and section headings used in this charter are for convenience only, and shall not be considered as part of this charter. 
Section 2.8. - Amendments. 
    This charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by law. Should two or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the amendment receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
State Law reference- Power to adopt and amend Charter, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22; Charter amendment procedure, MCL 117.21 et seq., MSA 5.2100 et seq. 
Section 2.9. - Severability of Charter Provisions. 
    If any provision, section, or clause of this charter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion or application of the charter, which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, and, to this end, this charter is declared to be severable. This rule shall apply equally to ordinances of the city. 
CHAPTER 3. - MUNICIPAL POWERS AND LIABILITIES 

Section 3.1. - General Powers. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided or limited by law, the City of Owosso shall be vested with and possess all the powers, functions, privileges, and immunities, expressed or implied, to which cities are, or hereafter may be, entitled under and in the spirit of the law of Michigan and the home rule traditions of the State, and may exercise all powers which are not prohibited by and which are not in contravention with law. In the exercise of such powers, functions and privileges, the city shall manage and control its finances, rights, interests, buildings, and property, enter into contracts; acquire by purchase, grant lease, or condemnation and hold and utilize any property, both within the limits and without the limits of the city; acquire, own, and operate any utility unless the power to do so is denied by law; do any act, including the adoption of ordinances, to advance the interests, good government, and prosperity of the city and its inhabitants; and protect the public peace, morals, health, and general welfare and the safety of persons and property. 
(b)  The city may join with any municipal corporation or with any unit of government, or with any number or combination thereof, by contract, or otherwise as may be permitted by law, in the ownership, operation, or performance, jointly, or by one or more on behalf of all, of any property, facility, or service which each would have the power to own, operate, or perform separately. 
(c)  The enumeration of particular powers, privileges, or immunities in this chapter or elsewhere in this charter shall not be held or interpreted to be exclusive. 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide that the city may exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of the municipal government, MCL 117.4j(3), MSA 5.2083(3). 
Section 3.2. - Permitted and Other Powers. 
    Under authority of Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of 1909 [MCL 117.1 et seq., MSA 5.2071 et seq.], as amended, and other provisions of law, the power of the city shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following, which so far as possible shall be exercised by general ordinance provisions: 
(1)  To declare as a hazard or nuisance any act or condition, upon public or private property, or both, including, but not limited to, the accumulation of rubbish or the growing of noxious weeds which is or may be dangerous to the health, safety, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the city; to provide for the abatement thereof; and to provide that the costs of such abatement shall be charged against the real property on which the hazard or nuisance is located as a special assessment: Provided, That suit may also be brought against the owner or occupant of the property concerned to collect or to enforce the collection of such costs; 
(2)  To provide for the public health and welfare and the safety of persons and property by: 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for the public peace and health, and for the safety of persons and property, MCL 117.3(j), MSA 5.2073(j). 
I  Regulating trades, occupations, and amusements within the city, and prohibiting trades, occupations, and amusements which are detrimental to the safety, health, morals, or welfare of its inhabitants; 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for regulation of trades, occupations and amusements, MCL 117.4i(4), MSA 5.2082(4). 
II  Regulating the preparation, storage, transportation, and sale or other distribution of foods, drugs, and beverages for human consumption; 
III  Collecting and disposing of sanitary and surface waters, and of private, commercial, and industrial liquid wastes, and licensing and regulating the same when done by others than the city; 
IV  Collecting and disposing of garbage and rubbish and licensing, regulating, and prohibiting the same when done by others than the city; 
V  Regulating and restricting the locations of oil and gasoline stations and other establishments which service and sell fuels for self-propelled vehicles; 
VI  Licensing and regulating the number and operation of vehicles which carry persons or property for hire, fixing the rates of fare and charges, and determining the location of stands or stations for such vehicles; 
VII  Regulating, limiting, and prohibiting the construction, erection, alteration, equipment, repair, moving, removal, use, and demolition of buildings and structures and their appurtenances and service equipment, and creating and enforcing fire zones or districts in the city for the diminishing and control of the hazards of fire in such zones or districts. 
VIII  Licensing, regulating, restricting and limiting the number and locations of billboards, signs, and other advertising devices within the city; 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for regulation of billboards, MCL 117.4i(5), MSA 5.2082(5). 
IX  Establishing zones within the city and regulating therein the use and occupancy of lands or structures; the height, area, size, and location of buildings; the required open spaces for light and ventilation of buildings and the density of population; 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for zoning, MCL 117.4i(3), MSA 5.2082(3). 
X  Regulating and controlling the use of streams, waters and watercourses within the city in any manner consistent with the provisions of law, including the prevention and control of the pollution and obstruction thereof in any manner, and the development of the stream beds and banks. 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for regulation of watercourses, MCL 117.4h(4), MSA 5.2081(4). 
XI  Regulating the use of private property insofar as the same may affect the public health and safety, and the use of public streets and highways; and to provide for the health and safety of persons on property to which persons are customarily invited for purposes of trade, entertainment, or manufacture, 
(3)  To establish and reasonably control streets, alleys, bridges, and public places, and the space above and beneath them, and the use thereof by: 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for regulation of public ways, MCL 117.4h(1), MSA 5.2081(1). 
I  Creating and vacating the same and by acquiring land or any interest in land which may be required therefor, which land may also be sold by the city to the extent it is not, or may no longer be, required for the purpose for which acquired, including any surplus land which may be incidental to or necessary for the purchase of land required; 
II  Providing a plan of streets and alleys within the city and for a distance of not more than three miles beyond its limits and as otherwise provided by law; 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for plan of streets and alleys within three miles of city, MCL 117.4h(3), MSA 5.2081(3). 
III  Providing for the safety of persons and property by regulating the use of the surface of streets and the space above and below the surface for the purposes of travel in any manner, and respecting advertising in any manner, excavations therein, structures therein or thereon of any type or kind, and easements or rights-of-way for any purpose; 
IV  Compelling all persons to keep sidewalks which are in the area or streets, and the areas between the curb or traveled portion of streets and such sidewalks, immediately adjacent to the premises owned, controlled, or occupied by them, free from any thing which obstructs such sidewalks or areas, or which makes the same offensive or hazardous to the public health or safety; and upon failure to do so, to remove the same and assess the cost thereof against such property as a special assessment; 
V  Providing for the grade of streets and sidewalks, or either of them, and requiring public utility users of the streets to conform thereto with respect to their tracks or facilities located on, above, or under the streets; requiring railroads to keep their tracks, and the street surface between their tracks and for a distance of one and one-half feet on each side of them, in a state of repair deemed reasonable by the city officer responsible therefor; 
VI  Regulating the speed of vehicles, trains, and locomotives upon or across the streets within the provisions and limitations of law, and the stopping and parking of the same upon the streets and at street crossings; 
VII  Providing for and regulating the lighting thereof, and which affect streets and alleys, whether such lights be located on public or private property; 
VIII  Regulating, preventing, or abating the obstruction of streets and alleys or any part thereof; 
IX  Regulating the location of buildings and structures, and of trees and shrubbery near street corners and street intersections with alleys, so as to provide for the protection of sewers and the safety of persons and property on or using the city's streets and alleys; 
X  Providing for and regulating the numbering of buildings upon property abutting the streets and alleys and compelling the owners and occupants thereof to affix numbers; 
XI  Providing for the use, by others than the owner, of public utility property located on, above, or under the streets, alleys, and public places, upon the payment of a reasonable compensation therefor to the owner thereof; 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for joint use of public property, MCL 117.4h(2), MSA 5.2081(2). 
XII  Providing for and regulating the planting and general care and protection of trees and shrubbery within any part of the streets and public places of the city, and preventing the cutting of limbs and branches for the placing and maintenance of utility wires without the consent of the designated officer or agency of the city; 
(4)  To undertake any public work or make any public improvement, or any repair or replacement thereof, either directly or by contract with public bodies or private persons; and to participate in any public work or public improvement under any lawful plan by which the whole or partial support of such work or improvement is provided by another governmental unit or agency, or by any private party, whether individual or corporate; 
(5)  To construct, provide, maintain, extend, operate, and improve: 
I  Within the city: a city hall, city office buildings, community buildings, police stations, fire stations, civic auditoriums, public libraries, and polling places; and 
II  Either within or without the corporate limits of the city: public parks, recreation grounds and stadiums; municipal camps, public grounds, and zoological gardens; museums; airports and landing fields; cemeteries; public wharves and landings upon navigable waters; levees, embankments, and structures for flood control and other purposes related to the public health, safety and welfare; electric light and power plants and systems; gas distribution systems; public heating plants and systems; waterworks and water treatment plants and systems; sewers, both for surface water and for sanitary wastes; sewage disposal facilities; garbage and rubbish collection and disposal facilities; market houses and market places; facilities for the storage and parking of vehicles; hospitals; facilities for helicopters and air vehicles having like landing and takeoff characteristics; and any other structure or facility which is devoted to or intended for public purposes within the scope of the powers of the city; 
(6)  Acquiring by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease, or otherwise, real and personal property and interests in property, either within or without the corporate limits of the city, for any public use or purpose within the scope of its powers, including, but not by way of limitation, the uses and purposes set forth in this section; 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for condemnation, MCL 117.4e(2), MSA 5.2078(2). 
(7)  Receiving, holding and managing any property, whether real, personal, or intangible, in trust for city hospital, library, park, cemetery, or any other municipal purpose and applying the same to the execution of such trust. 
(8)  For the acquisition by construction, condemnation or purchase and for the ownership, equipment, possession, leasing, operation, maintenance and finance of a public transit system. For negotiating, executing and performing contracts with any other municipality or municipalities, duly authorized and empowered to that end, with reference to the construction, equipment, operation, maintenance and management of a public transit system and facilities, and for the financing of any obligations, assumed under or imposed by any such contract. 
(Amd. by electors 11-6-07) 
CHAPTER 4. - OFFICERS 

Section 4.1. - City officers. 
(a)  The elective officers of the city shall be the seven Councilmen and the Municipal Judge or Judges. 
(b)  The appointive officers shall be those named in or created under authority of Section 7.1, and the members of the several boards created by or under authority of this charter. 
Editor's note- The municipal court was abolished by MCL 600.9921, MSA 27A.9921, which created the district court system. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for election or appointment of certain officers, MCL 117.3(a), MSA 5.2073(a). 
Section 4.2. - Eligibility for City Office-General Qualifications. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, a person is eligible for election or appointment to an elective city office if he has been a registered elector of the city, or of territory annexed to the city, for a total of two years or more, immediately preceding his election or appointment and is the owner of property in the city which is assessed for taxes. 
(b)  A person is eligible for appointment to an appointive city office if he is a registered elector of the city: Provided, That this qualification may be waived as to any such officer, except members of a board, by a resolution concurred in by not less than five of the members of the Council. When such requirement is waived, the appointment to office shall be provisional, until the appointee becomes a registered elector of the city. Each person for whom such requirement is waived shall become a resident of the city within ninety days, and a registered elector of the city within nine months, after the date of his appointment. 
(c)  The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members, subject to the election recount provisions of law and review by the courts relative to questions concerning qualifications for holding city office. 
Editor's note- A two-year residency requirement for city office was held violative of equal protection by Green v. McKeon, 335 F. Supp. 630 (E.D. Mich. 1971), affirmed by 468 F.2d 883 (6t Cir. 1972). A one-year residency requirement was upheld by Joseph v. City of Birmingham, 510 F. Supp. 1319 (E.D. Mich. 1981). 
Property ownership requirement for elective office was held violative of equal protection by Turner v. Frouche, 396 U.S. 346 (1969). 
State Law, Act 212 of 1999 (MCL 15.602), dictates residency can only be restricted to an area within 20 miles of the nearest boundary of the public employer. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for qualifications of its officers, MSL 117.3(d), MSA 5.2073(d). 
Section 4.3. - Certain Persons Ineligible for City Office or Employment. 
(a)  A person who is in default to the city, shall not be eligible to hold any city office. 
(b)  A person who holds or has held an elective city office shall not be eligible for appointment to an office or employment, for which compensation is paid by the city, until one year has elapsed following the term for which he was elected or appointed. 
(c)  A person who has been convicted of an infamous crime or of any violation of an oath of office or of the election law shall not be eligible to hold any city office. 
(d)  A person who has been elected to two consecutive 4-year terms of office on the City Council shall not be eligible to again serve on the City Council until 2 years have elapsed following his/her last term. This provision shall not constitute an additional eligibility requirement for appointment to those boards, other than the city council, whose members must have the qualifications of elective officers set forth in this charter. 
(Added by electors 11-6-79; Amd. by electors 11-4-97) 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for qualifications of its officers, MCL 117.3(d), MSA 5.2073(d). 
Section 4.4. - Terms of Office. 
(a)  The terms of office of all elective officers, shall be four years, unless otherwise provided by law. 
(b)  Each appointive officer, except members of boards, shall serve for an indefinite term. 
(c)  Unless otherwise required by law, members of city boards shall be appointed or chosen during the month of May before the time they are to assume the duties of the office to which appointed; and the term of office of each board member shall commence on and date from the first day of July of the calendar year in which his appointment is made. 
(d)  With the consent of the Council, and for so long as the Council shall permit, an officer may continue, provisionally, in the office held by him, after the expiration of his term, until his successor has qualified for the office. 
Section 4.5. - Notice of Election or Appointment. 
    Within five days after a person has been elected to office or a choice or an appointment has been made to any office, the Clerk shall mail to the person elected or appointed a certificate of such election or appointment. 
Section 4.6. - Compensation of Officers. 
    Members of the several boards shall serve without compensation, except as otherwise provided in this charter. The compensation for all other officers shall be fixed by the Council, except as otherwise provided by law. They shall receive no other compensation from the city. The Council shall not act to change the compensation of any elective officer after the thirtieth day preceding the last day for filing nominating petitions for that office. The Council may provide for the payment to officers of reasonable expenses which are actually incurred on behalf of the city when the claim therefor has been audited by the Finance Director and approved by the Council. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for the compensation of its officers, MCL 117.3(d), MSA 5.2073(d). 
Section 4.7. - Oath of Office. 
    Every officer, before entering upon his duties, and all employees designated by the Council, before entering upon their employment, shall take the oath prescribed by Section 1 of Article XI of the Michigan Constitution, and shall file the same with the Clerk. The Clerk shall not administer or accept the oath of office of any elective officer until such officer has filed with him a duplicate original copy of any statement of election expenses required by law to be filed with the County Clerk. 
Section 4.8. - Surety Bonds. 
    In order to protect the city and the public, the Council shall require appropriate surety bonds of officers and employees. The terms of surety bonds shall not exceed three years, unless the term of the officer or employee covered thereby exceeds three years, in which case the term of the bond therefor shall be for the term of the officer or officers covered thereon. No bond shall be renewed upon its expiration. The premium of such bonds shall be paid by the city. Blanket bonds covering two or more officers or employees, or both, may be substituted for individual bonds. 
Section 4.9. - Giving of Surety by Officers and Employees Forbidden. 
    No officer or employee shall give or furnish any bail or recognizance, nor shall he be the agent of any bondsman or insurer in connection with any bond or insurance, (except for the city, itself, in which case he shall be governed by Section 14.4 of this charter), which may be required by law, ordinance of this city, or by the Council relative to any city function, or which requires the approval of the Council. 
Section 4.10. - Vacancies in Office. 
(a)  A city office shall become vacant upon the occurrence of any of the following events: (1) Expiration of the term of office; (2) Death of the incumbent; (3) Resignation; (4) Removal from office; (5) Ceasing to possess the qualifications or eligibility required by this charter for election or appointment to office, subject to subsection (b) of this section; (6) Conviction of an infamous crime, or of an offense involving a violation of an oath of office; (7) A decision of a competent tribunal declaring the officer's election or appointment void; (8) Failure to take the oath or file or have furnished for him the bond required for the office within ten days from the date of election or appointment, or with such other time, not exceeding twenty days thereafter, as the Council may fix; (9) In the case of Councilmen, absence from four consecutive regular meetings of the Council, unless such absences be excused by the Council at the time they occur or at or prior to the fourth such absence; (10) Absence from twenty-five per cent of such meetings in any calendar year, whether or not such absences are excused; (11) Absence from the city or failure to perform the duties of his office for sixty days, unless such absence from the city or failure to perform the duties of office shall be excused by the Council prior to the expiration of such sixty day period; or (12) Any other event which by law, creates a vacancy. 
(b)  No person who is in default to the city shall continue thereafter to hold any city office, unless he shall eliminate the same within thirty days after notice thereof is filed with the Clerk and a copy thereof is served on him. However when an officer contests an alleged default by recognized means of legal procedure, brought prior to or within thirty days after notice is served on him, such thirty day period shall not commence, until a determination has been made by the court or tribunal in which the existence of the default is contested. 
Section 4.11. - Resignations. 
    Resignations of officers shall be made in writing and filed with the Clerk. The Clerk shall notify the Mayor and the City Manager, forthwith of all resignations and shall read the same to the Council at its next meeting. All such resignations shall be effective when filed with the Clerk, unless a later time of taking effect is specifically stated therein. 
Section 4.12. - Removal from Office. 
(a)  The City Manager may remove from office any officer, other than an elective officer, the deputy of an administrative officer, and a member of a city board, and each administrative officer having a deputy may remove his deputy; by filing with the Clerk a notice in duplicate of such removal, including a statement of the reasons for his action. 
(b)  Each removal shall be effective when the required notice is served upon the removed person personally or by the mailing of the same to his last known address on record with the person having charge of personnel records and proof by affidavit of such delivery or mailing being filed in the office of the Clerk. Each such removal shall be deemed to be a suspension without pay for a period of ten days. If no appeal from such removal is taken within ten days after such affidavit is filed in the office of the Clerk, such removal shall be final and may not be questioned in any proceedings whatsoever. 
(c)  Within said ten day period the removed officer may appeal to the Council for a hearing on his removal. Such appeal shall be in writing, shall be filed with the Clerk, and shall contain a statement of his case. When such an appeal is filed such removal shall be deemed to be a suspension, until after the Council has held a hearing on such removal and has made a determination thereon. Such hearing shall be held at the second regular meeting of the Council following the filing of such appeal with the Clerk, unless the Council shall set such hearing for the third regular Council meeting following the filing of such appeal. Prior to such hearing, the City Manager or administrative officer in the case of a deputy, shall file with the Clerk a written answer to the statement of the suspended officer. The hearing shall be limited, in all cases to the substance of the statements and the answer filed by the City Manager or administrative officer and the removed person. At the next regular Council meeting following such hearing, the Council shall complete its determination of the appeal and shall announce whether the removal by the City Manager or administrative officer stands or the officer shall be reinstated in his office, with pay from the date of suspension. 
(d)  The Council may remove members of boards, regardless of term of office by resolution: Provided, That, if a removed member, within ten days thereafter, files with the Clerk a request for a hearing, such hearing shall be granted and held by the Council at its next regular meeting unless the Council shall set such hearing for the next regular meeting thereafter. 
Section 4.13. - Recall. 
    An elective officer may be recalled, and the vacancy thereby created shall be filled, in the manner prescribed by law. 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for recall of its officers, MCL 117.4i(b), MSA 5.2082(6); recall generally, MCL 168.951 et seq., MSA 6.1951 et seq. See also Mich. Const. 1963, Art. II, § 8. 
Section 4.14. - Filling Vacancies. 
(a)  If a vacancy occurs in an elective office or if no person qualifies for any such office, the Council shall, within thirty days thereafter, fill the vacancy, by appointing a person other than the person creating the vacancy, who shall hold such office until the Monday following the next regular city election. If the vacancy occurs less than twenty-four hours prior to the last date and time set for filing nominating petitions for offices to be filled at the next regular city election, it shall not be filled until the first regular meeting of the Council next following the subsequent regular city election. If the vacancy occurs more than twenty-four hours before the aforesaid last date and hour, the balance of the duration of such vacancy shall be filled by election at the next regular city election and the person elected at such election to fill such office shall hold office for such purpose, commencing on the Monday following such election. 
(b)  In the event that the Council shall not fill a vacancy within such thirty day period, its power to fill such vacancy shall cease and the Clerk shall set the date for the holding of an election to fill such vacancy for the entire balance of the unexpired term thereof. The last day and time for filing nominating petitions for such nomination shall be thirty-five days before the date of such election, at 5:00 o'clock P.M. The date of the election to fill such vacancy shall be within not less than forty-five days nor more than sixty days after the last date that the Council could have filled such vacancy. The provisions of Chapter 13 of this charter shall govern in all respects the calling and holding of such election and the nomination of candidates therefor and the canvassing of votes cast thereat, except that no primary election shall be required and the person or persons receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected to fill the vacancy or vacancies to be filled. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, if a vacancy occurs in an appointive office, such vacancy shall be filled within thirty days, thereafter in the manner provided for making the original appointment: Provided, That, such time may be extended, for not to exceed an additional sixty days, by Council resolution setting forth the reasons therefor. During any vacancy, the appointing authority may designate a person to perform the duties of the vacant office temporarily. 
Section 4.15. - Delivery of Office to Successor. 
    Whenever an officer or employee resigns, or is removed from office, or his tenure in office expires, he shall deliver, forthwith, to his successor in the office or to the City Manager all records, books, working papers, moneys, effects, and property in his custody, possession, or control which are the property of the city or which were necessary to or were obtained as a part of the performance of his duties, or in any way pertain to the duties of his office or employment. 
CHAPTER 5. - THE CITY COUNCIL 

Section 5.1. - The City Council. 
    The Council shall consist of seven members, one of whom shall be the Mayor. The term of office of each Councilman shall commence on the Monday next following his election, except that, in the case of appointments to fill vacancies made under Section 4.14(a) of this charter, an appointee shall qualify for and assume the duties of his office within ten days after his appointment. 
Section 5.2. - Compensation of Councilmen. 
    The compensation of each Councilman shall be ten dollars per Council meeting actually attended: Provided, That compensation shall not be paid for more than thirty-six meetings in a calendar year. The Mayor shall receive the sum of $240.00 per year, pro rated and paid monthly, in addition to his compensation as a Councilman. 
Section 5.3. - Organization of the Council. 
    The Council shall meet and organize on the first Monday following each regular city election. At such meeting, or within one week thereafter, the Council shall elect from its membership a Mayor and Mayor Pro-tem and do such other acts as may be required for its organization and the conduct of its business, including setting the dates and times of its meetings if any change is made from the dates and times then in effect. 
Section 5.4. - Meetings of the Council. 
(a)  The Council shall meet in the established Council chambers, or such other place in the city as may be established by ordinance, and shall hold at least two regular meetings in each month, the time and date of which shall be set by resolution. In the selection of its meeting place and time of meeting consideration shall be given to the reasonable accommodation of the public. If any time set for the holding of a regular meeting of the Council shall be a legal holiday, then such regular meeting shall be held at the same time and place on the next day which is not a legal holiday. 
(b)  The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council and shall have an equal voice and vote with other members of the Council upon all matters. He shall be the chief executive officer of the city, shall be a conservator of the peace with all the powers of a sheriff to maintain order in the city, shall represent the city for all ceremonial purposes, and shall do and perform all duties required of him by law. The Mayor and persons acting in his stead shall not possess the veto power. 
(c)  In the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro-tem shall act in the stead of the Mayor, and shall possess the powers of the Mayor, but shall not be entitled to cast a vote for the Mayor. In the absence of both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro-Tem, the Councilmen present at any meeting shall appoint one of their number to act as Mayor during such absence. 
(d)  The Mayor Pro-tem shall succeed to the office of the Mayor when a vacancy occurs in that office, until such time as the Council shall appoint an elected member of the Council to fill such vacancy. When filling a vacancy in the office of Mayor, the Mayor Pro-tem and such appointed person shall receive the compensation of the Mayor pro rated during the time that they shall respectively be Mayor. 
(e)  Special meetings of the Council shall be held at the regular meeting place of the Council. Special meetings shall be called by the Clerk on the written request of the Mayor, or any two members of the Council, on at least six hours written notice, designating the time and purpose of such meeting, and served personally on each member of the Council, or left at his place of residence, as shown on the registration rolls of the city, by the Clerk or by someone designated by him. A copy of such notice shall also be so left at the place of business of each newspaper printed and published in the city. An affidavit of the service of notices required by this section thereof shall be entered in the journal of such meeting. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the foregoing requirements for the calling of special meetings, for an emergency, with the emergency stated in the minutes of the meeting, any special meeting for such purpose shall be a legal meeting if a quorum be present, without the six hour notice required by this section. 
(g)  No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the Council, except that stated in the notice of the meeting. 
(h)  All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be public meetings and the public shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard. 
(i)  Four members of the Council shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at all of its meetings. In the absence of a quorum, any number less than a quorum may adjourn a meeting to a later date, with notice thereof to be given by the Clerk as in the case of a special meeting. 
(j)  The Council shall determine its own rules and order of business and shall keep a journal in the English language, of all its proceedings. The journal of each meeting of the Council shall be signed by the Clerk and countersigned by the Mayor. The vote upon the passage of all ordinances and upon the adoption of all resolutions shall be taken by "Yes" or "No" votes and shall be entered upon the record, except that, where the vote is unanimous, it shall only be necessary to so state. The public shall have access to the minutes and records of all meetings of the Council at reasonable times. 
(k)  Within ten days after each of its meetings, the Council shall cause the proceedings thereof, or a synopsis of such proceedings signed by the Mayor and the Clerk, to be published in a newspaper which is qualified by law to publish legal notices in the city. 
(l)  There shall be no standing committees of the Council. 
(m)  The Council may compel the attendance of its own members and of all other officers and employees of the city at its meetings. Any member of the Council or other officer who, when requested to do so by the Council, refuses to attend such meetings, for reasons other than confining illness, or to conduct himself in an orderly manner thereat, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this charter. The Chief of Police or such other person as the Council shall designate shall serve as the Sergeant-at-arms of the Council in the enforcement of the provisions of this section and to maintain order at Council meetings. 
(n)  No member of the Council shall vote on any question upon which he or a member of his family has a direct or indirect financial interest other than as a citizen of the city. Otherwise, each member of the Council present shall vote on each question before the Council for a determination, unless excused therefrom by the affirmative vote of all remaining members able to vote on the question. If a question is raised under this section at any Council meeting, such question shall be determined before the main question shall be voted on, but the council member affected shall not vote on such determination. 
(o)  Except in those cases where a larger majority is required by law or the provisions of this charter, no ordinance or resolution shall be adopted or passed, nor shall any other official action be taken, except by the affirmative vote of at least four members. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide that all meetings of the council shall be open to the public, MCL 117.3(l), MSA 5.2073(l); mandatory that Charter provide for keeping of a journal of every session, MCL 117.3(m), MSA 5.2073(m); open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq., MSA 4.1800(11) et seq. 
Section 5.5. - Health Functions of Council. 
    To the extent and for the time that the health functions of the city are joined with or absorbed by the Health Department of the County of Shiawassee as provided or permitted by law, the powers exercisable by boards of health in cities shall be exercised for the city by such Health Department. In the event that the Health Department of Shiawassee County shall cease to exist or, in the opinion of the Council, shall cease or fail to exercise and perform any of the health functions of cities which are normally exercised by the boards of health thereof or which may be prescribed by ordinance, the Council shall constitute the Board of Health of the city and shall exercise and perform such functions. 
Section 5.6. - Restrictions of Powers of the Council. 
(a)  The Council shall not have the power to make any contract with or give any official position to any person who is in default to the city. Further, the Council shall not have the power to engage in any business enterprise requiring an investment of money in excess of ten cents per capita, unless approved by three-fifths of the electors of the city, voting thereon at any general or special election. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the Council and its members shall deal with the administrative officers or employees of the city through the City Manager only. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter and for the purpose of investigation, the City Manager shall be the spokesman for the administrative services of the city before the Council, though he may direct any administrative officer or employee to give information to the Council on matters within his knowledge and line of duty. 
Section 5.7. - City Seal. 
    The Council shall provide a seal for the city, which shall be used on all documents requiring a seal. 
CHAPTER 6. - CITY LEGISLATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for ordinances, MCL 117.3(k), MSA 5.2073(k); general authority relative to adoption of ordinances, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22. 

Section 6.1. - Legislative Power. 
    The legislative power of the city is vested exclusively in the Council, except as otherwise provided by law. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for body vested with legislative power, MCL 117.3(a), MSA 5.2073(a). 
Section 6.2. - Legislation Preserved. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, and rules of the city which were in effect on the effective date of this charter, to the extent that they are consistent with the provisions of this charter, shall continue in full force, until repealed or amended. When this charter requires the Council to adopt or provide any ordinance, any existing ordinance which is continued hereunder and meets such requirements shall suffice. 
Section 6.3. - Introduction, Consideration, and Style of Ordinances. 
(a)  Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written form. The style of all ordinances passed by the Council shall be, "The City of Owosso Ordains:" 
(b)  No ordinance shall be passed at the same meeting at which it is introduced, unless the same is declared to be an emergency ordinance by the affirmative vote of not less than five members of the Council. 
(c)  An ordinance may be repealed or amended only by an ordinance passed in the manner provided in this chapter. An ordinance may be repealed by reference to its number and title only. 
(d)  If a section of an ordinance is amended, the section shall be re-enacted and published at length. This requirement shall not apply to the schedules of one-way streets and of parking limitations contained in any traffic ordinance, nor to the city's zoning ordinance nor to any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds. 
(e)  Each ordinance, after adoption, shall be identified by a number. 
(f)  Each ordinance shall be recorded by the Clerk in the Ordinance Book, and the enactment of such ordinance shall be certified by him therein. Such recording and certification shall be prima facie evidence of the due and proper adoption and effectiveness of ordinances of the city. 
(g)  All ordinances, resolutions, rules, codes, and official proceedings of the city may be placed in evidence in all cases before all courts and tribunals by a copy thereof, certified as true by the Clerk, under the seal of the city, in addition to other methods provided or permitted by law. 
Section 6.4. - Publication of Ordinances. 
(a)  Before an ordinance may become effective, it shall be published. The publication of an ordinance as a part of the published proceedings of the Council shall constitute the publication required by this section. The effective date of an ordinance shall be stated therein, but shall not be less than twenty days from the date of its adoption, unless it is declared by the affirmative vote of not less than five members of the Council to be an emergency ordinance. 
(b)  Within two years after the effective date of this charter, the Council shall provide for and develop an ordinance code for the city. Such code shall be an ordinance of the city. It shall be amended and parts thereof shall be repealed only by an ordinance. It shall be adopted and published in the manner provided or permitted by law. In the development of such code, all existing ordinances of the city shall be reviewed and shall be adopted into such code, amended before such adoption, or omitted therefrom, as fits the needs of the city and the provisions of this charter. After the adoption of such code, all ordinances thereafter adopted shall be a part thereof. Copies of such code and all amendments thereof shall be available for public inspection in the office of the Clerk and in the Owosso Public Library. Copies of the Code shall be available in the office of the Clerk for public distribution at a cost which shall reasonably reflect the cost of the printing thereof. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for the publication of all ordinances before they become operative, MCL 117.3(k), MSA 5.2073(k); codification authority, MCL 117.56, MSA 5.2084(2); authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k), MSA 5.2073(k). 
Section 6.5. - Penalties. 
    The Council shall provide for the punishment of violations of its ordinances. Such punishment may be by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or both, in the discretion of the court. Imprisonment for violations of ordinances may be in the city or county jail, or in any correctional institution of the State which is authorized by law to receive prisoners of the city. 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i(10), MSA 5.2082(10). 
Section 6.6. - Time Limit for Prosecution of Ordinance Violations. 
    No prosecution for the violation of an ordinance shall be commenced after the expiration of two years after the commission of the offense. The Council may specify a shorter period in any ordinance for the limit upon the time for the prosecution of violations of its provisions. 
Section 6.7. - Proceedings for Prosecution of Ordinance Violations. 
    Except as may be inconsistent with or otherwise provided in Chapter 12 of this charter, all proceedings relative to the arrest, custody, and trial of persons accused of the violation of ordinances shall be governed by and conform as nearly as may be with the provisions of law relating to proceedings in criminal cases cognizable by justices of the peace or by any courts which may be the successors thereof. The Municipal Court of the city shall take judicial notice of all city ordinances. 
Editor's note- The municipal court was abolished by MCL 600.9921, MSA 27A.9921, which created the district court system. 
State Law reference- Criminal procedure for ordinance violations, MCL 764.9a et seq., MSA 28.868(1) et seq. 
Section 6.8. - Initiative and Referendum. 
    An ordinance may be initiated, or a referendum on an ordinance or resolution adopted by the Council may be had, by a petition, as hereinafter provided. 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for initiative and referendum, MCL 117.4i(6), MSA 5.2082(6). 
Section 6.9. - Initiatory or Referendary Petitions. 
    An initiatory or a referendary petition shall be signed by not less than fifteen per cent of the registered electors of the city on the date of the last regular election prior to the filing thereof. Before being circulated for signatures, a copy of such petition shall be filed with the Clerk who shall refer the same to the City Attorney. Within fifteen days after such petition is filed with him, the City Attorney shall give his opinion on the form of such petition, and the legality of the ordinance proposed thereby if the petition be for the purpose of initiating an ordinance. Such petition may be the aggregate of two or more petition papers. Each signer of a petition shall sign his name, and shall place thereon, after his name, the date and his place of residence by street and number. To each petition paper there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that it was signed in the presence of the affiant. Such petition shall be filed with the Clerk who shall, within ten days after the receipt thereof by him, canvass the signatures thereon to determine the authenticity and the sufficiency thereof. Any signatures obtained more than sixty days before the filing of such petition shall not be counted. If found to contain an insufficient number of signatures of registered electors of the city, or to be improper as to compliance with the provisions of this section, the Clerk shall notify the person filing such petition, and ten days from such notification shall be allowed for the filing of additional petition papers. Thereafter, the Clerk shall determine the authenticity and sufficiency of the signatures on such additional petitions as in the first instance. When found sufficient and proper, the Clerk shall so certify and present the petition to the Council at its next regular meeting. 
Section 6.10. - Same-Council Procedure. 
    Upon receiving an initiatory or referendary petition from the Clerk, the Council shall, within thirty days, either: 
(1)  If it be an initiatory petition, adopt the ordinance as submitted in the petition or determine to submit the proposal for the adoption thereof to the electors; or 
(2)  If it be a referendary petition, repeal the ordinance or resolution to which the petition refers or determine to submit the proposal for the repeal thereof to the electors. 
Section 6.11. - Same-Submission to Electors. 
    Should the Council decide to submit any such proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election held in the city at which such proposal may be submitted or, in the discretion of the Council, at a special election. The proposed ordinance shall be published at least once in a newspaper of the city not less than ten days prior to the election thereon. The result shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon, except in cases where otherwise required by law. 
Section 6.12. - Same-Status of Ordinances Adopted. 
    An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed by the Council for a period of two years after the date of the election at which it was adopted. Should two or more ordinances, adopted at the same election, have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
Section 6.13. - Same-Ordinance or Resolution Suspended. 
    The certification by the Clerk of the sufficiency of a referendary petition within forty-five days after the passage of the ordinance or resolution to which such petition refers shall automatically suspend the operation thereof, pending repeal by the Council or final determination by the electors. 
CHAPTER 7. - THE ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for the qualifications and duties of its officers, MCL 117.3(d), MSA 5.2073(d). 

Section 7.1. - The Administrative Officers. 
(a)  The administrative officers of the city shall be the City Manager, Assessor, Chief of Police, Clerk, Finance Director, Fire Chief, the Treasurer, and the deputies of any of them. 
(b)  The administrative service of the city may be divided into such departments as the Council shall provide by ordinance. Such ordinance shall be known and designated as the Administrative plan [sic] of the city. In such administrative plan the Council shall define the duties of officers and departments of the city government. In such administrative plan the Council may create additional administrative officers or departments, or combine any administrative offices and municipal departments, in any manner not inconsistent with law, and prescribe the duties thereof as it may deem necessary for the proper operation of the city government. No creation of any administrative office or department, or combination thereof one with another, shall abolish the office of City Manager nor diminish any of the duties or prerogatives of that office as set forth in this charter. Except as authorized by law the Council shall create no board for the purpose of exercising any administrative function of the city. 
(c)  Pending the adoption of the administrative plan, or when conditions arise which are not covered by the plan the City Manager may, with the approval of the Council, establish temporary regulations for the conduct of the city's government, consistent with this charter. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for appointment of certain officers, MCL 117.3(a), MSA 5.2073(a). 
Section 7.2. - Administrative Officers and Employees-Appointment, Terms, and Compensation. 
(a)  The City Manager shall hold office by virtue of appointment by the Council, which body shall also set his compensation. He shall hold office at the pleasure of the Council. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, all other administrative officers shall be appointed by the City Manager, subject to the confirmation of the Council, and serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. 
(c)  In making appointments of administrative officers, the appointing authority shall consider only the good of the public services and the fitness of the appointee for, and his ability to discharge, the duties of the office to which he is appointed. Such appointments shall also be subject to Section 4.2(b) of this charter. 
(d)  The compensation of all administrative officers and employees, except that of the City Manager, shall be set by the City Manager in accordance with budget appropriations. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for compensation of its officers, MCL 117.3(d), MSA 5.2073(d). 
Section 7.3. - The City Manager. 
(a)  The City Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, with special emphasis upon his training and actual experience in municipal administration. 
(b)  The City Manager shall be the administrative agent of the Council; shall in such capacity be vested with all administrative powers of the city not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter; and shall perform the duties of his office under the authority of and be accountable to the Council. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the City Manager to: 
(1)  Supervise and coordinate the work of the administrative officers and departments of the city, except the Clerk so far as his work is that required of him by Section 7.4(a) hereof, and as otherwise provided in this charter and; 
(2)  Prepare the annual budget proposals of the city, together with supporting information in explanation thereof; 
(3)  Establish and maintain a central purchasing service for the city; 
(4)  Employ or be responsible, subject to the Civil Service ordinance of the city, for the employment of all city employees, and supervise and coordinate the personnel policies and practices of the city; 
(5)  Maintain an inventory of city-owned property; 
(6)  Keep informed and report to the Council concerning city affairs and the work of the several offices and departments of the city and, to that end, he may secure from the officers, heads of all administrative departments, and professional personnel of the city such information and periodical or special reports as he or the Council shall deem necessary; 
(7)  Resolve the conflict or supply the necessary authority, so far as may be consistent with law and the ordinances of the city, in case of conflict of authority between officers and administrative departments or, in case of absence of administrative authority occasioned by inadequacy of charter or ordinance provisions, and direct the necessary action to be taken in conformance therewith; making a full report promptly to the Council; 
(8)  Attend all meetings of the Council, with the right to be heard in all Council proceedings, but without the right to vote; 
(9)  Recommend to the Council from time to time, such measures as he deems necessary or appropriate for the improvement of the city, its administration, or its services; 
(10)  Possess such further powers and perform such additional duties as may be granted to or required of him, from time to time, by the Council; 
(11)  Establish any rules necessary to carry out any of the foregoing duties. 
Section 7.4. - City Clerk. 
(a)  The Clerk shall be clerk of the Council. He shall attend all meetings of the Council, and shall keep its journal. 
(b)  He shall keep a record of all ordinances, resolutions, and actions of the Council. 
(c)  He shall have power to administer all oaths required by law and the ordinances of the city. 
(d)  He shall be custodian of the city seal and shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal, and shall attest the same. He shall also be custodian of all papers, documents, and records pertaining to the city, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for by this charter. 
(e)  He shall give to the Council and to the officer concerned ample notice of the expiration or termination of the term of any city officers and of any official bond, franchise, contract, or agreement to which the city is a party. 
(f)  He shall notify the Council of the failure of any officer or employee to take the required oath of office or to furnish any bond required of him or to file any statement of election expenses required by law. 
(g)  He shall certify all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council. 
Section 7.5. - Finance Director. 
(a)  The Finance Director shall be the general accountant of the city and shall be responsible to the City Manager. He shall keep the books of account of the assets, receipts, and expenditures of the city, and shall keep the Council and the City Manager informed as to the financial affairs of the city. The system of accounts of the city shall conform to such uniform systems as may be required by law. 
(b)  He shall examine and audit all accounts and claims against the city and, respecting those which are eligible for payment, designate the budgetary funds from which they are to be paid. 
(c)  He shall balance all the books of account of the city at the end of each calendar month, and shall make a report thereon to the City Manager. 
(d)  He shall, upon direction of the City Manager, examine and audit all books of account kept by any officer, department, or board of the city. He shall examine the books of account of the Treasurer and the Municipal Court at least once each month. 
(e)  Until such time as the Council shall provide by ordinance for a Finance Director, the Clerk shall act in such capacity. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for a system of accounts, MCL 117.3(n), MSA 5.2073(n); uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq., MSA 5.3228(21) et seq. 
Section 7.6. - City Attorney. 
(a)  The Council shall designate an Attorney or firm of attorneys as the legal advisor of the Council. The attorney shall also advise the City Manager concerning legal problems affecting the city administration and the Clerk, Treasurer, and Assessor concerning their statutory and charter duties, when so requested, and shall file with the Clerk a copy of all written opinions given to the Council and such officers. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the Attorney to: 
(1)  At the request of the Chief of Police and other proper officers of the city, prepare complaints concerning ordinance violations and violations of this charter and shall prosecute all such violations. 
(2)  Represent the city in cases before all courts and other tribunals; 
(3)  Prepare or review all proposed ordinances[,] regulations, contracts, bonds, and such other instruments as may be required by this charter or by the Council, and shall promptly give his opinion as to the legality thereof; 
(4)  Attend all regular meetings of the Council and, on the request of the Mayor with the same notice as given to members of the Council, special meetings of the Council; 
(5)  Defend all officers and employees in all actions against them arising out of the performance of their official or employment duties; 
(6)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this charter or the Council; 
(c)  Upon the attorney's recommendation, or upon its own initiative, the Council may provide for an assistant to the attorney and may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the city has an interest, or to assist the Attorney therewith. 
Section 7.7. - City Treasurer. 
(a)  The Treasurer shall have the custody of all moneys of the city and all evidences of value belonging to or held in trust by the city. 
(b)  He shall keep and deposit all moneys or funds in such manner and only in such places as the Council may determine. 
(c)  He shall have such powers, duties, and prerogatives in regard to the collection and custody of state, county, school district, and city taxes and moneys as are conferred by law. 
Section 7.8. - Deputies. 
    The Clerk and Treasurer and other administrative officers, may appoint and remove their deputies subject to the budget allowances therefor and the approval of the City Manager in the case of appointments. Removals of deputies shall be subject to Section 4.12 of this Charter. Each deputy shall possess all the powers and authorities of his superior officer except as the same may be from time to time limited by his superior. 
Section 7.9. - Assessor. 
(a)  The Assessor shall be a person who is qualified for such office by education, training, or experience respecting property evaluation, and shall possess all the powers vested in and shall be charged with all the duties imposed upon assessing officers by law. 
(b)  He shall make and prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in the manner prescribed by or under authority of law. 
Section 7.10. - City Engineering Services. 
(a)  The Council shall provide for engineering services for the city by retaining a legally qualified Engineer or engineering firm whose work shall be coordinated for the Council through the City Manager respecting public works and public improvements of the city and copies of all drawings, plans, specifications, surveys, and reports necessary to such work shall be filed with the city. Engineering services so provided shall include those of official surveyor of the city. 
(b)  The Council shall provide office and filing space for the work of the Engineer or engineering firm in which shall be preserved the engineering and surveying records of the city, including the boundaries of the city, the location of city streets, alleys, easements and other interests in real estate, and public places, and the location of all utility and sewer mains, lines, conduits, manholes, valves, junctions, public works and improvements, and appurtenances thereof located on, above or under streets, alleys, and easements of the city; and may provide facilities for performing such drafting and engineering work as shall be required to be locally done. 
(c)  The Council shall have power to employ the engineering services of any qualified Engineer or engineering firm, in connection with any specific engineering work. Such services may be performed in conjunction with, or independently of, the regularly retained Engineer or engineering firm. A copy of all final plans and specifications provided by such Engineer or engineering firm shall be filed with the city. 
Section 7.11. - Police Department. 
(a)  The Police Department shall be in charge of the Chief of Police, who, except as otherwise provided by law, shall be responsible to the City Manager. To be eligible for appointment as Chief of Police, a person must be qualified for such office by education, training or experience. 
(b)  The Chief of Police shall perform and be responsible for the performance of all duties and acts required to be performed by him or the police department by law and shall account for and pay over to the proper agencies all moneys received by him or the police department in the performance of such duties and acts. 
(c)  Police officers of the city shall have all the powers, immunities, and privileges granted to peace officers by law for the making of arrests, the preservation of order, and the safety of persons and property in the city and on lands and premises owned by the city outside its corporate limits. Any person arrested shall be taken before the proper magistrate or court, as required by law, or in lieu thereof, be given notice to appear before such a magistrate or court. Police officers may make and sign complaints to or before the proper magistrates concerning violations of this charter and the ordinances of the city. For purposes of making arrests, violations of this charter and of city ordinances shall be deemed to be misdemeanors. 
Section 7.12. - Fire Department. 
(a)  The Fire Department shall be in the charge of the Fire Chief, who, except as otherwise provided by law, shall be responsible to the City Manager. To be eligible for appointment as Fire Chief, a person must be qualified for such office by education, training, or experience. 
(b)  The Fire Department shall be responsible for the prevention and extinguishment of fires and the protection of persons and property against damage and accident resulting therefrom. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the use, care, and management of the city's fire fighting apparatus and property. He shall conduct supervisory and educational programs to diminish the risk of fires within the city. He, or any of his authorized subordinates, may command any person present at a fire to aid in the extinguishment thereof and to assist in the protection of life or property. If any person willfully disobeys any such lawful requirement, he shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this charter. 
(c)  The Fire Chief or any of his authorized subordinates may cause any building to be pulled down or destroyed, when deemed necessary in order to arrest the progress of a fire. In such case no action shall be maintained against the city or any person therefor. If any person having an interest in such a building shall apply to the Council, within three months after the fire, for damages or compensation for such building the Council may pay him such compensation as it may deem just. The Council may ascertain the amount of such damage or compensation by agreement with the owner of the property or by the appraisal of a jury selected in the same manner as in the case of juries selected to appraise damages for the taking of property for public use. No compensation shall be paid by the city on account of any loss which would probably have occurred to a building by or on account of fire, if it has [had] not been pulled down or destroyed under authority of this section. In making any award under authority of this section, the Council or the jury, as the case may be, shall credit against the damages arising out of the pulling down or destruction of the building any insurance recoverable by persons having an interest in the property. 
Section 7.13. - City Library. 
(a)  The city library shall be a department of the city government under the direction of a Library Board composed of five members who shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council. The terms of members of the Library Board shall be for five years, commencing on July 1, and shall be so arranged that the term of one member shall expire in each year. The Library Board shall possess such powers as are conferred upon such boards by law. 
State Law reference- Libraries generally, MCL 397.201 et seq., MSA 15.1661 et seq. 
Section 7.14. - City Planning. 
(a)  The council shall provide for and maintain a City Planning Commission which shall possess all of the powers and perform the functions of planning commissions as set forth in Act No. 285, P.A., 1931 as amended or as provided for in its successor legislation. The membership and term of office of the planning commissioners shall be established by city ordinance and comply with Act No. 285, P.A. 1931, as amended or as provided for in its successor legislation. 
(b)  The Commission may appoint a Planning Director, subject to the confirmation of the Council, who shall perform the duties prescribed by the established rules of the Commission. 
(Amd. by electors 11-6-07) 
Section 7.15. - Civil Service. 
(a)  Within one year after the effective date of this charter, the Council shall adopt an ordinance establishing a civil service plan for the city, providing for the selection, tenure, promotion, demotion, discharge, and discipline of city employees. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the personnel of the city, other than its officers and their deputies, the Court Officer, and persons employed or retained in a professional capacity shall be deemed to be city employees. 
(c)  In the selection, discharge, and fixing of terms and conditions of the employment of city employees, there shall be no discrimination on grounds of race, color, religion, or national origin. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  In the civil service plan, the Council shall provide for the control or prevention of nepotism in city employment. 
(Amd. by electors 11-5-91) 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for a system of civil service for employees, MCL 117.4i(7), MSA 5.2082(7). 
Section 7.16. - Citizen Committees. 
    The Council may create citizen committees for the purpose of studying specific problems or needs of any department, function, or interest of the city. Each such committee shall conduct its study in cooperation with the City Manager and his subordinates and submit its findings and recommendations to the Council. Each such committee shall render its report to the Council within one year after its creation and shall then cease to exist, unless the work of the committee is extended thereafter by the Council for a period not exceeding one year. 
Section 7.17. - Additional Administrative Powers and Duties. 
    From time to time, the Council may, in the administrative plan adopted by it, prescribe additional powers and duties or diminish any powers and duties in a manner not inconsistent with this charter, to be exercised and administered by appropriate officers and departments of the city. Administrative officers shall also perform such duties in connection with their offices as may be required by law, the Council, or by the City Manager. 
Section 7.18. - Administrative Rules. 
    Before any rule or set of rules or amendment thereof affecting the public, as distinguished from the officers and employees of the city, which is made or provided by any office or board of the city, except rules of the Municipal Court, shall become effective, such rule or set of rules shall be approved by the Council and filed with the Clerk. A copy of such rules or set of rules, and of all amendments thereof shall also be placed in the Owosso Public Library. After notice to the office or board concerned and an opportunity to be heard thereon, the Council shall have power to review any rule at any time and to affirm or rescind its approval thereof. 
Section 7.19. - Employee Welfare Benefits. 
    The Council shall have power to make available to the administrative officers and employees of the city and its departments and boards, any recognized standard group plan of life, hospital, health, or accident insurance. 
State Law reference- Permissible for Charter to provide for a system of compensation for its employees and their dependents in the use of disability, injury or death of such employees, MCL 117.4i(8), MSA 5.2082(8). 
Section 7.20. - Employee Relationships. 
    Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, after the same have been laid before the proper department heads of the city and the City Manager, employees of the city may lay matters concerning general employee relationships and compensation before the Council and they and the City Manager and the proper department heads shall be heard thereon. 
CHAPTER 8. - GENERAL FINANCE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq., MSA 5.3188(1) et seq. 

Section 8.1. - Fiscal Year. 
    The fiscal and budget year of the city shall begin on the first day of July of each year. 
Section 8.2. - Budget Procedure. 
    Not later than the first Monday of February of each year each officer, department, and board of the city shall submit to the City Manager an itemized estimate of its expected income and expenditures during the next fiscal year for the department or activities under its control. The City Manager shall compile such information and after reviewing the same shall submit to the Council, not later than the first meeting of the Council in April of each year a budget proposal which sets forth such budget requests and his recommendations thereon, and shall contain such information as the Council shall request. The anticipated expenditures by the city in such budget proposal shall be within the tax limit and other anticipated revenue of the city, considering anticipated unexpended balance, if any, from the then current budget as income, and taking into account any anticipated deficit in the current budget at the end of the current fiscal year. In addition to the foregoing information, such recommended budget shall include therein, at least the following information: 
(1)  The detailed estimates of the City Manager, with supporting explanation, of proposed expenditures for each office, department and board of the city, with a comparison of the actual appropriations and expenditures for corresponding items for the last preceding fiscal year, in full, and the appropriations for the current fiscal year, together with the expenditures for such year to January first, and estimated expenditures for the balance of the current fiscal year; 
(2)  An estimate of and provision for paying carry-over accounts payable from the current fiscal year; 
(3)  Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the city, showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unissued, and the condition of sinking funds, if any; 
(4)  Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues of the city from sources other than taxes, with a comparative statement of the amounts estimated for and actually received from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding fiscal year in full, for the current fiscal year to January first, and estimated revenues therefrom for the balance of the current fiscal year; 
(5)  A statement of the estimated accumulated cash and unencumbered balances, or deficits, at the end of the current fiscal year; 
(6)  An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from taxes to be levied, from delinquent taxes, and the amount to be raised from bond issues which, together with available unappropriated funds and any revenues from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures; 
(7)  The budgetary recommendations of the city's auditors, its officers, department heads, and boards, and the City Manager's comments and recommendations thereon. 
Section 8.3. - Further Budget Procedure. 
    The budget proposal of the City Manager, together with his recommendations and its supporting schedules and information shall be available for public inspection in the office of the Clerk. Within five days after the budget proposal is submitted to the Council, the City Manager shall place a copy thereof in the Owosso Public Library. Such budget proposal, together with the City Manager's supporting schedules, information, and messages, shall be reviewed by the Council. 
Section 8.4. - Budget Hearing. 
    A public hearing on the budget proposal shall be held not less than one week before its final adoption, at such time as the Council shall direct. Notice of the public hearing shall be published by the Clerk at least one week in advance thereof. 
Section 8.5. - Adoption of Budget. 
(a)  At a regular meeting held not later than the fourth Monday in May of each year, the Council shall, by resolution, adopt a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and make an appropriation of the money needed therefor. Such resolution shall designate the sum to be raised by taxation for the general purposes of the city and for the payments of principal and interest on its indebtedness. Failure to adopt such resolution within the time herein set shall not invalidate either the budget or the tax levy therefor. 
(b)  A copy of the appropriations for each fiscal year, certified by the Clerk, shall be furnished to the Finance Director within ten days after the date of the adoption of the budget resolution. 
(c)  In the event that the Council shall not adopt a budget for any fiscal year by the first Monday in June preceding the commencement of such fiscal year, the budget proposal for that year, as presented to the Council by the City Manager in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be the budget for that fiscal year and there shall be an appropriation therefor, without the necessity of Council action. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for an annual appropriation, MCL 117.3(h), MSA 5.2073(h). 
Section 8.6. - Budget Control. 
(a)  Except for purposes which are to be financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessments, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city, except in accordance with an appropriation for such purpose, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred without an appropriation covering all payments which will be due under such obligation during the fiscal year. The Council only, by resolution adopted by the affirmative vote of not less than five of its members may appropriate unappropriated funds or transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance, including the contingent account of the general fund of the city, or any portion thereof, from any budget item or account, department, or agency to another. 
(b)  Expenditures shall not be charged directly to any contingent or general account. Instead, the necessary amount of the appropriation from such account shall be transferred to the appropriate budget item or account and the expenditure then charged thereto. 
(c)  During each month, the City Manager shall submit to the Council data showing the relation between the estimated and actual revenues and expenditures to the end of the preceding month; and, if it shall appear that the revenues are less than anticipated, the Council may, by resolution, reduce appropriations except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the revenues. 
Section 8.7. - Accumulation Accounts. 
(a)  The Council may, by ordinance, establish and maintain accounts for accumulating moneys to be used for acquiring, extending, altering, constructing, or repairing public improvements. 
(b)  Appropriations to such accounts may be made by the Council either in the annual appropriation resolution or from time to time during the fiscal year, from available funds, from whatever source derived, which are not required for other appropriations or obligations of the city. Such accounts shall be continuing accounts and the balances therein at the end of each fiscal year shall remain a part thereof. 
(c)  Moneys which are accumulated for the purpose of public improvements, as set forth in subsection (a) hereof, shall be used only at the direction of the Council and only for the purpose provided in the original ordinance establishing such account, unless their use for some other municipal purpose be authorized by a majority vote of the electors of the city who vote on the proposition to amend such ordinance to provide for a change of the use of the moneys in such account. After the purpose of any such account has been fulfilled for the purpose for which the fund was created, any balance remaining therein may be transferred by the council to any other accumulation account or to the general fund of the city. 
(d)  Moneys may be accumulated in the same manner for the purpose of purchasing equipment required by the city. Such moneys shall be expended only for the purpose provided in the ordinance establishing any such account, or as such ordinance may be amended from time to time, and, when no longer required for such purpose, such moneys or any part thereof may be transferred by any other such accumulation account, or to the general fund, by a resolution adopted by the affirmative vote of not less than five members of the Council. 
Section 8.8. - Claims against City, other than for Injuries. 
    Procedures for the examination and payment of claims against the city, other than for injuries for which provision is made in Section 8.9 shall be as prescribed by law. In the absence of any such law, the Council shall prescribe such procedures by ordinance. 
Section 8.9. - Claims against City for Injuries. 
(a)  Procedures and limitations for the examination and adjustment of claims against the city for injury to persons and property shall be such as are provided by law. 
(b)  This section shall not be deemed to waive any defense of immunity which the city may have from claims for damages arising out of negligence or otherwise, but shall apply in all cases where such defense is not available to the city. 
State Law reference- City liability for injury on public ways, MCL 691.1401 et seq., MSA 3.996(101) et seq. 
Section 8.10. - Withdrawal of City Funds. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by law or by ordinance, all funds drawn from the treasury shall be drawn pursuant to the authority of the Council. The City Manager, where necessary to expedite operating procedures, may authorize, in writing, other officers and employees of the city to make minor disbursements from petty cash accounts, which disbursements shall be accounted for and shall be audited by the Finance Director. 
(b)  Checks or warrants may be issued prior to authorization by the Council for such purposes and up to such amounts as the Council shall provide by ordinance. 
(c)  Checks or warrants for the disbursement of city funds may be signed by the Clerk only. The Council may, however, provide by ordinance that checks or warrants shall also be countersigned by the Finance Director or the Treasurer. Signatures may be facsimile, when and as is authorized by the Council. 
Section 8.11. - Municipal Borrowing Power. 
(a)  Subject to the applicable provisions of law, the city may borrow money for any purpose within the scope of its powers or which may be permitted by law, and may issue bonds or other evidences of indebtedness therefor. Such bonds or other evidences of indebtedness shall include, but not be limited to the following types: 
(1)  General obligation bonds for the payment of which the full faith and credit of the city is pledged; 
(2)  Special assessment bonds which are issued in anticipation of the payment of special assessments for the purpose of defraying the cost of any one or more public improvements, which bonds shall be both an obligation of the special assessment district and a general obligation of the city; 
(3)  Revenue bonds, as authorized by law; 
(4)  Tax anticipation notes, which may be issued in anticipation of the collection of taxes for the current or next succeeding fiscal years of the city, or any other year permitted by law, in the manner and subject to any limitations provided by law; 
(5)  Mortgage bonds, as authorized by law, for the acquiring, owning, purchasing, constructing, improving, or operating of any public utility which the city is authorized by law to finance in this manner; 
(6)  Bonds issued in anticipation of future payments from the Motor Vehicle Highway Fund, or any other funds of the State, which the city may be permitted by law to pledge for the payment of the principal and interest thereof, which bonds, if the law so permits, may also be a general obligation of the city; 
(7)  Water main extension bonds, in an amount not to exceed one per cent of the assessed valuation of all real and personal property in the city, for the payment of which the full faith and credit of the city are pledged for the refunding from time to time of moneys advanced or paid on special assessments imposed for water main extensions as buildings are connected to such extensions, which bonds shall be payable in not more than thirty years, with interest thereon at a rate which shall not exceed six per cent per annum; 
(8)  Calamity bonds, issued in case of fire, flood, or other calamity for the relief of the inhabitants of the city and for the preservation of municipal property, in a sum not to exceed three-eighths of one per cent of the assessed value of the real and personal property in the city, which shall become due in not more than five years. 
(b)  Whenever any portion of public improvements shall be assessed by or charged to the city at-large and the balance of such cost assessed against the property benefitted, the Council may provide for the payment of the city's portion of such cost in installments. In such case, bonds may be issued in anticipation of the payment of the amount assessed against the city at-large, the same as they may be issued in anticipation of the payment of the amount assessed against the benefitted property. In such case, the Council shall appropriate in each fiscal year an amount which is sufficient to pay the principal of and interest on such bonds which are required to be paid during that year. Such bonds may be included as a part of a total issue of bonds for the public improvement to which they apply and need not be separated from bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of special assessments assessed against the benefitted property. 
(c)  Bonds may be issued in anticipation of the collection of special assessments levied with respect to two or more public improvements, but no special assessment district shall be required to pay the obligation of any other special assessment district and the ordinance or resolution creating such districts shall so provide. 
(d)  All collections on special assessment rolls or on any combination of such rolls shall be set apart in a separate fund and shall be used for the purpose for which levied, and for the payment of the principal of an [sic] interest on bonds issued in anticipation of such special assessments. If there is any deficiency in any special assessment fund to meet the payment of the principal or interest to be paid therefrom, moneys shall be advanced from the general funds of the city to meet such deficiency, and shall be replaced in the general funds when the special assessment fund shall be sufficient therefor. 
(e)  Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued, and the proceeds thereof shall not be used for any other purpose, except that, when ever the proceeds of any bond issue, or a part thereof, remain unexpended and unencumbered for the purpose for which said bond was made, the Council may, by the confirming vote of not less than five members, authorize the use of such unexpended and unencumbered funds: 
(1)  For the retirement of such bond issue, or 
(2)  If such bond issue has been fully retired, then for the retirement of other bonds or obligations of the city provided for by this section: Provided, That in the case of special assessment bonds, such funds shall be refunded to the owners of property against which special assessments therefor were made, or placed in the general fund of the city in accordance with the provisions of Section 10.2 of this charter, and 
(3)  For such other purposes as may be permitted by law, subject to the proviso in paragraph (2) above; or 
(4)  If such funds cannot be so used, then in any manner approved by the vote of not less than five members of the Council. 
(f)  No bond or other evidence of indebtedness, regardless of type or purpose, shall bear interest at a rate exceeding that fixed by law. 
(g)  All bonds and other evidences of indebtedness shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk, under the seal of the city. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile signatures of the Mayor and the Clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness shall be kept by the Treasurer. Upon the payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the same shall be marked "Cancelled" or otherwise defaced by the Treasurer to indicate payment. After all of the bonds of any issue have been paid, they may be destroyed by cremation, with a proper certificate of such destruction filed in the office of the Clerk. 
State Law reference- City authority to borrow money on the credit of the city and issue bonds therefor, MCL 117.4a(1), MSA 5.2074(1); city authority to borrow money and issue bonds therefor in anticipation of the payment of special assessments, MCL 117.4a(2), MSA 5.2074(2); municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq., MSA 5.3188(1) et seq. 
Section 8.12. - Limitations Upon Borrowing Power. 
(a)  The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not at any time exceed ten per cent of the assessed value of all the real and personal property in the city: Provided, That, in computing such net bonded indebtedness, there shall be excluded money borrowed under the provisions of Section 8.11.(a) clauses (2), (3), and (4) of this chapter, and any other bonds which are not, by law, subject to the debt limitation of the city. The resources of any debt retirement or sinking fund pledged for the retirement of any outstanding bonds which are subject to the debt limitation herein established, shall also be deducted from the amount of the bonded indebtedness. 
(b)  No bonds shall be sold to obtain funds for any purpose other than that for which they were specifically authorized, and, if such bonds are not sold within two years after authorization, such authorization shall be null and void, except when delay is caused by litigation or when a bond issue has been authorized to be issued in two or more parts or series. In case of litigation, the two year period shall start at the time of the filing of the final judgment or decree. In case of bonds authorized to be issued in two or more parts or series, the first part or series shall be sold within two years after authorization and the final part or series shall be sold within ten years after authorization. 
State Law reference- Limitation on net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes, MCL 117.4a(1), MSA 5.2074(1). 
Section 8.13. - Depositories. 
    The Council shall designate depositories for city funds in accordance with law and shall provide for the regular deposit of all city moneys. 
State Law reference- Designation of depositories, MCL 129.12, MSA 3.752; deposit of public moneys, MCL 211.436, MSA 7.86. 
Section 8.14. - Independent Audit. 
    An independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the city government at the close of each fiscal year, and shall be completed within ninety days thereafter. Special independent audits may be made at such time that the Council may designate. All such audits shall be made to the Council by a Certified Public Accountant designated by it. Each such audit and reports supplemental thereto shall be submitted to the Council and made public by it in the manner that it determines. Copies thereof shall be placed in the office of the Clerk, and the Owosso Public Library. 
Section 8.15. - Annual Report. 
    The City Manager shall prepare an annual report of the affairs of the city, after the completion of the annual audit. The report shall include condensed financial statements showing the results of all city operations, including statements for each public utility owned or operated by the city. Copies of such report shall be filed in the office of the Clerk and in the Owosso Public Library and shall be available for public inspection and distribution at the office of the Clerk and by such other method as the Council may determine. 
CHAPTER 9. - TAXATION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- General property tax act, MCL 211.1 et seq., MSA 7.1 et seq. 

Section 9.1. - Power to Tax and Tax Limits. 
(a)  The city shall have the power to annually levy and collect ad valorem taxes, rents, tolls, and excises for municipal purposes. 
(b)  The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for State, county, and school purposes under the general law. Except as otherwise provided by this charter, city taxes shall be levied, collected, and returned in the manner provided by law. 
(c)  Exclusive of any levy for the payment of principal of and interest on outstanding general obligation bonds and exclusive of any other levies authorized by law to be made beyond charter tax rate limitations, the levy of ad valorem taxes for general municipal purposes shall not exceed one and one-half of one percent of (fifteen mills on) the assessed value of all real and personal property in the city. 
(d)  The foregoing tax limitation of one and one-half of one percent of (fifteen mills on) the assessed value of all real and personal property in the city may be increased for any period, not to exceed two fiscal years of the city, by a majority of the electors of the city voting on the question at a regular or special election. In no case shall the total of any such increase cause the tax limitation of the city, including the limitations authorized in sub-section (c) hereof, to exceed two percent of (twenty mills on) the assessed value of all real and personal property in the city. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for annually levying and collecting taxes, MCL 117.3(g), MSA 5.2073(g); mandatory that Charter provide that subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes under general law, MCL 117.3(f), MSA 5.2073(f); property subject to taxation, MCL 211.1 et seq., MSA 7.1 et seq. 
Section 9.2. - Tax Day. 
    Subject to the exceptions provided or permitted by statute, the taxable status of persons and property shall be determined as of the thirty-first day of December of each year, or such other day as may be provided by law, which shall be deemed to be the tax day as defined by state law for all taxes levied in the city during the ensuing calendar year. 
State Law reference- Property exempt from taxation, MCL 211.7 et seq., MSA 7.7 et seq.; designation of tax day, MCL 211.2, MSA 7.2. 
Section 9.3. - Preparation of the Assessment Roll. 
(a)  On or before the first Monday in March in each year the Assessor shall prepare and certify an assessment roll of all property in the city, in the manner and form required by law. Values of all property listed on such assessment roll shall be estimated according to recognized methods of systematic assessment which are uniform for comparable properties. Not less than ten (10) days prior to the second meeting of the board of review in each year, the Assessor shall give notice of any increase in the assessed value of any property on, or of the addition of any property to, the assessment roll. Such notice shall be given to the owner thereof, as shown by such assessment roll, by first class mail. The failure of the owner to receive any such notice, shall not invalidate any assessment roll or any assessment or levy of taxes thereon. 
(b)  No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed, except as expressly required or permitted by law. 
(Amd. by electors 11-7-95) 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for preparation of assessment roll, MCL 117.3(i), MSA 5.2073(i); assessment roll, MCL 211.24 et seq., MSA 7.24 et seq. 
Section 9.4. - Board of Review. 
(a)  A Board of Review is hereby created, composed of five members who have the qualifications for holding elective city office as set forth in this charter and who are freeholders of property assessed for taxes in the city. The Council shall set the compensation of the members of the Board of Review, which compensation shall be on a per diem basis. 
(b)  The members of the Board of Review shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council, and may be removed for reasons of non-feasance or misfeasance by a vote of five or more members of the Council. The first members shall be appointed during the month of January, 1965 for terms which shall be such that the term of one of the members will expire in the month of January of each year. Thereafter one member shall be appointed in the month of January of each year, for a term of five years, commencing upon his appointment. 
(c)  The board shall, annually on the first day of its meeting, select one of its members chairman for the ensuing year. The Assessor shall be Clerk of the Board, and shall be entitled to be heard at its sessions, but shall have no vote on any proposition or question. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for a board of review, MCL 117.3(a), MSA 5.2073(a). 
Section 9.5. - Duties and Functions of Board of Review. 
    For the purpose of revising and correcting assessments, the Board of Review shall have the same powers and perform like duties in all respects as are, by law, conferred upon and required of boards of review in townships, except as otherwise provided in this charter. At the time, and in the manner provided in the following section, it shall hear the complaints of all persons considering themselves aggrieved by assessments. If it shall appear that any person or property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the roll, the Board shall correct the roll in such manner as it deems just. Except as otherwise provided by law, no person other than the Board of Review shall make any change upon, or addition or correction to, the assessment roll. The assessor shall make a permanent record of all proceedings of the Board and enter therein all resolutions and decisions of the Board. Such record shall be filed with the Clerk on or before the first day of May following the meeting of the Board of Review. 
Section 9.6. - Meetings of the Board of Review. 
    The board of review shall convene its first meeting on the Tuesday following the first Monday in March of each year. The purpose of the first meeting is to review and correct the assessment roll. When the board of review makes a change that will increase an assessment or add property to the assessment roll, the person chargeable with the assessment shall be promptly notified in such a manner as will assure the person opportunity to attend the second meeting of the board of review. 
    The board of review shall meet for its second meeting on the second Monday in March and shall continue in session for at least four (4) hours. The board of review shall also meet the following day for not less than four (4) hours. One of the aforementioned meetings shall be in session for not less than two (2) hours after 5:00 p.m. The purpose of such second meetings shall be to consider and correct the assessment roll prepared and presented by the assessor. The board of review shall schedule such additional meetings as may be required to hear persons who have given notice of a desire to be heard during such two-day period. The assessor shall order the publication of the time and place of the meeting of the board of review not less than one (1) week before it convenes in each year. 
(Amd. by electors, 11-7-95) 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for meeting of board of review, MCL 117.3(i), MSA 5.2073(i). 
Section 9.7. - Endorsement of Roll. 
    After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, and not later than the first Monday in April, a majority of its members shall endorse thereon and sign a statement to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the city for the year in which it has been prepared. The omission of such endorsement or statement shall not affect the validity of such roll. In the event that the Board of Review shall fail or refuse to so review the assessment roll of the city, such roll, as prepared and presented to the Board of Review by the Assessor shall be the assessment roll for the year for which it was prepared and shall stand as though it had been certified by the Board of Review and the amounts required to be certified by Section 9.9 shall be spread thereon by the Assessor and collected by the Treasurer. 
State Law reference- Completion of review of assessments prior to first Monday in April required, MCL 211.30a, MSA 7.30(1). 
Section 9.8. - Validity of Assessment Roll. 
    Upon the completion of the assessment roll, and from and after midnight ending the last day of the meeting of the Board of Review, it shall be the assessment roll of the city for county, school and city taxes, and for other taxes on real and personal property that may be authorized by law. It shall be presumed by all courts and tribunals to be valid and shall not be set aside except for cause set forth by law. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for levy, collection and return of state, county and school taxes, MCL 117.3(i), MSA 5.2073(i). 
Section 9.9. - Clerk to Certify Tax Levy. 
    Within three days after the Council has adopted the budget for the ensuing fiscal year of the city, the Clerk shall certify to the Assessor the total amount which the Council has determined shall be raised by general tax. He shall also certify all amounts of current or delinquent special assessments and all other amounts which the Council requires to be assessed, reassessed, or charged upon such roll upon any property or against any person. 
Section 9.10. - City Tax Roll. 
    After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, the Assessor shall prepare the city tax roll. Such city tax roll may be either a copy of the assessment roll with the authorized city taxes, assessments, and charges spread thereon, or may be a combined tax roll upon which county, school, and other taxes may be spread for collection under the general property tax act, in addition to city taxes, assessments and charges, as determined by the Council. Upon receiving the certification of the several amounts to be raised, or to be assessed, reassessed, or charged as provided in Section 9.9 of this charter, the Assessor shall spread upon said tax roll the several amounts determined by the Council to be raised, charged, assessed, or reassessed against persons and property. He shall spread the amount to be raised by general city tax, according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth in said roll. To avoid fractions in computation on any tax roll, the Assessor may add to the amount of the several taxes to be raised thereon not more than the amount prescribed by law. Any excess created thereby on any tax roll, for the levy and collection of taxes in the city, shall belong to the city. 
Section 9.11. - Tax Roll Certified for Collections. 
    After spreading the city taxes and any assessments, reassessments, and charges, the Assessor shall certify the tax roll and shall annex his warrant thereto, directing and requiring the Treasurer to collect from the persons named in said roll the several sums mentioned therein opposite their respective names as a tax, assessment, reassessment, or charge, and granting to him, for the purpose of collecting taxes, assessments and charges on such roll, all of the statutory powers and immunities possessed by township treasurers for the collecting of taxes. On or before June 15th, the city tax roll shall be delivered to the Treasurer for the collection of the taxes, assessments, reassessments, and charges set forth thereon. 
State Law reference- Collection of taxes, MCL 21.44 et seq., MSA 7.87 et seq. 
Section 9.12. - Taxes a Debt and Lien. 
(a)  The taxes on real and personal property shall become a debt to the city from the owner or person otherwise to be assessed, on the tax day provided by law. The amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall become a lien upon such real property on the first day of July following the said tax day and the lien for such amounts, and for all interest and charges thereon shall continue until payment thereof. All personal property taxes shall be a first lien prior, superior, and paramount, on all personal property of persons so assessed from and after the first day of July following the said tax day and shall so remain until paid. Said tax liens on personal property shall take precedence over all other claims, encumbrances, and liens upon said personal property whatsoever, whether created by chattel mortgage, title retaining contract, execution, or upon any other final process of a court, attachment, replevin, judgment, or, otherwise. No transfer of personal property assessed for taxes shall operate to divest or destroy such lien, except where such property is actually sold in the regular course of retail trade. 
Section 9.13. - Personal Property-Jeopardy Assessment. 
    If the Treasurer finds or reasonably believes that any person who is, or may be, liable for taxes upon personal property, the taxable situs of which was in the city on tax day, intends to depart or has departed from the city; or to remove or has removed therefrom personal property which is or may be, liable for taxation; or to conceal or conceals himself or his property; or does any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partly ineffectual the proceeding to collect such tax, he shall proceed to collect the same as a jeopardy assessment in the manner provided by law. 
State Law reference- Jeopardy assessment of personal property taxes, MCL 211.691 et seq., MSA 7.51(1) et seq. 
Section 9.14. - Taxes Due and Notification Thereof. 
(a)  City taxes shall be due for payment on the first day of July of the year when levied and shall be payable as stated in the warrant of the Assessor annexed to said roll. 
(b)  The Treasurer shall not be required to call upon the persons named in the city tax roll, nor to make personal demand for the payment of taxes, but he shall give notice to the taxpayers of the city, at least six days prior to the first day of July in each year, of the time when said taxes will be due for collection, by publication, at least once, in one or more of the newspapers published or circulated in the city, he shall also send a tax statement by first class mail, addressed to the owners of the property upon which taxes are assessed, according to the names of such owners and their addresses as indicated on the tax roll. Said notice and tax statement shall be deemed sufficient to require the payment of all taxes on said tax roll. Failure on the part of the Treasurer to give said notice and send any tax statement shall not invalidate the taxes on said tax roll nor release any person or property assessed thereon from any penalty provided for the non-payment or late payment of city taxes, assessments, or charges appearing on the tax roll. 
Section 9.15. - Tax Payment Schedule. 
    The Council shall provide, by ordinance, a tax payment schedule. Such schedule shall state the amount of collection charges and interest to be added to taxes, charges, assessments, and reassessments on the city tax roll and when such charges and interest shall be added. Such schedule may provide for the closing of the city tax roll on the first day of November of each year and the spreading of the taxes then delinquent upon the December tax roll upon which county and school taxes are collected, to be collected upon such roll with a four percent collection charge added thereto. 
Section 9.16. - Failure or Refusal to Pay Personal Property Taxes. 
    If any person shall neglect or refuse to pay any city tax on personal property assessed to him, the Treasurer shall collect the same by seizing any personal property of such person, wherever it may be found in the State of Michigan, to an amount sufficient to pay such tax, and charges and interest added thereto. No personal property shall be exempt from such seizure. He may sell the property seized, to an amount sufficient to pay such tax, together with all charges, fees, penalties, and interest added thereto, in accordance with statutory provisions. The Treasurer may also sue the person to whom a personal property tax is assessed, in accordance with the powers granted him by law. 
State Law reference- Failure or refusal to pay tax, MCL 211.47, MSA 7.91. 
Section 9.17. - Collection of Delinquent Taxes. 
    All taxes, assessments, and charges upon real property on the tax roll, together with collection charges and interest added thereto, remaining uncollected by the Treasurer on the first day of March following the date when the roll was received by him shall be subject to one of the following procedures: 
(1)  The real property against which such taxes, assessments, and charges are assessed shall be subject to disposition, sale, and redemption for the enforcement and collection of the tax lien against the same in the method and manner which may be provided by ordinance. The Council may provide by ordinance the procedure for the sale and redemption of real property for such unpaid taxes, assessments and charges, together with collection charges and interest added thereto, by judicial sale on petition filed in behalf of the city. Such procedure shall correspond substantially to the procedure provided by law for the sale by the State of tax delinquent real property and redemption therefrom, except that the acts performed by state and county officers shall be performed by appropriate city officers and that city tax sales shall be held not less than thirty nor more than ninety days prior to the dates of corresponding tax sales under the general law. 
(2)  If no ordinance is in effect pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, such taxes, assessments, and charges, together with any collection charges and interest added thereto shall be returned to the County Treasurer, to the extent and in the same manner and with like effect as provided by law for returns by township treasurers of township, school, and county taxes. The taxes, assessments, and charges, together with any collection charges and interest added thereto, which collection charges and interest shall be treated and collected in the same manner as taxes returned to the County Treasurer are to be collected in accordance with law, and shall be and remain a lien upon the property against which they are assessed until paid. 
Section 9.18. - Protection of City Lien. 
    The city shall have power to acquire, by purchase, any premises within the city at any tax or other public sale, or by direct purchase from the State of Michigan or the fee owner when such purchase is necessary to protect the lien of the city for taxes or special assessments, or both, on said premises and the lien for other charges, collection charges and interest, and may hold, lease, or sell the same for purpose of securing therefrom the amount of such taxes, special assessments, charges, collection charges, and of personal property assessed for taxes shall operate to divest or destroy such lien, except where such property is actually sold in the regular course of retail trade. 
Section 9.19. - State, County, and School Taxes. 
    For the purpose of assessing and collecting the taxes for the state, county, and school purposes, the city shall be considered the same as a township, and all provisions of State Law relative to the collection of and accounting for such taxes shall apply. For these purposes the Treasurer shall perform the same deputies and have the same powers as township treasurers under State Law. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for levy, collection and return of state, county and school taxes, MCL 117.3(i), MSA 5.2073(i); state law relative to the assessment, levy and collection of taxes, MCL 211.1 et seq., MSA 7.1 et seq. 
Section 9.20. - Disposition of Real Property Held by the City. 
    When the city has acquired any interest in property to protect the city's tax lien thereon, the owner of any interest therein, by fee title, as mortgagee, or as vendor or vendee under a land contract shall have the right to purchase the city's interest therein, upon payment to the city of the amount of money which the city has invested therein in the form of taxes, special assessments, charges, fees, penalties, interest, and costs, paid by the city to perfect its title in such property. After the lapse of ninety days after the date that the city acquired title to any such property, the Council may remove the same from the market by determining that such property is needed for and should be devoted to public purposes, naming such purposes, or may sell the same at a price which shall be not less than its market value, as determined and certified to the Council by the Assessor and qualified appraisers appointed by the Council. 
CHAPTER 10. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Power re assessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5, MSA 5.2074, 5.2075, 5.2077, 5.2084. 

Section 10.1. - General Power Relative to Special Assessments. 
    The Council shall have the power to make public improvements within the city. As to public improvements which are of such a nature as to benefit especially any property or properties within a district, the Council shall have the power to determine by resolution, that the whole or any part of the expense of any such public improvement shall be defrayed by special assessment upon such property, in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for assessing costs of public improvements, MCL 117.4d, MSA 5.2077. 
Section 10.2. - Detailed Procedure to be Fixed by Ordinance. 
(a)  The Council shall prescribe, by ordinance, the complete special assessment procedure governing the initiation of public improvements, the preparation of plans and cost estimates, the creation of special assessment districts, notices and hearings, making of special assessment rolls, the correction of errors in such rolls[,] the confirming of special assessment roll, the number of installments in which special assessments may be paid, the collection of special assessments, the making of additional assessments where the original special assessment roll proves insufficient to pay the cost of the improvement or the cost of the repayment of the principal of and interest on money borrowed to pay for such improvements, refunds of excessive assessments; provided, that, when such excess is less than five per cent of the total amount of the assessment roll, the excess may be placed in the general fund; and any other matters concerning the making and financing of improvements by the special assessment method. Such ordinance shall include provisions for the following: 
(1)  The procedure for filing petitions for public improvements; 
(2)  A survey and report by the City Manager concerning the need for, desirable extent of, and probable cost of such proposed public improvement; 
(3)  A public hearing by the Council on the necessity of the making of such public improvement with a publication of notice of such hearing: Provided, That no such public hearing shall be required when a petition for a public improvement is signed by all of the owners of property to be assessed therefor; 
(4)  A resolution of the Council determining to proceed or not to proceed with the proposed public improvement; 
(5)  A public hearing by the Council on the special assessment roll for the project with a publication of notice of such hearing; 
(6)  A resolution of the Council confirming the special assessment roll for public improvements and stating the date upon which the special assessment therefor, or the first installment thereof, if installment payments be allowed, shall be due and payable, the number of annual installments, if allowed, in which the special assessment may be paid, and the rate of interest to be charged upon such deferred installment; 
(7)  That no additional assessment for any public improvement which exceeds 10% of the original assessment shall be made, unless such additional assessment be reviewed at a meeting of the Council, for which meeting notices shall be published as provided in the case of review of the original special assessment roll; 
(8)  That, in any case when the main purpose of a sidewalk is to provide travel convenience to and from a school, factory, or other institution, public or private, and not for the benefit of the property in a district, except incidentally, the city shall pay not less than one-half of the cost of such sidewalk; 
(9)  If, under item (4) above, the determination is to proceed, determining the probable life of the improvement, finally fixing the special assessment district therefor, and ordering the Assessor to prepare a special assessment roll therefor: Provided That, if prior to the adoption of the resolution to proceed with the making of the public improvement, written objections thereto have been filed by the owners of property in the district, which according to the City Manager's report will be required to bear more than fifty per cent of the cost thereof, or by a majority of the owners of property to be assessed, no resolution determining to proceed with the improvement shall be adopted while such objections remain, except by the affirmative vote of five members of the Council; 
(10)  Publication of notices required by this section shall be given in a newspaper published in the city not less than seven days prior to the hearing to which it applies. Notice of all hearings in special assessment proceedings shall also be given by first class mail to the persons and in the manner provided in Act 162, P.A., 1962 [MCL 211.741 et seq., MSA 5.3534(1) et seq.]. 
(11)  In the event that funds are on hand or a revolving fund exists to defray the expense of any public improvement prior to the completion thereof, the special assessment roll therefor may be made within sixty days after the improvement is completed and shall be based upon the actual cost thereof. 
(b)  When the city may, by law, participate in intergovernmental improvements, the cost of which may be defrayed in whole or in part by special assessments, the procedure therefor shall be as provided by the law permitting the same. If such procedure is not so provided, the procedure established by and under authority of this chapter shall govern. 
Code reference- See Code of Ordinances, Chapter 28. 
Section 10.3. - Reconsideration of Petitions. 
    In the event that the Council shall fail to make any public improvement petitioned for under the provisions of the special assessment ordinance during the calendar year during which any petition is filed, such petition shall be reconsidered by the Council prior to the first day of March of the succeeding calendar year for the purpose of determining whether such improvement should be made during such calendar year. 
Section 10.4. - Condemnation costs. 
    The cost of condemning or otherwise acquiring property needed for any public improvement shall constitute a part of the cost of the improvement, but in no case shall the amount of such cost which is included in any special assessment for any public improvement cause the assessment to exceed the amount of the benefit received by any property assessed therefor through the making of the improvement. 
Section 10.5. - Limitation on Suits and Actions. 
    No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment or additional special assessment, (1) unless, within thirty days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll, written notice be filed with the Clerk of intention to file such suit or action, stating the grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal, and (2) unless such suit or action shall be commenced within ninety days after the confirmation of the roll. 
Editor's note- This type of section was held invalid as in conflict with the general property tax law (MCL 211.53, MSA 7.97) and the statute of limitations for personal actions (MCL 600.5813, MSA 27A.5813). See Wells v. City of Southfield, 14 Mich. App. 393, and Smuezynski v. City of Warren, 14 Mich. App. 464. 
Section 10.6. - Lien for and Collection of Special Assessments. 
(a)  Upon the confirmation of each special assessment roll, the special assessments thereon shall, until paid, constitute a personal obligation to the city of the owner of the property against which it is assessed and shall be and continue to be a lien upon the property assessed for the amount of such assessments and all interest and collection charges which may accrue thereon. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as that which is created by this charter for city taxes. Such special assessments or the installments thereof as the case may be, shall be charged against the owners of the property assessed, according to the records of the assessor's office at the time the special assessment or installment thereof, as the case may be, is due for payment. All special assessments or installments thereof, made in any calendar year which remain unpaid on the first day of March of the succeeding calendar year, together with the collection charges and interest which have accrued thereto, shall be placed upon the delinquent tax roll of the city as required in Chapter 9 of this charter and shall be collected, or the collection thereof enforced, in the same manner as are delinquent taxes on the city. For this purpose, the word "assessments" used in Chapter 9 shall include special assessments authorized by this chapter. 
(b)  In addition to the procedures established in sub-section (a) hereof for the collection of special assessments levied against property, the city may recover them in a suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. In any such suit, the confirmed special assessment roll upon which the special assessment concerned appears shall be prima facie evidence of the existence of the special assessment, of the regularity of the proceedings in making the special assessment, and of the right of the city to recover judgment therefor. 
State Law reference- Specific authority to institute an action in assumpsit to recover unpaid assessments, MCL 211.501, MSA 7.721. 
Section 10.7. - Hazards and Nuisances. 
    When any lot, or premises, building, or structure within the city, because of age or dilapidation, the accumulation of refuse or debris, the uncontrolled growing of noxious weeds, or because of any other condition or happening becomes, in the opinion of the Council, a public nuisance, or hazard which is dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of the city or of those residing or habitually going near such lot or premises, or such building, or structure, the Council may, after investigation, give notice to the owner or owners of the land upon which such nuisance or hazard exists or to the owner or occupant of the land or the building or structure itself, by posting notice upon the premises, by personal service, or by registered or certified mail addressed to the address set forth in the current assessment roll of the city, or the records of the assessor, specifying the nature of the nuisance or hazard and requiring such owner or occupant to alter, repair, tear down, abate, or remove the nuisance or hazard within a time to be specified by the Council which shall be commensurate with the nature of the nuisance or hazard. If, at the expiration of the time limit in said notice, the owner has not complied with the requirements thereof, or in any case where the owner of the land or of the building or structure itself is not known or cannot be found, the Council may order such nuisance or hazard to be abated by the proper department or agency of the city which is qualified to do the work required, or may do the work by contract or by hire, and the cost of such abatement may be assessed against the lot, premises, or description of real property upon which such nuisance or hazard is located, by special assessment. 
Section 10.8. - Boulevard Lighting. 
    The Council may provide a system of boulevard lighting for the city or any part or parts thereof, and may assess the cost thereof on any street for which such lighting is provided against the lands abutting thereon if the property owners of a majority of the frontage on such streets, or part thereof so to be improved, shall petition therefor. 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for boulevard lighting, MCL 117.4d(2), MSA 5.2077(2). 
Section 10.9. - All Real Property Liable for Special Assessments. 
    All real property, including such as is exempt from taxation by law, shall be liable for the cost of public improvements benefiting such property, unless specifically exempted from special assessments by law. 
Section 10.10. - Special Assessment Accounts. 
    Moneys raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be credited to a special assessment account, and shall be used to pay the special assessment portion of the cost of the improvement for which the assessment was levied and of expenses incidental thereto, including the repayment of the principal of and interest on money borrowed therefor, and to refund excessive assessments, if refunds be authorized. 
Section 10.11. - Certain Postponements of Payments. 
    The Council may provide that any person who, in the opinion of the assessor and Council, by reason of poverty is unable to contribute toward the cost of the making of a public improvement, by special assessment, may execute to the city an instrument creating a lien for the benefit of the city on all or any part of the real property owned by him and benefited by any public improvement, which lien will mature and be effective from and after the execution or such instrument, shall be recorded with the Register of Deeds of Shiawassee County, and shall not be discharged or released until the terms thereof are met in full. The Council shall establish the procedure for making this section effective. 
CHAPTER 11. - COUNTY SUPERVISORS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- This chapter is now obsolete. The election of supervisors is governed by MCL 46.401 et seq., MSA 5.359(1) et seq. 

Section 11.1. - Number of Supervisors. 
    The City of Owosso shall be entitled to such number of representatives on the Board of Supervisors of Shiawassee County, as shall be provided by law. 
Section 11.2. - Selection of Supervisors. 
    The representatives of the city on the Board of Supervisors of Shiawassee County shall be the Mayor, or if the Mayor shall file statement that he is unable to serve in such capacity, a member of the Council who is elected by the Council, the Assessor, and such number of electors of the city, including officers of the city, who possess the qualifications set forth in this charter for holding an elective city office, as shall be required to complete the number of representatives to which the city is entitled. Such electors shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the Council not later than fifteen days before elected township supervisors assume office following their election and their terms of office shall commence as nearly as possible coincidentally with the beginning of the terms of office of township supervisors and shall continue for the same terms as are provided by law for township supervisors. 
Section 11.3. - Temporary Absences and Vacancies. 
    In cases of temporary absence or of the inability of any city representative on the Board of Supervisors, to serve or perform the duties of his office, the Mayor shall, in writing appoint a person having the same qualifications as required for appointed city representatives on the county board of supervisors to serve during the absence or inability. 
Section 11.4. - Vacancies in Office of Supervisor. 
    All vacancies in the office of city representatives on the county board of supervisors who are appointed by the Mayor, shall be filled within thirty days after such vacancy occurs, in the manner provided in this charter for the appointment of such city representatives. 
Section 11.5. - Compensation of Supervisors. 
    Each city representative on the county board of supervisors shall be entitled to retain any compensation and mileage paid to him by the county. 
CHAPTER 12. - MUNICIPAL COURT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- This chapter is now obsolete. The municipal court was abolished by MCL 600.9921, which created the district court system. 

Section 12.1. - Style of Municipal Court. 
    The Municipal Court of the city shall be that created for cities by Act No. 5 of the Public Acts of 1956 [MCL 730.501 et seq., MSA 27.3937(1) et seq.] as amended. The Municipal Court of the city organized and operating under such act on the effective date of this charter shall continue under this charter. 
Section 12.2. - Jurisdiction of Municipal Court. 
    The Municipal Court shall have exclusive original jurisdiction in the trial of actions involving violations of the provisions of this charter and of the ordinances of the city and such other jurisdiction as may be conferred by law. 
Section 12.3. - Associate Municipal Judge. 
    The Council may create the office of Associate Municipal Judge as provided by law. 
Section 12.4. - Compensation of Municipal Judge. 
    The Council shall set the compensation of the Municipal Judge and of each Associate Municipal Judge. 
Section 12.5. - Rules of the Municipal Court. 
    Rules adopted by the Municipal Court, shall become effective when filed with the Clerk. A copy of such rules shall be deposited with the Owosso Public Library. 
Section 12.6. - Court Room and Supplies. 
    The city shall furnish the Municipal Court with all necessary court room quarters, dockets, books, forms, stationery and equipment which may be required for the proper conduct of its business, which shall be and remain the property of the city. 
Section 12.7. - Violations Bureau. 
    A Violations Bureau may be established by ordinance within the Court. The creation of such a Bureau shall not operate so as to deprive any person of a full and impartial hearing in court, should such person so choose. 
Section 12.8. - Court Officer-Constable. 
    With the advice and subject to the confirmation of the Council, the Municipal Judge shall appoint one or more persons having the qualifications of elective officers of the city, to act as court officers in the Municipal Court. Such court officers shall serve at the pleasure of the Municipal Judge and be subject to his orders and direction. Such officers shall be charged with the duty of and shall be responsible for maintaining order in the court room under the direction of the Judge, and each shall be responsible for the safety and custody of persons placed in his charge. Such officers shall be the Constables of the city and shall have like powers, authorities, and immunities in the service of warrants, notices, and process lawfully directed to them as are conferred by law on constables in townships. They shall have power to serve all process issued for violations of the charter and ordinances of the city. They shall not have the power of arrest, other than as private citizens unless acting as members of the city's police department or as deputy sheriffs. The compensation of the court officers shall be fixed by the Council. If a Court Officer shall be a police officer, his compensation shall be as provided in the budget, or, if not so provided, as the Council shall determine. 
Section 12.9. - Court Clerk. 
    Subject to the conformation of the Council, the Municipal Judge may appoint a person having the qualifications of appointive officers of the city as Clerk of the Court. Such person shall perform the duties provided by law for clerks of municipal courts and by the Municipal Judge and shall be compensated at a rate fixed by the Council. 
Section 12.10. - Juries. 
    Juries in the Municipal Court shall be selected in a manner provided by law. Each calendar year shall constitute a term of court: Provided, That the fees paid to jurors and the deposits required to be paid into court for jury trials shall conform to those set by law. 
CHAPTER 13. - ELECTIONS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Res. No. 57-2014, adopted by city council May 19, 2014, authorized the governing body of the city that holds elections for city officers at odd-year November elections to change its regular election schedule to even-year November elections, commencing with the city election of November 2016. Terms of the city's current elected and appointed councilmembers will not be shortened and the terms for elected offices will continue until successors are elected starting with the November 2016 election. 
State Law reference- Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq.; mandatory that Charter provide for the time, manner and means of holding elections, MCL 117.3(c). 

Section 13.1. - Regular City Election. 
    A regular city election shall be held biennially on the first Tuesday in April of even numbered years. Four members of the Council shall be elected at each such election. At each such election, the three persons receiving the largest number of votes who are elected to the office of Councilman shall be elected for terms of four years, each, and the person elected to such office who receives the least number of votes shall be elected for a term of two years. The Municipal Judge or Judges shall be elected at each such election that occurs in even numbered years which are not divisible by four, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Section 13.2. - Special Elections. 
    Special city elections shall be held when called by resolution of the Council, adopted at least forty-five days in advance of such election. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. Unless otherwise permitted by law, no more than two special city elections shall be held in any one calendar year. 
State Law reference- Special election approval, MCL 168.631, 168.639, MSA 6.1631, 6.1639. 
Section 13.3. - Primary Election. 
    Primary Elections for elective city offices are abolished. 
(Amended by electors 11-4-86) 
Section 13.4. - Qualifications of Electors. 
    Each person who has the constitutional qualifications of an elector in the State of Michigan, or who will have such qualifications at the next ensuing primary or regular or special city election, shall be entitled to register as an elector of the city. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for registration of electors, MCL 117.3(c), MSA 5.2073(c); registration of electors generally, MCL 168.491 et seq., MSA 6.1491 et seq. 
Section 13.5. - Election Procedure. 
(a)  All primary [now abolished] and regular city elections for the nomination and election of officers shall be non-partisan. The general election laws of the state shall apply to and control, as near as may be, all procedures relating to notices for, to registrations for, and to the conduct of primary and regular city elections, except as such general laws relate to political parties or partisan procedures, and except as otherwise provided by this charter. 
State Law reference- Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq., MSA 6.1001 et seq. 
Section 13.6. - City Election Commission. 
    A City Election Commission, consisting of the Clerk, the Assessor, and the City Attorney, is hereby created. If any of such persons are candidates for office at any election such person shall not be a member of the Commission for such election and the Council shall designate a person to act in his stead. The Clerk shall be chairman. The Commission shall have charge of all activities and duties required of it by law relating to the conduct of elections in the city. It shall select and appoint the election inspectors and other election personnel. The compensation of all election personnel shall be determined by the Council. In any case where election procedure is in doubt, the Election Commission shall prescribe the procedure to follow. 
Section 13.7. - Nominating Petitions. 
    A person desiring to qualify as a candidate for any elective office under this charter shall file with the Clerk a properly filled out official nominating petition on a form secured from the office of the Clerk. The Clerk shall prepare and provide such official blank nominating petitions, in substantially the same form as required by law or designated by the Secretary of State for non-partisan judicial officers. Each such petition may be on more than one petition form and shall be signed by not less than fifty nor more than one hundred of the registered electors of the city. Such petitions shall be filed with the Clerk not later than 4:00 o'clock in the afternoon on the Tuesday succeeding the first Monday in August preceding every odd-year November election. The Clerk shall publish notice of the last date and time for receiving nominating petitions not less than ten days prior thereto. Before the Clerk shall furnish nominating petitions to any person, he shall enter thereon with typewriter or in ink the name of the candidate and the name of the office for which he is to be a candidate. No petition which has been altered with respect to such entries shall be received by the Clerk for filing under the provisions of this section. [12] Nominating petitions for the purpose of filling a vacancy shall so state in connection with the name of the office for which they are to be used. If any person signs his name to a greater number of petitions that [than] are filed for any office than there will be persons elected to that office, his signature shall be disregarded on all petitions for that office. 
(Amended by electors 11-4-86) 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for nomination of elective officers, MCL 117.3(b), MSA 5.2073(b); nonpartisan nominating petitions, MCL 168.544a, MSA 6.1544(1). 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- The filing of any petition is permitted as long as it complies substantially with MCL 168.546, MSA 6.1546. 

Section 13.8. - Approval of Petitions. 
    The Clerk shall accept for filing only nominating petitions on official blanks furnished by him which contain the required number of signatures of qualified and registered electors of the city. Within five days after receiving any nominating petition, the Clerk shall determine the sufficiency of the number and genuineness of the signatures on each petition filed, and, if he finds that any petition does not contain the required signatures of qualified and registered electors, he shall immediately notify the candidate, in writing, of the insufficiency of his petition. Each petition which is found by the Clerk to contain the required signatures of qualified and registered electors shall be marked "valid," with the date thereof. 
Section 13.9. - Affidavit of Qualification for Office. 
    On or before the third day after the last day for filing petitions for any city office as above provided, each person for whom a nominating petition has been filed or the person who filed the petition, shall file with the Clerk an affidavit that the person named in the petition is possessed of all of the qualifications set forth by this charter for election to and the holding of the office for which his petition has been filed. Such affidavit shall be on the form therefor provided by the Clerk. If a second petition is filed for nominating a person to an office different from that named in a prior petition filed by him or on his behalf, the first petition must be withdrawn by the person named therein before the affidavit required by this section may be received by the Clerk on behalf of such person respecting the second petition. 
Section 13.10. - Form of Ballots. 
    The form, printing, and numbering of ballots and ballot labels used in any city election, shall conform, as nearly as may be, to that prescribed by law, except that no party designation or emblem shall appear thereon. 
Section 13.11. - Canvass of Votes. 
    The Board of City Canvassers created by law to canvass the votes cast at all city elections shall meet in the office of the Clerk, at 10:00 o'clock in the forenoon on the day following each city primary [now abolished] and election, and shall publicly canvass the returns of such primary [now abolished] or election, and shall determine the vote upon all questions and propositions, and declare whether the same have been adopted or rejected which persons have been nominated for or elected to office. The said Board of Canvassers shall make a report of its determinations to the Council at the next regular meeting thereof, which report shall be spread upon the journal of such meeting. 
Editor's note- Canvassing is now performed by the county, MCL 168.24a et seq., 168.30a et seq., MSA 6.1024(1) et seq., 6.1030(1) et seq. 
Section 13.12. - Tie Vote. 
    If, at any city election, there shall be no choice between candidates by reason of two or more persons having received an equal number of votes at any primary or regular city election, the Election Commission shall name a date and time and notify each such candidate thereof, in writing and mail to each by certified mail at the address shown on his petition, for the appearance of such persons for the purpose of determining the nomination or election of one of such persons by lot, as provided by law. Should any person or persons fail or refuse to appear, in person or by representative, to determine the result of any such tie, at the time and place named by the Commission, such determination shall be made by lot in his or their absence, at the direction and under the supervision of the said commission. Such determination shall, in any event, be final. 
State Law reference- Determination of election by lot, MCL 168.851, 168.852, MSA 6.1851, 6.1852. 
Section 13.13. - Recount. 
    A recount of the votes cast at any primary [now abolished] or election for any office, or upon any proposition, may be had in accordance with the general election laws of the state. 
State Law reference- Recounts, MCL 168.861 et seq., MSA 6.1861 et seq. 
CHAPTER 14. - CONTRACTS 

Section 14.1. - Authority of Council. 
(a)  The power to authorize the making of contracts on behalf of the city is vested in the Council and shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of law. 
(b)  All contracts, except as otherwise provided by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of Section 14.2 hereof, shall be authorized by the Council and shall be signed on behalf of the city by the Mayor and the Clerk, and, except as so provided, in the case of contracts for five hundred dollars or more, shall not be enforceable unless so signed. 
Section 14.2. - Purchase and Sale of Personal Property. 
    The Council shall establish, by ordinance, the procedures for the purchase and sale of personal property. Such ordinance shall provide for centralized purchasing on behalf of the city. The ordinance shall also provide the dollar limit within which purchases of personal property may be made without the necessity of securing competitive bids, and the dollar limit within which purchases may be made without the necessity of Council approval and signature by the Mayor and Clerk. No purchase of personal property shall be made unless a sufficient unencumbered appropriation is available therefor, or for such amount of the purchase price as shall be required to be paid during the current fiscal year of the city. 
Editor's note- See Code of Ordinances, Section 2-341 et seq. 
Section 14.3. - Limitations on Contractual Power. 
(a)  The Council shall have power to enter into contracts which by the terms thereof, will be fully executed within a period of ten years. Except contracts exempted from the limitations of this section, contracts which, by the terms thereof, will not be fully executed within a term of ten years shall first receive the approval of a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon at a regular or special election before they shall be binding on the city. The total of the amounts of principal payable under all contracts which will not be fully paid within the fiscal year in which executed shall not exceed an amount equal to one-quarter of one percent of the assessed value of all real and personal property in the city. The limitations of this section shall not apply to any contract for services with a public utility or one or more other governmental units, to contracts for debt secured by bonds or notes which are permitted to be issued by the city by law, nor to any contract for a term of years which may be permitted by law. 
(b)  The city shall not have power to purchase, sell, lease, or dispose of any real estate, unless: 
(1)  Such action is approved by the affirmative roll call vote of five or more members of the Council, and, unless; 
(2)  In the case of real estate owned by it, the resolution authorizing the sale, lease, or disposal thereof shall be completed in the manner in which it is to be finally passed and has remained on file with the Clerk for public inspection for twenty-one days after its original introduction at a meeting of the Council before the final adoption or passage thereof and, unless; 
(3)  When the proposition is to sell any park cemetery or any part thereof, except when such park is not required under an official master plan of the city, or any property bordering on a water front, the proposition to sell, lease, or dispose of the same shall also be approved by a three-fifths vote of the electors of the city voting thereon at any general or special election. 
(c)  Except as provided by ordinance authorized by Section 14.2 of this chapter, each contract for construction of public improvements or for the purchase or sale of personal property shall be let after opportunity for competitive bidding. All bids shall be sealed before filing with the Clerk and shall be opened in public in the Council room by the Clerk at the time designated in the notice of letting and shall be reported by him to the Council at its next regular meeting or special meeting called for that purpose. The Council may reject any or all bids, if deemed advisable. If, after two or more opportunities for competitive bidding, no bids are received or such bids as were received were not satisfactory to the Council, it may either endeavor to obtain new competitive bids or may authorize the City Manager or other proper official of the city to negotiate for a contract in the open market. 
(d)  No contract shall be made with any person who is in default to the city. 
(e)  No extra compensation shall be paid to any agent, employee, or contractor after the service has been rendered or the contract entered into. 
State Law reference- Restriction on making contracts with persons in default to city, MCL 117.5(f), MSA 5.2084(f). 
Section 14.4. - Business Dealings With City. 
    An officer or employee of the city who intends to have business dealings with the city, whereby he may derive any income or benefits, other than such as are provided as remuneration for his official duties, shall file with the Clerk a statement, under oath, setting forth the nature of such business dealings, and his interest therein. The statement shall be filed with the Clerk not less than ten days before the date when action may be taken by the Council or any other officer or agency of the city upon the matter involved. The statement shall be spread upon the proceedings of the Council for the meeting at which it is received and published in full therewith. In each case where the type of dealings with the city is on a continuing basis, involving more than one or a sequence of transactions described in the statement, each such statement shall stand for and apply to such transactions for a period of one year and may be renewed at the end of each one year period for so long as such transactions continue. Each such renewal shall be spread upon the proceedings of the Council and published as in the case of the original statement. In the event that the interest of any officer or employee of the city in any business dealings with the city changes at any time, he shall file a statement thereof as herein required, which statement shall also be spread upon the proceedings of the Council and published as herein required. Any business dealing made in violation of this section shall be void. 
Editor's note- This section has been preempted by MCL 15.321 et seq., MSA 4.1700(51) et seq., on conflicts of interest as to contracts. 
CHAPTER 15. - PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICES[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference- Mandates relative to public utilities, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, §§ 24, 25; permissible that Charter provide for operation of utilities, MCL 117.4c, 117.4f, MSA 5.2076, 5.2079. 

Section 15.1. - General Powers Respecting Municipal Utilities. 
    The city shall have all the powers granted by law to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair, and maintain public utilities, either within or without its corporate limits and either within or without the corporate limits of Shiawassee County, including, but not by way of limitation, public utilities for supplying water and water treatment, sewage disposal and treatment, electric light and power, gas, steam, or any of them, to the municipality and the inhabitants thereof; and also to sell water, electricity, gas, steam, and other utility services beyond its corporate limits as authorized by law. 
Section 15.2. - City's Water Supply and Sanitary Sewer Systems. 
    The water supply and sanitary sewage plants and systems and appurtenances of the city shall be under the general control of the Council and shall be managed by the City Manager, as the administrative agent of the Council. The City Manager shall employ such personnel as may be required for the efficient and proper operation of said systems. 
Section 15.3. - Rates. 
(a)  The Council shall fix just and reasonable rates and such other charges as may be deemed advisable for supplying water and other municipal utility services, to the inhabitants of the city and others. Discrimination in rates by the Council, within any classification of users, shall not be permitted, nor shall free service be permitted other than to the city. Increased utility rates, approved by the Council, may be charged for service outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The rates and charges for any municipal utility, shall be fixed by the Council on a basis at least adequate to compensate the city for the cost of such service and to make reasonable provision for the extension thereof according to the needs of the city. Transactions pertaining to the ownership and operation of each such municipal utility shall be recorded in a separate group of accounts, which shall be classified in accordance with generally accepted accounting practices. Charges for all service furnished to, or rendered by, other city departments or administrative units shall be recorded, whether collected or not. An annual report shall be prepared to show the financial position of each utility and the results of its operation. A copy of such reports shall be available for inspection at the office of the Clerk. 
Section 15.4. - Collection of Municipal Utility Rates and Charges. 
(a)  The Council shall provide by ordinance for the collection of rates and charges for public utility services furnished by the city. When any person fails or refuses to pay to the city any sums due on utility bills, the service upon which such delinquency exists may be discontinued and suit may be brought for the collection thereof. 
(b)  As permitted by law, the city shall have a lien upon the premises to which utility services are supplied for such services and, for such purpose, shall have all the powers granted to cities by law. The lien shall become effective immediately on the distribution or supplying of utility services to such premises. In each case where a lien to secure the payment of utility charges is not available to the city by operation of law or otherwise, the Council shall require that an adequate deposit by made by the person to whom city utility services are furnished, for the purpose of guaranteeing the collection of charges for such utility services. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law, all unpaid charges for utility services which constitute a lien upon the premises to which they are supplied or furnished which, on the last day of March of each year, have remained unpaid for a period of three months or more, shall be reported to the Council by the Finance Director at the first meeting thereof in the month of April. The Council thereupon shall order the publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of notice that all such unpaid utility charges not paid by the last day of April will be spread upon the city's tax roll against the premises to which such utility services were supplied or furnished, and such charges shall then be spread upon the city's tax roll, with a surcharge of ten percent thereof added thereto to defray the cost of making such spread, and shall be collected in the same manner as the city taxes. 
Section 15.5. - Disposal of Municipal Utility Plants and Property. 
    The city shall not sell, exchange, lease, or in any way dispose of any property, easement, equipment, privilege, or asset needed to continue the operation of any municipal public utility, unless the proposition to do so is approved by a three-fifths majority vote of the electors of the city voting on such proposition at a regular or special city election. All contracts, grants, leases, or other forms of transfer in violation of this section shall be void and of no effect as against the city. The restrictions of this section shall not apply to the sale or exchange of articles of machinery or equipment of any municipally owned public utility which are no longer useful or which are replaced by new machinery or equipment, or to the leasing of property not necessary for the operation of the utility, or to the exchange of property or easements for other needed property or interests in property. 
Section 15.6. - Public Utility Franchises. 
    The city may grant a franchise to any person for the use of the streets, alleys, bridges, and other public places of the city for the furnishing of any public utility service to the city and its inhabitants. Franchises and renewals, amendments, and extensions thereof shall be granted only by ordinance. Public utility franchises shall include provisions for fixing rates and charges, and may provide for readjustments thereof at periodic intervals. The city may, with respect to any public utility franchise granted after the effective date of this charter, whether or not so provided in the granting ordinance: 
(1)  Terminate the same for the violation of any of its provisions, for the misuse or nonuse thereof, for failure to comply with any provision thereof, or any regulation imposed under authority of this section; 
(2)  Require proper and adequate extension of plant and the maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency; 
(3)  Establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products, and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(4)  Require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(5)  Impose other regulations determined by the Council to be conducive to the health, safety, welfare, and convenience of the public; 
(6)  Require the public utility to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, bridges, and public places, by the city and others than the owner, insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor and, in the absence of agreement, upon application by the public utility, provide for the arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor; 
(7)  Require the public utility to pay any part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges, and public places, that arises from its use thereof, and to protect and save the city harmless from all damages arising from such use; 
(8)  Require the public utility to file with the Clerk such reports concerning the utility and its financial operation and status and with the City Engineer such drawings and maps of the location and nature of its facilities as the Council may request. 
Section 15.7. - Limitations on the Granting of Franchises. 
    Franchises may be granted by the city for a term not exceeding thirty years. No exclusive franchise shall be granted. Each franchise shall include a provision requiring the franchise to take effect within one year after the adoption of the ordinance granting it, except in the case of grants to take effect at the end of an existing franchise. An irrevocable franchise and any extension of amendment of such a franchise may be granted by the city only when the ordinance granting such franchise has first received the affirmative vote of at least three-fifths of the electors of the city voting thereon at a regular or special city election. An irrevocable franchise ordinance may be approved by the Council, for referral to the electorate, only after a public hearing has been held thereon and after the grantee named therein has filed with the Clerk his unconditional acceptance of all the terms of the franchise. A special election for such purpose may be ordered by the Council only when the expense of holding such election has first been paid to the Treasurer by the grantee. 
State Law reference- Franchises limited to thirty (30) years, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 30; submittal to electors if irrevocable, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 25; expenses of special election to be paid by grantee, MCL 117.5(i), MSA 5.2084(i). 
Section 15.8. - Procedure for Granting Franchises. 
    Every ordinance granting a franchise, license, or right to occupy or use streets, alleys, bridges or public places shall remain on file with the Clerk for public inspection in its final form for at least twenty-eight days before the final adoption thereof, or the approval thereof for referral to the electorate. 
Section 15.9. - Certificate of Convenience and Necessity. 
    No person who or which is not required by law to obtain a certificate of convenience and necessity from the Michigan Public Service Commission shall commence the operation of any public utility or public utility service in the city without first obtaining from the Council a certificate that the public convenience and necessity requires or will require the services of such public utility. Before any such certificate shall be granted, the person desiring it shall file with the Clerk an application therefor, setting forth the name of the person making such application, his or its personal, partnership, corporate, or other organizational status, a current verified financial statement, the names of all other municipalities in which it supplies public utility services, and the names of all persons having a financial interest in the business, and of its corporate officers, if the applicants be a corporation. The Council shall hold a public hearing on such application, with notice thereof given to the applicant and to all persons rendering like services in the city, not less than ten days before the date of such hearing. In determining the question of public convenience and necessity, the Council shall take into consideration the services being rendered by others in the city, the investment required by the applicant for rendering the proposed services, the information set forth in the application, the experience of other municipalities concerning the applicant, and the benefit or lack thereof to the public, if any, in rates and other matters which would result from the granting or denial of the certificate. 
Section 15.10. - Sale or Assignment of Franchises. 
    The grantee of a franchise may not sell, assign, sublet, or allow another to use the same, unless the Council gives its consent. In the case of utilities which supply electric, gas, and communications services within the city, Council consent shall not be required in any case where approval of the Michigan Public Service Commission is given. Nothing in this section shall limit the right of the grantee of any public utility franchise to mortgage its property, other than its franchise, nor shall restrict the rights of the purchaser upon foreclosure sale, to operate the same, except that such mortgagee or purchaser shall be subject to the terms of the franchise and provisions of this chapter. 
Section 15.11. - Plans of Facilities in Streets and Public Places. 
    The Council may, by ordinance, require, as a condition to the placing or installment thereof, that each public utility conducting a business in the city file with the city a duplicate copy of layout plans of pipes, conduits, wires, and other facilities which are, or are to be, placed on, under, or above the surface of the city's streets, alleys, bridges, and public places. 
CHAPTER 16. - RESERVED[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 638, § 1, adopted Sept. 15, 2003, and approved at an election held Nov. 4, 2003, repealed chapter 16, sections 16.1-16.13, 16.15-16.27, 16.27A, 16.28-16.35, in its entirety. Former chapter 16 pertained to municipal employees' pensions and derived from an Amd. by electors on Nov. 5, 1968; Amd. by electors on April 12, 1977; Amd. by electors Nov. 6, 1990. Provisions pertaining to municipal employees' pensions may now be found in chapter 2, article VII of this Code. 

Secs. 16.1-16.35. - Reserved. 
BOUNDARY APPENDIX 
(Required by Section 1.1(b) of this charter) 
Description of Owosso City Limits, October 20, 1987. 
    The City of Owosso shall include all the territory contained within the boundaries described as follows, to-wit: 
    Commencing at the Southwest corner of the Southeast one-quarter (1/4) of Section twenty-three (23) of the Township of Owosso in the County of Shiawassee and State of Michigan, being Town seven (7) North of Range two (2) East, Michigan; thence running West along the South line of Sections twenty-three (23) of the said Township of Owosso to a point thirteen (13) rods East of the West eighth ( 1/8 ) line of Section twenty-six (26), T7N, R2E; thence South thirty-seven (37) rods, thence West thirteen (13) rods to the West eighth ( 1/8 ) line of said Section twenty-six (26), thence South along said eighth ( 1/8 ) line to the Westerly right-of-way line of the New York Central Railroad right-of-way, thence Northeasterly along this right-of-way line to the North line of said Section 26, thence East along said North Section line to the East right-of-way line of said New York Central Railroad, thence Southwesterly along said East right-of-way line to the said West one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line of said Section 26, thence South along said one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line to the East and West one-quarter (1/4) line of said Section twenty-six (26), thence East along said one-quarter (1/4) line to a point eighty (80) rods West of the East line of said Section twenty-six (26); thence North four (4) rods; thence East to the East line of said Section twenty-six (26); thence North along the East line of said Section twenty-six (26) to a point twenty (20) rods South of the North line of Section twenty-six (26); thence West sixteen (16) rods, thence North twenty (20) rods to the South line of said Section twenty-three (23); thence East along the South line of said Section twenty-three (23) and twenty-four (24) in said Township of Owosso to the North one-quarter (1/4) post of Section twenty-five (25) of said Owosso Township, thence Southwesterly along the centerline of old M-47 Highway now designated State Highway M-52 to a point three hundred ninety-six (396) feet South of the North line of said Section twenty-five (25), as measured in a North-South direction; thence Easterly to the East right-of-way line of said M-52 Highway; thence Southwesterly along said East right-of-way line 468.24 feet; thence North-easterly to the centerline of old M-47 highway now designated as M-52; thence S 37°52'26? W 393.76'; thence South fifty-five degrees five minutes four seconds East (S 55°05'04? E) four hundred forty (440) feet; thence South thirty-eight degrees twenty-three minutes ten seconds West (S 38°23'10? W) one thousand three hundred sixty-three and fifty-four hundredths (1363.54) feet; thence North eighty-nine degrees thirty-nine minutes thirty seconds East (N 89°39'30? E) four hundred ten (410) feet; thence South seven degrees twenty-three minutes twenty-four seconds West (S 07°23'24? W) two hundred ninety-one and eighty hundredths (291.80) feet; thence South eighty-nine degrees twenty-eight minutes East (S 89°28' E) three hundred fifty-nine and fifty hundredths (359.50) feet; thence South forty-seven degrees three minutes twelve seconds East (S 47°03'12? E) four hundred seventy-eight and thirteen hundredths (478.13) feet to the North-South one-quarter (1/4) line of said Section 25; thence North 1.5 feet along said one-quarter (1/4) line; thence Easterly parallel with the East and West one-quarter (1/4) line of said Section twenty-five (25) six hundred seventy-five and thirty-four hundredths (675.34) feet; thence Northerly parallel with the North and South one-quarter (1/4) line of said Section twenty-five (25) three hundred twenty-two and fifty hundredths (322.50) feet to the East and West one-quarter (1/4) line of said Section twenty-five (25); thence Westerly along said East and West one-quarter (1/4) line of said Section twenty-five (25) eighty-one and thirty-four hundredths (81.34) feet; thence Northerly parallel with the North and South one-quarter (1/4) line of said Section twenty-five (25) nineteen hundred and eighty (1980) feet; thence Easterly parallel with the North line of said section twenty-five (25) thirty-three (33) feet to the centerline of Palmer Street; thence Northerly along the centerline of Palmer Street six hundred and sixty (660) feet to the South line of said Section twenty-four (24); thence Easterly along the South line of Section twenty-four (24) of the said Township of Owosso and along the North line of Section thirty (30) of the Township of Caledonia in the County of Shiawassee and State of Michigan, being Town seven (7) North Range three (3) East, Michigan, to the North one-quarter (1/4) post of said Section thirty (30), thence South along the North and South one-quarter (1/4) line of said Section thirty (30) to a point South of the North one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line of said Section thirty (30) that is at the South line of the North ten (10) acres of the South one-half (1/2) of the Northeast one-quarter (1/4) of said Section thirty (30), thence East parallel with the North one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line of said Section thirty (30) to the East line of said Section thirty (30); thence North along said East line of Section thirty (30) to the southeast corner post of Section nineteen (19) in Town Seven (7) North, Range Three (3) East, thence West along the South line of said Section nineteen (19) to the Southeast corner of the Southwest one-quarter (1/4) of the Southeast one-quarter (1/4) of said Section nineteen (19); thence Northerly along the East, North and South one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line of said Section nineteen (19) to the center of the channel of the Shiawassee River; thence running downstream along the center of the channel of said Shiawassee River to a point which is due East of the intersection of the centerlines of Jerome and Gould Streets; thence running due West to a point of intersection of the centerlines of said Jerome and Gould Streets, which point is on the North and South one-quarter (1/4) line of said Section nineteen (19); thence Northerly along the said North and South one-quarter (1/4) line of said Section nineteen (19) and the North and South one-quarter (1/4) line of Section eighteen (18) of said Township of Caledonia; thence North along said one-quarter (1/4) line to the Northeast corner of the Northwest one-quarter (1/4) of said Section eighteen (18); thence Westerly along the North line of said Section eighteen (18) three hundred and forty-nine (349) feet; thence North Zero degrees four minutes three seconds West (N 0°04'03? W), parallel to the West, North and South one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line of Section seven (7) of said Township of Caledonia, a distance of eighteen hundred six and ninety-six hundredth (1806.96) feet; thence South eighty-nine degrees one minute twenty-nine seconds West (S 89°01'29? W), parallel to the Southerly line of said Section seven (7), a distance of nine hundred sixty-four and twenty-seven hundredths (964.27) feet to the West, North and South one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line of said Section seven (7); thence South Zero degrees four minutes three seconds East (S 0°04'03? E), along said West, North, and South one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line of said Section seven (7), seven hundred thirty-nine and seventy-four hundredths (739.74) feet; thence South eighty-nine degrees one minute twenty-nine seconds West (S 89°01'29? W), parallel with the Southerly line of said Section seven (7), a distance of four hundred ninety-five and sixty-six hundredths (495.66) feet; thence South Zero degrees four minutes three seconds East (S 0°04'03? E), parallel with the West, North and South one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line of said Section seven (7), seven hundred thirty-seven and twenty-two hundredths (737.22) feet; thence North eighty-nine degrees one minute twenty-nine seconds East (N 89°01'29? E), parallel with the southerly line of said Section seven (7), seventy-three and sixteen hundredths (73.16) feet; thence South Zero degrees four minutes three seconds East (S 0°04'3? E), parallel with the West, North and South one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line of said Section seven (7), two hundred and ninety-seven (297) feet to the North line of North Street; thence East along said North line seventy-five (75) feet; thence South thirty-three (33) feet to the centerline of North Street which if the Northerly line of Section eighteen (18) of said Township of Caledonia; thence Westerly along the Northerly line of Section eighteen (18) of the Township of Caledonia and the Northerly line of Section thirteen (13) of the Township of Owosso in the County of Shiawassee and State of Michigan, being Town seven (7) North of Range two (2) East, Michigan, to the intersection of the centerlines of Washington and North Streets; thence Northerly along the centerline of Washington Street to the South, East and West one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line of Section twelve (12) of said Township of Owosso at a point sixteen hundred, ninety-one and ninety-one hundredths (1691.91) feet East of the Northwest corner of the South one-half (1/2) of the Southeast one-quarter (1/4) of said Section twelve (12); thence Westerly along the said South, East and West one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line of said Section twelve (12) to the East, North-South one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line of said Section twelve (12); thence North along said one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line two hundred thirty-one (231) feet; thence North eighty-six degrees fifty-six minutes fifty-five seconds West (N 86°56'55? W) to the North-South one-quarter (1/4) line of said Section 12, thence South along said one-quarter (1/4) line to a point one hundred fifteen (115) feet South of the South East and West one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line of said Section twelve (12); thence East thirty-five (35) feet to the East right-of-way line of State Highway M-47 now M-52; thence South along said East right-of-way line sixty (60) feet; thence South eighty-seven degrees fourteen minutes fifty-three seconds East (S 87°14'53? E) seven hundred ninety-five (795) feet; thence North two minutes eleven seconds West (N 2'11? W) one hundred seventy-five (175) feet; thence East one hundred thirty-five and twenty-six hundredths (135.26) feet to the West line of North Water Street; thence South six hundred thirty-two and forty-two hundredths (632.42) feet to the centerline of Wesley Drive; thence Easterly along the centerline of Wesley Drive three hundred twenty-nine and sixty-six hundredths (329.66) feet; thence South three hundred and twelve (312) feet; thence East one hundred thirty-three and seventy hundredths (133.70) feet; thence South three hundred sixty-two and ninety-five hundredths (362.95) feet to the centerline of North Street, the South line of said Section twelve (12) of said Township of Owosso; thence West along said South line of Section twelve (12) to the East, North-South one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line of said Section twelve (12); thence North along said one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line three hundred twenty-nine and ninety-five (329.95) feet; thence West one hundred twenty-nine and eighty hundredths (129.80) feet; thence South parallel with said East one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line three hundred twenty-nine and ninety-five hundredths (329.95) feet to South line of said Section twelve (12); thence Westerly along the Northerly lines of Sections thirteen (13) and fourteen (14) of the Township of Owosso, to the Northwest corner of the Northeast one-quarter (1/4) of said Section fourteen (14); thence Southerly along the North and South one-quarter (1/4) line of Sections fourteen (14) and twenty-three (23) of the said Township of Owosso to a point four hundred sixty-eight and thirty hundredths (468.3) feet North of the center of said Section twenty-three (23); thence South eighty-eight degrees fifty-three minutes thirty seconds West (S 88°53'30? W) one thousand three hundred twenty-six and seventy hundredths (1326.70) feet to the West one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line of said Section twenty-three (23); thence South along said one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line to said East-West one-quarter (1/4) line; thence East to the center of said Section twenty-three (23); thence South to the place of beginning. 
Also those lands annexed as described below: 
Beginning at a point 2 rods east and 30 rods 7 1/3 links north of the south 1/4 post of section 18. in T7N.R3E. Caledonia township, Shiawassee County, Michigan; thence east parallel with the south line of said Section 12, 39 chains; thence north parallel with the north and south 1/4 line to a point 20 rods due south of the south line of the extension of Oliver Street; thence westerly parallel with the extension of the south line of Oliver Street to a point 2 rods east of the north and south 1/4 line and thence south to the place of beginning, containing 10 acres of land, more or less. 
Also, beginning eight hundred fifteen (815) feet east and six hundred sixty (660) feet South of the North 1/4 post of Section 25, T7N. R3E.; thence South eighty-nine degrees twenty minutes East (S 89°20' E) four hundred eighty and forty-one hundredths (481.41) feet to the East one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line of said Section 25; thence South zero degrees six minutes East (S 0°6' E) along said one-eighth ( 1/8 ) line eight hundred fifty-one and fifty-four hundredths (851.54) feet; thence North eighty-nine degrees twenty-eight minutes West (N 89°28' W) six hundred thirty-three and ninety-two hundredths (633.92) feet; thence North five hundred eighty-seven and twenty-eight hundredths (587.28) feet; thence East one hundred fifty-five (155) feet; thence North two hundred sixty-six (266) feet to the point of beginning. 
EXCEPT the following: 
A triangular parcel of land lying on the East R.O.W. line of Highway M-52 and part of the Northwest Quarter (NW 1/4) of Section 25, T7N, R2E, Michigan described as: Commencing at the North Quarter post of said Section 25; thence South along North and South Quarter line of Section 25; 297' to the place of beginning; thence West parallel to the North line of Section 25 to the intersection of the East R.O.W. line of Highway M-52 (formerly M-47); thence Northeasterly along this 5°00' (arc definition) curve to the intersection of the North and South Quarter line of Sec. 25; thence South along this Quarter line to the place of beginning. 
SCHEDULE 
Section 1. - Purpose and Status of Schedule Chapter. 
    The purpose of this schedule chapter is to provide for the transition of the government of the city to that under this charter. It shall constitute a part of this charter only to the extent and for the time required to accomplish that end. Sections 2, 3, and 4 of this schedule chapter shall take effect and be operative on and after February 6, 1964. The balance of this Schedule chapter shall take effect and be operative on April 9, 1964. 
Section 2. - Election to Adopt Charter. 
(a)  This charter shall be submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the territory comprising the City of Owosso at the regular city election to be held on Monday, April 6, 1964, between the hours of 7:00 o'clock a.m. and 8:00 o'clock p.m. All provisions for the submission of the question of adopting this charter at such election shall be made in the manner provided by law. 
(b)  If, at said election, a majority of the electors voting on the question shall vote in favor of the adoption of this charter, then the City Clerk shall perform all other acts required by law to carry this charter into effect. 
(c)  If so adopted, this charter shall take effect and become law at 12:01 o'clock a.m., on Wednesday, July 1, 1964, except as otherwise provided herein, thereby superseding in all respects, except as provided otherwise in this Schedule, the charter of the city adopted by the electors of the city on November 5, 1913. 
Section 3. - Form of Ballot. 
    The form of the question on submission of this charter shall be as follows: 
Shall the proposed charter of the City of Owosso drafted by the Charter Commission which was elected November 12, 1963, be adopted? 
Yes  No 
Section 4. - Election of First Officers under Charter. 
    At a special city election to be held on May 26, 1964, there shall be elected by the city at-large seven Councilmen from candidates for such offices who are eligible under the provisions of 4.2(a) and 4.3 of this charter and who have qualified as such according to the provisions of 13.7, 13.8, and 13.9 of this charter excepting that the petitions therefor shall be filed with the Clerk not later than 5:00 o'clock p.m. on the 27th day of April, 1964. No primary election shall be held in connection with the election of such officers. The seven candidates for the office of Councilman who receive the largest number of votes cast by the electors of the city shall be deemed to have been elected to that office. The three Councilmen who receive the largest number of votes cast for such office shall hold office until the Monday following the regular city election held in the year, 1968. The remaining four Councilmen shall hold office until the Monday following the regular city election held in the year, 1966. 
Section 5. - First City Council. 
(a)  The Council elected under the provisions of Section 4 of this chapter, shall meet at 7:30 p.m., on the first day of June following their election, take their oaths of office, and organize by selecting a Mayor and a Mayor Pro-Tem. 
(b)  During the month of June, 1964, the Council shall undertake to find a proper person to fill the office of City Manager,[.] After July 1, 1964, and until a City Manager assumes the duties of his office, the Council may appoint an acting City Manager. 
(c)  Beginning at 12:01 a.m. on July 1, 1964, the said Council shall constitute the governing body of the city and shall assume and perform its full duties under the provisions of this charter. 
(d)  The Council shall have power to make adjustments in the budget of the city for the city's fiscal year commencing on July 1, 1964, to conform with the requirements of this charter, within the tax requirements of such budget and the anticipated revenues of the city. 
Section 6. - Administrative Officers. 
    From and after July 1, 1964, the persons then holding the administrative offices designated in Section 7.1 of this charter, shall continue in such offices as though appointed under the provisions of this charter and shall perform their several duties and, in all respects, be subject to the provisions thereof. In the appointment of other administrative officers and employees of the city prior to July 1, 1965, the provision of Section 4.3(b) shall not apply. 
Section 7. - Meetings of Council under Charter. 
    Until otherwise provided in accordance with Section 5.4(a) of this charter, the Council shall hold its regular meeting at 7:30 p.m., on the first and third Monday of each month. 
Section 8. - Effects and Property of Terminated Offices. 
    All records, books, working papers, money, effects, and property in the custody, possession, or control of any board or office ceasing to exist on July 1, 1964, or which are the property of the city or which were necessary to or were obtained as a part of the performance of the duties of the office, or in any way pertain to the duties of such board or office shall be delivered to the Clerk, forthwith, after the duties of such board or office terminate. 
Section 9. - Municipal Court. 
    The Municipal Court established by this charter, having been in existence prior to the adoption of this charter by operation of law, shall be and remain the Municipal Court of the city, subject to the provisions of this charter. The Municipal Judge and the Associate Municipal Judge who held such offices at the time this charter became effective shall continue in such offices until the end of the terms for which they were elected, and until their successors are elected and assume their offices under the provisions of this charter. 
Section 10. - First Constable under Charter. 
    The Constable of the city who held that office on the effective date of this charter shall continue in such office under and subject to the provisions of this charter as though he had been appointed in accordance with its provisions. His compensation shall be that which was set for his office on the effective date of this charter, until otherwise provided under authority of law. 
Section 11. - Compensation of Officers and Employees. 
    The compensation of administrative and judicial officers and employees of the city, as established at the time this charter became effective, shall continue as the compensation of such officers and employees, until otherwise provided under authority of law. 
Section 12. - Council Action. 
    In all cases involving the transition of the city government from that under the previous charter to that under this charter, which are not covered by this chapter, the Council shall supply necessary details and procedures and may adopt such rules, regulations and ordinances as may be required therefor. 
Section 13. - Interim Civil Service Board. 
(a)  All full time permanent employees of the city who were so employed on the effective date of this charter shall remain as employees of the city, subject to the provisions of this charter. 
(b)  In order to protect the full time permanent employees of the city who were in the employ of the city on the effective date of this charter and those who become employees prior to the adoption of the Civil Service Plan ordinance against unmerited or political discharges, transfers, or demotions, an Interim Civil Service Board is hereby created, to be composed of seven persons having the qualifications and being appointed as set forth in Section 7.15(d) of this charter. If any discharged, transferred, or demoted full time permanent employee shall, within ten days after he shall receive notice thereof, make written application to the Interim Civil Service Board for a hearing thereon, such discharge, transfer, or demotion shall thereupon become provisional. Such application shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall, forthwith, notify the Board and the person making such discharge, transfer, or demotion. Within five days after such notice by the Clerk, the person making such discharge, transfer, or demotion shall file with the Clerk a statement, in duplicate, of his reasons for such action. The Clerk shall, forthwith, furnish one copy of such statement to the affected employee. The employee affected may, within ten days after receiving such statement, file with the Clerk an answer thereto. The Clerk shall, thereupon, file the written appeal and the statement and answer of the parties with the chairman of the Board, who shall convene the Board within fifteen days for the purpose of holding a hearing on such appeal, based upon the facts and circumstances set forth in the statement and answer filed by the parties. Within ten days after the completion of such hearing the Board shall make a determination in the matter. If such Board shall deem that any person has been discharged, transferred, or demoted unjustly or for political reasons, it shall order such person restored to the position from which he has been discharged, transferred, or demoted and such person shall thereupon be entitled to reassume such position and be entitled to his pay therefor from the date of his discharge, transfer, or demotion. 
(c)  The members of the Interim Civil Service Board to be chosen by the members of the Police Department, the Fire Department, and the general employees of the city shall be chosen on or before July 31, 1964, in the same manner as the representatives of the said employee groups are chosen thereby for the Board of Trustees of the Retirement System of the City of Owosso. 
Section 14. - Vested Rights and Liabilities. 
    After the effective date of this charter, the city and all its agencies shall be vested with all property, moneys, contracts, rights, credits, effects, and the records, files, books, and papers belonging to it under and by virtue of the previous charter. No right or liability, contract, lease or franchise, either in favor of or against the city, existing at the time this charter became effective, and no suit or prosecution of any character, shall be affected in any manner by any change resulting from the adoption of this charter, but the same shall stand or proceed as if no change had been made. All taxes, debts, and liabilities, due to the city from any person, and all fines and penalties, imposed and existing at the time of such change, shall be collected by the city. All trusts, established for any municipal purpose, shall be continued in accordance with the terms thereof, subject to the cy pres doctrine. 
RESOLUTION OF ADOPTION 
    At a meeting of the Charter Commission of the City of Owosso held on the 6th day of February, 1964, at the usual meeting place of the Commission the following members of the Charter Commission were present: Commissioners Himburg, Hoddy, Lyons, Miner, Montague, Roth, Towne, Trezise, and Woodbury. 
    At such meeting the following resolution was offered by Commissioner Himburg and seconded by Commissioner Hoddy. 
    Resolved, That the Charter Commission of the City of Owosso does hereby adopt the foregoing instrument as the proposed charter of the City of Owosso and the Clerk of this Commission is hereby instructed to transmit the same to the Governor of the State of Michigan, in accordance with the provisions of Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of 1909 [MCL 117.1 et seq., MSA 5.2071 et seq.], as amended, for his approval. 
    The vote on the adoption of the resolution was as follows: 
Ayes: Nine 
Nayes: None 
Absent: None 
G. A. VanEpps 
Clerk of The Charter Commission of the City of Owosso, Michigan 
Attested by the following Commissioners: 
James S. Miner 
R. Douglas Trezise 
Eugene G. Lyons 
Leon A. Montaque 
Joseph R. Woodbury 
Samuel W. Roth 
Ralph E. Towne 
Gerald L. Hoddy, Vice-Chairman 
W. P. Himburg, Chairman 
    The said Commissioners having attested as to said resolution, as above set forth and, also, having attested the copy to be signed by the Governor, the meeting adjourned subject to the call of the Chairman. 
____________ 
STATE OF MICHIGAN 
OFFICE OF THE GOVERNOR 
Lansing 
George Romney 
Governor 
    I hereby approve the foregoing Charter of the City of Owosso, Michigan. 
George Romney 
Governor of the State of Michigan 
Dated March 31, 1964  11:18 A.M. 
____________ 
Statement Of The 
Charter Commission 
To the People of Owosso: 
    In accordance with your instructions of November 12, 1963, when you voted for charter revision, we have drafted a revised charter for the City of Owosso, embodying a change in form of government, and herewith submit it for your consideration. 
    Effort was made to have the charter brief and clear, to give the city every permitted home rule power, to limit rigidly those powers it seems should be limited, to leave flexibility in the exercise of powers where flexibility appeared advantageous. 
    The plan of government is simple and logical. Responsibility is clearly fixed at every point and, where responsibility is placed, proportionate authority is granted. 
    To facilitate clear understanding of the proposed charter, we summarize as follows its more important provisions: 
GOVERNMENTAL STRUCTURE 
    The people elect a Council of seven members, upon whom is placed the responsibility of governing the city. 
    The Council appoints a City Manager, who is the chief administrative officer of the city government, under the Council, and upon whom is placed the responsibility for efficient operation of the administrative service. 
    Other officials appointed or confirmed by the Council are: members of the Board of Review, the city's representatives on the Board of Supervisors, a Mayor, a City Clerk, Treasurer, Assessor, and other needed officers. The Mayor, chosen from the Council's membership, serves as presiding officer of the Council and as ceremonial head of the city government. The duties of the Council are chiefly legislative and policy determining. The compensation of its members is nominal, since they are not administrative officers under this charter. 
    The City Manager is given adequate authority, including appointment and removal of administrative officers, subject to Council approval and review. 
    The Council is free to hire the best City Manager available, paying such reasonable salary as his capabilities command, and is equally free to dismiss him at any time if not satisfied with his performance. The field from which he may be chosen is defined and while he need not be a resident of the city or the state at the time he is selected, he must become a resident within a reasonable time. 
MUNICIPAL COURT 
    Our present municipal court is continued unchanged and may handle cases up to $1,000. The municipal judge is elected by the people. 
ELECTIONS 
    Regular non-partisan city elections are held the first Tuesday in April of each even numbered year. Candidates for Councilmen seek office by petition, or a petition may be filed by friends. If more than twice the number of candidates file than there are persons to be elected to an office (that is, more than 2 for Municipal Judge, or more than 8 for the office of Councilman) a primary election is held to reduce the number to 2 and 8, respectively, so that each person elected to a city office shall have received a clear majority of the votes cast for his office. The terms of Councilmen are so arranged that a majority of Council must be elected every two years. 
FINANCE-TAXATION-BONDS 
    Greatest care was taken in preparing the provisions relating to finance, taxation, and the issuance of bonds, so that the city might possess all rightful powers, but with the people's interest carefully safeguarded. Authority to issue bonds without the approval of three-fifths of the electors is strictly limited by State law. 
    Not because we believe it the ultimate answer to the vexations [vexatious] taxation problem, but rather because it has so long been established in the existing charter we have included in this new charter the fifteen-mill limitation on taxation contained in the present charter. The Charter Commission feels that any change in the tax limitation should be by a direct vote of the people and should not be a part of a package in a new charter. 
BUDGET 
    Under the proposed charter, an itemized annual budget, prepared by the City Manager shall be considered at a public hearing, after notice to the public and filing at the City Library, and will be passed upon finally by the Council. Under the existing form of government, in which the commissioners are administrators as well as legislators, a budget is worked out by the Mayor, and each Commissioner has his attention on his own department and functions. Under the proposed charter, the City Manager will present a correlated budget and the Council will review and adopt it on the basis of a city wide and overall interest. 
RETIREMENTS-PENSIONS 
    It is the intent of the chapter on retirements and pensions to preserve the present pension plans of the city. This has been done by writing the present plans into the charter. The only changes in the pension plan are changes in wording to make it conform to the style of the charter and those recommended by the actuary to conform to modern practice. Minor changes had to be made to comply with the new State Constitution. The city's consulting actuary advises the Charter Commission that these changes do not change the rights of employees in a pension for their years of work for the city as they have existed in the past but, rather, strengthen and clarify these rights. 
CIVIL SERVICE 
    The Charter Commission has protected every appointive officer and employee of the city in the position held by him. To this purpose, both groups are protected by the availability of public hearings at their request, if there has been any unmerited discharge, demotion, or disciplinary action. The Council is required to adopt a civil service plan for all employees within one year after the effective date of the charter. 
PUBLIC UTILITIES-FRANCHISES 
    Every care was taken to safeguard fully the people's rights in the granting of public utility franchises, and at the same time to avoid such drastic restrictions as might work to the city's disadvantage. No irrevocable franchise may be granted except by a 3/4 vote of the people, and exclusive franchises are prohibited. Thirty years is fixed as the maximum life of a franchise, but the Council and the people may limit them to any shorter terms, as circumstances at the time may dictate. Because the right of municipal ownership of public utilities is satisfactorily provided by state law and is among the powers vested in the city, it was not repeated in detail in this charter, except by a general reference thereto. 
INITIATIVE-REFERENDUM-RECALL 
    The initiative, the referendum, and the recall are preserved. Exercise of any of these rights is cumbersome and costly, but there always is a possibility that at some time resort to one or another of them may be justifiable. 
OPEN RECORDS-PUBLIC MEETINGS 
    In the proposed charter, the early American "town meeting" rights are preserved. All city records are open to public inspection. The public may attend and voice opinions at both special and regular council meetings, which must be held at a time and place convenient to the public. 
NEW STATE CONSTITUTION 
    In the drafting of this charter, the Charter Commission has been aware of the adoption of the new Michigan Constitution. In so far as the Constitution, itself, affects the provisions of city charters, the Charter Commission has endeavored to comply with its provisions. The Charter Commission is and has been aware of the fact that implementing legislation has been passed and will be required to make such Constitution fully effective. In so far as such implementing legislation is known and could be foreseen by the Charter Commission from information available to it, every effort has been made to make this charter conform thereto or to include the intent and purposes thereof. 
CONCLUSION 
    Your Charter Commission has followed as much as possible the excellent work of the 1956 Charter Commission. We do, however, feel that we have improved the instrument and brought it into line with the progress in local government ideas and statutory requirements of the mid-1960's. 
    You are requested to pass judgment upon this proposed new charter in its entirety, and not allow disapproval of some particular provision to cause rejection of the whole. 
    Perfection is not claimed, but we are convinced this charter offers the best governmental machinery that has been evolved for a city of Owosso's size and needs. Should any provision of the charter fail to live up to the expectations of the people and of the Charter Commission, the procedure for amending the charter is relatively simple and democratic. Amendments to this charter may be presented by the Council or by popular petition and are voted by the people, themselves, under our Michigan law. 
    Your thoughtful consideration to the provisions of this charter is requested by your Charter Commission and your vote of approval is recommended at the election on its adoption on April 6, 1964. 
THE OWOSSO CITY CHARTER 
COMMISSION 
Eugene G. Lyons 
James S. Miner 
Leon A. Montague 
Samuel W. Roth 
Ralph E. Towne 
R. Douglas Trezise 
Joseph R. Woodbury 
Gerald L. Hoddy, Vice Chairman 
William P. Himburg, Chairman 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
  
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Date Section 
this Charter  4- 6-64 1.1-16.35 11- 5-68 16.2 16.8 16.12-16.25 16.27-16.31 16.33-16.35  4-12-77 16.2 16.27A 16.29(b) 11- 6-79 4.3 11- 4-86 13.3 13.7 11- 6-90 16.19 11- 5-91 Rpld 7.15(d) 11- 7-95 9.3(a) 11- 7-95 9.6 11- 4-97 4.3(d) 11- 4-03       Rpld 16.1-16-13 16.15-16.27 16.27A 16.28-16.35 11- 6-07 7.14(a)       Added 3.2(8)  1-19-10 4.2(note)  5-19-14       Added Ch. 13(note)  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Citing Code. 
    This Code shall be cited as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Owosso, Michigan," or the "Owosso Code." 
(Code 1977, § 1.5) 
Charter reference- Publication of ordinances, § 6.4. 
State Law reference- Certification authority, MCL 117.5b, MSA 4.2084(2). 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them unless otherwise provided in this Code. 
    Charter. The word "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Owosso. 
    City. The word "city" means the City of Owosso, Michigan. 
    Code. The words "Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances of the City of Owosso, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be computed as prescribed by state statute. 
State Law reference- Computing period of days, MCL 8.6, MSA 2.217. 
    Council. The word "council" means the legislative body of the City of Owosso, Michigan. 
    County. The word "county" means the County of Shiawassee. 
    Gender. Words importing masculine gender shall apply to firms, associations, partnerships and corporations, and may apply to females if the intent of the ordinance or Code provision so requires. 
    Health officer. The phrase "health officer" shall mean the director of the county health department or his or her authorized representative, or any person hereinafter appointed to such position by the city council. 
    Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three (3) or more public officers or other persons, shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it is otherwise expressly declared in the provision granting the authority. 
    MCL. The abbreviation "MCL" shall mean the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended. 
    Month. The word "month" shall be construed to mean a calendar month. 
    MSA. The abbreviation "MSA" shall mean the Michigan Statutes Annotated, as amended. 
    Municipal civil infraction. The words "Municipal civil infraction" mean an act or omission that is prohibited by this Code or any ordinance of the city, but which is not a crime under this Code or other ordinance, and for which civil sanctions, including without limitation, fines, damages, expenses and costs, may be ordered, as authorized by Chapter 87 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended. A municipal civil infraction is not a lesser included offense of a violation of this Code that is a criminal offense. 
    Number. Words in either the singular or plural numbers shall include either or both numbers and may apply in any instance to a particular person or persons. 
    Oath, affirmation, sworn, affirmed. The word "oath" shall be construed to include the word "affirmation" in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in like cases the word "sworn" shall be construed to include the word "affirmed." 
    Officers, departments, divisions, boards, commissions, employees or agencies. The several titles of any officer, department, division, board, commission, employee or agency shall mean such officer, department, division, board, commission, employee or agency of the city, or any authorized subordinate or designee. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part-owner, land contract, vendee, joint-owner, tenant-in-common, tenant-in-partnership, joint tenant, or tenant-by-the-entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" includes firms, joint adventures, partnerships, corporations, clubs, and all associations or organizations of natural persons, either incorporated or unincorporated, however, operating or named, and whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or fiduciary, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors and assigns thereof. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following," when used by way of reference to any title, chapter or section of any ordinance of the city, shall be construed to mean the title, chapter or section next preceding or next following that in which such reference is made, unless when some other title, chapter or section is expressly designated in such reference. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Public place. The words "public place" mean any street, alley, park, cemetery, public building, or any place of business or assembly, parking lot, parking area, or any other premises open to the public or frequented by the public. 
    References, history notes. The charter references, cross references, state law references, editor's notes and history notes are inserted for convenience and to facilitate the use of same, and such words shall not be construed to limit or affect the meaning of any of the provisions of this Code. 
    Seal. In all cases in which the seal of any court or public office shall be required to be affixed to any paper issuing from such court or office, the word "seal" shall be construed to mean the impression of such seal on such paper alone, as well as the impression of such seal affixed thereto by means of a wafer or wax. 
    Shall, may. The word "shall" means imperative or mandatory; the word "may" means permissive. 
    Signature, subscription. The words "signature" and "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The word "state" means the State of Michigan. 
    Sundays, legal holidays. Whenever any act required to be done pursuant to the provisions of any ordinance or Code section falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, that act shall be performed on the next succeeding business day. 
    Tense. Words used in the present or past tense shall be construed as including the future as well as the present or past. 
    Time. Whenever time is referred to, it means eastern standard time or the time officially in force in the city. 
    Titles, headings and catchlines. The key words used in the Code as headings, titles or catchlines for chapters, articles, divisions and sections are inserted for convenience and to facilitate the use of same, and such words shall not be construed to limit or affect the meaning of any of the provisions of this Code. 
    Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days. 
    Written, in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" may include any form of reproduction or expression of language. 
    Year. The word "year" shall be construed to mean a calendar year; and the word "year," alone, shall be equivalent to the words "year of our Lord." 
    All ordinances of the city shall be interpreted and construed in accordance with the above provisions, unless such interpretation and construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council. 
(Code 1977, §§ 1.6, 1.8, 1.9, 1.10; Ord. No. 528, § 1, 5-15-95) 
State Law reference- Rules of construction, MCL 8.3 et seq., MSA 2.212 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Whenever an ordinance, or any part thereof, is repealed by a subsequent ordinance, such ordinance or any part thereof so repealed shall not be revived by the repeal of such subsequent repealing ordinance. 
(b)  Whenever an ordinance is adopted, all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict therewith, shall to the extent of such conflict, be repealed. 
(c)  The repeal of any ordinance or part thereof shall not release or relinquish any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under such ordinance or any part thereof, unless the repealing act shall so expressly provide, and such ordinance and part thereof shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purpose of instituting or sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of such penalty, forfeiture or liability. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 8.4, 8.4a, MSA 2.213, 2.214. 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Owosso, Michigan, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Owosso, Michigan, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which shall read as follows: ...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a section is to be repealed, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Owosso, Michigan, is hereby amended by deleting a section, numbered ____________ ." 
(Code 1977, § 1.2) 
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city; 
(2)  Granting any right or franchise; 
(3)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(4)  Making any appropriation; 
(5)  Levying or imposing annual taxes; 
(6)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(7)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(8)  Extending or contracting the boundaries of the city; 
(9)  Prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets; 
(10)  Affecting any specific urban renewal project; 
(11)  Pertaining to rezoning; 
(12)  Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. The ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability. 
    If any part of this Code or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be found to be invalid by any court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining parts or applications of this Code which can be given effect without the invalid part or application, provided such remaining parts are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end all provisions of this Code are declared to be severable. 
(Code 1977, § 1.13) 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty. 
(a)  Unless a violation of this Code or any ordinance of the city is specifically designated in the Code or ordinance as a municipal civil infraction, the violation shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The penalty for a misdemeanor violation shall be a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus costs of prosecution, or imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided for the violation by this Code or any ordinance. 
(c)  The sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this Code or any ordinance, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under Chapter 87 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended, and other applicable laws. 
(1)  Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal civil infraction violation by this Code or any ordinance, the civil fine for a violation shall be fifty dollars ($50.00), plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(2)  Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a person of any requirement or provision of this Code or any ordinance. As used in this section, "repeat offense" means a second or any subsequent municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision (i) committed by a person within any twelve-month period, unless some other period is specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance, and (ii) for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. Unless otherwise specifically provided by this Code or any ordinance for a particular municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows: 
a.  The fine for any offense which is a first repeat offense shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), plus costs. 
b.  The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus costs. 
(d)  A "violation" includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense by this Code of any ordinance; and any omission or failure to act where the act is required by this Code or any ordinance. 
(e)  Each day on which any violation of this Code or any ordinance continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. 
(f)  In addition to any remedies available at law, the city may revoke licenses or permits and/or bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this Code or any city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 528, § 1, 5-15-95) 
Charter reference- Limitation on penalties, § 6-5. 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i; juveniles and juvenile division, MCL 712A.1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-9. - Notices. 
    Notices regarding any act, the expense of which, if performed by the city, may be assessed against the premises under the provisions of this Code, shall be served in the following manner if not otherwise specified elsewhere: 
(1)  By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the same at his or her residence, office or place of business with some person of suitable age and discretion; or 
(2)  By mailing the notice by first class or certified mail to such owner at his or her last known address; or 
(3)  If the owner is unknown, by posting the notice in some conspicuous place on the premises at least five (5) days before the act or action concerning which the notice is given is required or is to occur. 
(Code 1977, § 1.11; Ord. No. 740, § 1, 6-3-13) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Municipal powers and liabilities, Ch. 3. 
Cross reference- Community development, Ch. 11; emergency preparedness, Ch. 12; administration of flood protection standards, § 14-26 et seq.; library, Ch. 15; offenses affecting government functions, § 19-26 et seq.; planning, Ch. 23; taxation, Ch. 32; utilities and services, Ch. 34; administration of sewer service, § 34-201 et seq.; administration and enforcement of zoning § 38-476 et seq. 
State Law reference- Standards of Conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- City council, Ch. 5; city legislation, Ch. 6; elections, Ch. 13. 
State Law reference- Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 

Secs. 2-16-2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE PLAN OF THE CITY[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. 656, § 1, adopted April 1, 2004, amended the Code by repealing former art. III, §§ 2-51-2-53, 2-76-2-82, 2-101-2-106, 2-116-2-118, 2-136, 2-137, 2-151, 2-152, 2-166, 2-167, 2-196, and 2-197; and added a new art. III. Former art. III pertained to administrative service; and derived from the Code of 1977, §§ 1.31, 1.36, 1.40, 1.41, 1.43, 1.51-1.53, 1.61, 1.66, 1.67, 1.71, 1.91, and 1.101-1.107; and Ord. No. 529, adopted May 15, 1995. 
Charter reference- Officers, Ch. 4; the administrative service, Ch. 7; municipal employees pensions, Ch. 16. 
State Law reference- Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-51. - Division of the administrative service. 
    The administrative service of the city shall be under the supervision and direction of the city manager, except as provided by the City Charter, and shall be divided into the following offices and departments, each of which shall be the responsibility of and under the control of an administrative officer or department director as listed below opposite such office or department: 
Department Department Director Department of public safety Director of public safety Department of utilities, engineering and public services Director ofutilities, engineering and public services Department of economic development and neighborhood services Director ofeconomic development and neighborhood services Department of financial and customer services Director of financial andcustomer services  
Office Officer/Director Assessor's office City assessor Attorney's office City attorney Planning, building safety and code enforcement office Director ofplanning, building safety and code enforcement Clerk's office City clerk Human resources office Director of human resources Finance office Finance director Manager's office City manager Treasurer's office City treasurer  
(Ord. No. 656, § 1, 4-19-04; Ord. No. 695, § 1, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 2-52. - City officers. 
    The officers of the city shall be assessor, city manager, clerk, director of public safety, finance director, treasurer and the deputies of any of them. 
((Ord. No. 656, § 1, 4-19-04; Ord. No. 695, § 1, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 2-53. - Vacancies in office. 
(a)  In cases of a vacancy in office, the absence from the city of an administrative officer or department director, or the inability on the part of an administrative officer or department director to perform the duties of the position due to illness, injury or other reasons, the city manager may designate an interim acting administrative officer or department head or perform personally the functions of the office. 
(b)  In the case of his or her own absence from the city, the city manager may designate an administrative officer or department director to perform the duties of the office of manager. In making such a designation, the city manager shall establish such limitations on the authority of the individual appointed to perform his or her duties as he or she deems appropriate. 
(c)  If the city manager is unable to perform the duties of his or her office due to illness, injury or other reasons, the city council may designate an individual to act as interim acting city manager or may assign the duties of the office to one (1) or more administrative officers or department directors. 
((Ord. No. 656, § 1, 4-19-04; Ord. No. 695, § 1, 4-21-08) 
Secs. 2-54-2-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES AND DEPARTMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 695, § 1, adopted April 21, 2008, repealed former art. III, §§ 2-76-2-88, and enacted a new art. III, §§ 2-76-2-86. Former art. III pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 656, § 1, adopted April 19, 2004. 

Sec. 2-76. - Assessor's office. 
    The assessor's office shall be headed by the city assessor who shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for such office in the City Charter, this Code and state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 695, § 1, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 2-77. - Attorney's office. 
    The attorney's office shall be headed by the city attorney who may be either an employee of the city or whose services may be provided pursuant to contract. The duties and responsibilities of the city attorney shall be those detailed for such position in the City Charter, this Code, and state statutes. The city attorney shall be charged with overseeing the performance of all legal services of the city including those of legal adviser to the council and to all administrative officers and department directors of the city, and the prosecution of all cases arising out of the violation of the provisions of the city ordinances. The city attorney shall also represent, or provide for the representation of, the city in matters in which the city is interested coming before any court or tribunal and shall perform such other duties as may be required by the council. The city attorney shall be charged with the responsibility for calling to the attention of the council all matters of law affecting the city. 
(Ord. No. 695, § 1, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 2-78. - Clerk's office. 
    The clerk's office shall be headed by the city clerk who shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for such office in the City Charter, this Code and state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 695, § 1, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 2-79. - Department of economic development and neighborhood services. 
    The department of economic development and neighborhood services shall be headed by the director of economic development and neighborhood services. He or she shall have the responsibility for city planning, including the development of master plans, housing plans, recreation plans and the like, and for overseeing activities related to economic development, housing development, downtown development, neighborhood development, grant management, city marketing, business services, and similar activities. In performing his or her duties, the director of economic development and neighborhood services shall coordinate his or her activities with those of other city departments that have responsibilities related to the planning and development activities with which he or she is engaged, and for such other responsibilities that shall be designated from time to time by the city manager to be performed by the department. 
(Ord. No. 695, § 1, 4-21-08) 
Sec 2-80. - Department of financial and customer services. 
    The department of financial and customer services shall be headed by the director of financial and customer services. He or she shall have the responsibilities of customer service coordination for the city. The director shall also coordinate and manage city financial transactions, shall supervise the clerk's office, to the extent permitted by law, and for such other responsibilities that shall be designated from time to time by the city manager to be performed by the department. 
(Ord. No. 695, § 1, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 2-81. - Department of public safety. 
(a)  The department of public safety shall be headed by the director of public safety who shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for the offices of police chief and fire chief in the City Charter, this Code and state statutes and such other duties and responsibilities associated with management of police, fire and emergency medical response services in the city, and for such other responsibilities that shall be designated from time to time by the city manager to be performed by the department. 
(b)  The department of public safety shall consist of a police division and a fire and emergency medical response division. 
(c)  The police division shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for police departments in the City Charter, this Code and state statutes. 
(1)  The director of public safety shall promulgate rules for the government of police officers of the city, subject to approval by the city manager, which shall be entered in a book of police division rules and orders and may be amended or revoked by the public safety director upon written notice to and approval of the city manager. Such rules may establish one (1) or more bureaus within the police division. Any such bureau shall be supervised by an officer of the police division who shall be responsible for the particular functions of the police division assigned to the particular bureau by the director of public safety or his designee. It shall be the duty of all members of the police department to comply with such rules and orders while effective. 
(d)  The fire and emergency medical response division shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for fire departments in the City Charter, this Code and state statutes. It shall have also the duties and responsibilities detailed in this Code and state statutes for emergency medical response and ambulance departments. 
(1)  The director of public safety shall promulgate rules and regulations for the government of the fire and emergency medical response division, subject to the approval of the city manager, which shall be entered in a book of fire and emergency medical response division rules and which may be amended or revoked by the public safety director upon written notice to and approval of the city manager. It shall be the duty of all members of the fire and emergency medical response division to comply with such rules and orders while effective. 
(Ord. No. 695, § 1, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 2-82. - Department of utilities, engineering and public services. 
(a)  The department of utilities, engineering and public services shall be headed by the director of utilities, engineering and public services who shall have the responsibility for supervising city engineering services, water and wastewater public utilities, and public services as provided in the City Charter. The director of utilities, engineering and public services shall have the responsibility for the design and construction of public improvements in the city, except when that responsibility shall have been assigned by the city manager to another city officer or department director, and he or she shall have the responsibility for assuring that the public facilities and improvements are maintained in a satisfactory condition, and for such other public services that shall be designated from time to time by the city manager to be performed by the department. 
(b)  The department of utilities, engineering and public services shall consist of a public utilities division and a public services division. 
(c)  The utilities division shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for water and wastewater public utilities in the City Charter, this Code and state statutes. The director of utilities, engineering and public services shall promulgate rules for the government of the city's water and wastewater public utilities, subject to approval by the city manager, and may be amended or revoked by the director of utilities, engineering and public services director upon written notice to and approval of the city manager, or by the city manager. 
(d)  The public services division shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed in the City Charter, this Code and state statutes associated with the repair and maintenance of streets, parks and public buildings and grounds of the city. The director of utilities, engineering and public services shall promulgate rules subject to council approval for the government of the city's public services, subject to approval by the city manager, and may be amended or revoked by the director of utilities, engineering and public services director upon written notice to and approval of the city manager, or by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 695, § 1, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 2-83. - Finance department. 
    The finance department shall be headed by the finance director who shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for such office in the City Charter, this Code and state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 695, § 1, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 2-84. - Manager's office. 
(a)  The manager's office shall be headed by the city manager who shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for such office in the City Charter, this Code and state statutes and such additional duties and responsibilities assigned to him or her from time to time by the city council. 
(b)  There is hereby established within the manager's office the human resources office. The human resources office shall be headed by the director of human resources. He or she shall have the responsibility for activities related to the personnel functions of the city including, but not limited to, administration of the civil service plan, development of personnel policies and work rules, negotiation of collective bargaining agreements, overseeing the process of recruiting, hiring, disciplining and terminating employees, and the development and implementation of employee training programs. In performing his or her duties, the human resources office shall coordinate his or her activities with those of the city officers and department directors and their subordinates who are charged with the supervision of personnel in their respective offices and departments, and for such other responsibilities that shall be designated from time to time by the city manager to be performed by the department. 
(c)  The city manager shall have the discretion to implement the administrative plan and these amendments based upon the needs of the city, the personnel available to the city and budgeting constraints. 
(Ord. No. 695, § 1, 4-21-08) 
Sec 2-85. - Planning, building safety and code enforcement office. 
    The planning, building safety and code enforcement office shall be headed by the director of planning, building safety and code enforcement who shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for such office in this Code and state statutes, including those duties and responsibilities that are included in such uniform codes adopted by reference by the city. The director of planning, building safety and code enforcement shall also have the responsibility for supervising the work of such other employees or contractors employed by the city for the purposes of providing site plan review, code enforcement, oversight of public building management, and building, plumbing, mechanical and electrical inspection services. 
(Ord. No. 695, § 1, 4-21-08) 
Sec. 2-86. - Treasurer's office. 
    The treasurer's office shall be headed by the city treasurer who shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for such office in the City Charter, this Code and state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 695, § 1, 4-21-08) 
Secs. 2-87-2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATIVE POLICY AND PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-101. - Department heads. 
    All administrative officers and department directors are responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of their respective departments and offices and all activities assigned to them. The city manager shall employ or appoint all officers, directors and employees except as otherwise provided by the City Charter or this Code. The city manager may set aside any action taken by any administrative officer or department director and may supersede such officer or director in the functions of the office or department, but as to officers appointed by the council such action shall be subject to approval by the council. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 1, 4-19-04) 
Sec. 2-102. - All departments. 
    All offices and departments of the city shall comply with the following: 
(1)  All administrative officers and department directors shall keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and shall inaugurate, with the approval of the city manager, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public. 
(2)  Reports of the activities of each office or department shall be made to the manager as the manager directs. 
(3)  Each administrative officer or department director shall be held responsible for the preservation of all public records under the officer's or director's jurisdiction. No public records, reports, correspondence or other data relative to the business of any office or department shall be destroyed or removed permanently from the files except in accordance with record retention policies and procedures approved by the city council. 
(4)  Each administrative officer or department director shall be held responsible for the buildings, facilities, equipment, vehicles, tools and other assets falling under his or her jurisdiction or control. He or she shall take such steps as are consistent with prudent management practice, subject to the approval of the city manager, to safeguard such assets and to provide for necessary maintenance, repair and replacement of such assets, within budget allowances therefore, so as to insure the capacity within his or her office or department to perform the duties and responsibilities for which such assets are designed to be used. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 1, 4-19-04) 
Sec. 2-103. - Assigned duties; rules and regulations. 
(a)  In addition to the duties and responsibilities provided for in the Charter, this Code, or state statutes, administrative officers and department directors shall be responsible for such other duties and responsibilities that might be assigned to them from time to time by the city manager. 
(b)  Provisions of this article describing the duties and responsibilities of administrative officers and department directors provided for in the Charter, this Code or state statutes shall be interpreted to include such additional duties and responsibilities as are included in rules, regulations, policies and procedures promulgated pursuant to the provisions of the Charter, this Code or state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 1, 4-19-04) 
Sec. 2-104. - Payment of moneys. 
    All moneys belonging to the city shall be paid out upon presentation of a valid invoice and purchase order approved and signed by the city manager by checks drawn by the city clerk or the clerk's deputy. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 1, 4-19-04) 
Sec. 2-105. - Approval of legal documents. 
    The mayor shall sign, the city clerk shall attest to, the city manager shall approve as to substance, and the city attorney shall approve as to form, all contracts and agreements requiring the assent of the city, unless otherwise provided for by law, the Charter or the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 1, 4-19-04) 
Sec. 2-106. - Bonds. 
    Surety bonds, conditioned as required by section 4.8 of the Charter, shall be filed by the following officers of the city in not less than the amounts indicated: 
Officer Amount Treasurer $100,000.00 Deputy treasurer 50,000.00 Finance director 100,000.00 Manager 25,000.00 Clerk 25,000.00 Deputy clerk 25,000.00 All other officers of the city and employees (except the mayor and council members) Blanket bond, $5,000.00  
(Ord. No. 656, § 1, 4-19-04) 
Secs. 2-107-2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU 

Sec. 2-116. - Municipal ordinance violations bureau-Established. 
    The city hereby establishes a municipal ordinance violations bureau (referred to hereafter in this division as "bureau") as authorized by Act No. 236 of 1961, Section 8396, to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized city officials, and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by this Code or any ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 1, 4-19-04) 
Sec. 2-117. - Same-Location; supervision; employees, rules and regulations. 
    The bureau shall be located in the police division of the public safety department, and shall be under the supervision and control of the director of public safety. The director of public safety may adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the bureau, subject to the approval of the city council, and appoint any necessary qualified city employees to administer the bureau. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 1, 4-19-04) 
Sec. 2-118. - Same-Procedures. 
    The bureau shall follow and apply those procedures specified in Act No. 236 of 1961. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 1, 4-19-04) 
Sec. 2-119. - Authorized city officials. 
    All officers of the police division of the department of public safety shall be considered authorized city officials pursuant to Act No. 236 of 1961. 
(Ord. No. 656, § 1, 4-19-04) 
Sec. 2-120-2-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- City election commission, § 13.6. 
Cross reference- Civil service board, § 2-288; downtown development authority, § 11-31 et seq.; appeals board for flood protection, § 14-33; library board, § 15-16 et seq.; city planning commission, § 23-16 et seq.; zoning board of appeals, § 38-501 et seq.; planning commission, § 38-526 et seq. 
State Law reference- Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-216-2-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HISTORICAL COMMISSION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 750, adopted June 2, 2014, repealed div. 2 in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former div. 2, §§ 2-226-2-234, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1977 Code, §§ 1.351-1.358; Ord. No. 494, § 1, adopted Aug. 3, 1992; and Ord. No. 734, § 1, adopted July 2, 2012. 
State Law reference- Historical activities, MCL 399.171 et seq.;historic districts, MCL 399.201 et seq. 

Sec. 2-226. - Established. 
    The Owosso Historical Commission for the city is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 2-227. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the historical commission shall be to recognize, preserve and bring public attention to the city's historical treasures. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 2-228. - Members; appointment, terms, etc. 
    The members of the historical commission shall be appointed by the city council. Membership shall consist of one (1) member from the council and ten (10) members at large appointed for three-year terms. No member at large shall be appointed to the historical commission for more than two (2) successive terms unless one (1) year has elapsed after his or her second term expires. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 1, 6-2-14; Ord. No. 780, § 1, 12-5-16) 
Sec. 2-229. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-230. - General duties. 
    The historical commission shall be responsible for the permanent perpetuation of the city's history through means developed by the commission, to include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Receipt, cataloging, preservation and security of articles of historic interest as determined by the commission. 
(2)  Displaying of artifacts for the public through cooperation with other organizations and the city council. 
(3)  Encouragement of the preservation and perpetuation of historic architecture in the city. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 2-231. - Curwood Castle. 
    The historical commission shall be responsible for the permanent perpetuation and use of Curwood Castle and nearby historic buildings by such maintenance and operational programs and rules and regulations as may be proposed by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 2-232. - Donations. 
    The historical commission shall be empowered to receive gifts and donations of money and personal property in the name of the city for the purposes of the commission and shall have the sole right to determine the use of such gifts and donations. Disposal of personal property shall be in accordance with section 2-347. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 2-233. - Program sponsorship. 
    The historical commission shall sponsor programs for public appreciation of the city's historical treasurers. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Sec. 2-234. - Committees. 
    The historical commission shall be empowered to appoint committees as necessary. Qualifications of committee members shall be as by policy adopted by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 750, § 1, 6-2-14) 
Secs. 2-235-2-239. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-240. - Established. 
    The city parks and recreation commission is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1, 2-4-08) 
Sec. 2-241. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the parks and recreation commission shall be to provide quality park and recreation opportunities based upon cost, efficiency and community need. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1, 2-4-08) 
Sec. 2-242. - Members; appointment, terms, voting, officers. 
(a)  The members of the parks and recreation commission shall consist of seven (7) at-large members appointed by the mayor and approved by the council. Commission members shall be residents of the city. The mayor or the designee of the mayor, with council approval, shall be an ex-officio member of the commission. 
(b)  The seven (7) at-large members shall have terms of two (2) years. The first appointment of the seven (7) at-large members shall be staggered so that three (3) members are appointed for a one-year term and four (4) members shall be appointed to two-year terms. Thereafter each appointment of an at-large member shall be for a two-year term unless it is an appointment to fill a vacancy in office that occurs prior to completion of a term. The ex-officio member of the commission shall serve for an indefinite term at the pleasure of the mayor. 
(c)  Each at-large member shall be entitled to one (1) vote. The ex-officio member shall not have a vote. Any action shall require a majority vote of the members present at a meeting constituting a quorum. A quorum shall consist of at least four (4) members. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1, 2-4-08; Ord. No. 782, § 1, 1-3-17) 
Sec. 2-243. - Duties of commission. 
    The powers and duties of the parks and recreation commission shall have the following duties as determined by the city council: 
(1)  Identifying recreation needs of residents and visitors, including suggestions of new sites and facilities; 
(2)  Presentation to the City Council and city staff of suggestions for park and recreation area improvements; 
(3)  Development of an annual park analysis and action plan at the end of each calendar year; 
(4)  Recommendation of priorities for park and recreation facilities and programs for budget consideration as needed; 
(5)  Encourage citizen involvement by recommending to the city council recreation and park use based on the needs and interest of the community to assure and stimulate public interest; 
(6)  Solicit to the fullest extent the cooperation of schools, local youth, countywide and charitable organizations and the public at large to discuss such issues; 
(7)  Consult with other entities regarding the quality of the parks and recreation opportunities; and 
(8)  Other special park and recreation projects at the direction of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1, 2-4-08) 
Sec. 2-244. - Expenditures, fund raising. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall have no authority to expend the funds of the city. 
    The parks and recreation commission, subject to approval of the city council, may, on its own or in partnership with other entities, raise funds for improvements of the parks and other activities. Funds raised for such purposes may only be expended with city council approval. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1, 2-4-08) 
Sec. 2-245. - Meetings. 
    Regular meetings of the parks and recreation commission shall be held at such dates and times as established by resolution of the commission at its first meeting in each calendar year. 
    Special meetings of the parks and recreation commission may be called by any member of the commission. 
    All meetings of the parks and recreation commission shall be held in compliance with the Michigan Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1, 2-4-08) 
Sec. 2-246. - By-laws. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall adopt by-laws which shall govern its operation. Such by-laws and any amendments thereto shall be subject to city council approval. 
(Ord. No. 691, § 1, 2-4-08) 
Sec. 2-247-2-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EMPLOYEE RELATIONS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 487, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1992, amended the Code to read as herein set out in §§ 2-251-2-257 and 2-271-2-281. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, §§ 2-251-2-257 and 2-271-2-281 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1977, §§ 1.122-1.128, 1.131-1.136, 1.141-1.147, 1.151-1.157, 1.164-1.167, 1.171-1.179, 1.180-1.182. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-251. - Policy statement. 
    It is hereby declared the policy of the city that: 
(1)  Employment in the city government shall be based on merit and fitness, free of personal political considerations. 
(2)  Just and equitable incentives and conditions of employment shall be established and maintained to promote efficiency and economy in the operation of the city government. 
(3)  Positions having similar duties and responsibilities shall be classified and compensated on a uniform basis. 
(4)  Appointments, promotions and other actions requiring the application of the merit principal shall be based on systematic tests and evaluations, whenever practicable. 
(5)  A productive work environment shall be maintained by fair administration of the rights and interests of employees consistent with the best interests of the public and the city. 
(6)  Tenure of employees covered by this article shall be subject to good behavior, the satisfactory performance of work, and the availability of funds. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 6-16-08) 
Sec. 2-252. - Political activity. 
    Employees shall be selected without regard to political considerations, may not be required to contribute to any political purpose, and may not engage in improper political activity. Rules shall define the scope of improper political activity. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 6-16-08) 
State Law reference- Political activities by public employees, MCL 15.401 et seq. 
Sec. 2-253. - Unlawful discrimination. 
    The city shall not discriminate with regard to hiring, terms of employment, promotion, transfer, or other conditions of employment because of race, color, creed, national origin, sex, religious affiliation, age, height, weight, marital status, disabled status, or political affiliation. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 6-16-08) 
State Law reference- Unlawful discrimination by employers, MCL 37.2201 et seq. 
Sec. 2-254. - Nepotism. 
(a)  No person shall become employed who is related to a member of the council within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity. 
(b)  No person shall become or remain employed if such employment would result in supervisory direction and responsibility by one (1) officer or employee over another who is related within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity. Supervisory direction and responsibility shall be interpreted to include circumstances in which an officer or employee is immediately subordinate to the superior officer or employee is within the direct line of authority of the superior officer or employee. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any such relationships between employees, supervisors and council members which are in existence on the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 6-16-08) 
Sec. 2-255. - Administrative rules. 
    The director of human resources shall draft, in consultation with the city manager, such rules as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. These rules shall be submitted for adoption by resolution of the council. The rules shall have the force and effect of law. Amendments to the rules shall be made by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 6-16-08) 
Sec. 2-256. - Training, employee service, and employee recognition programs. 
    The director of human resources shall encourage the improvements of service by providing employees with opportunities for training, employee service, and employee recognition programs which need not be limited to training, service, and recognition for specific jobs but may include training, service, and recognition for advancement and for general fitness for public service. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 6-16-08) 
Sec. 2-257. - Administration. 
(a)  The human resources program established by this article shall be administered by the director of human resources. The director of human resources shall be the city manager or his or her designee. The director of human resources shall administer all the provisions of this article and of the personnel rules, and shall prepare and recommend revisions and amendments to the personnel rules. 
(b)  The council may contract with any qualified person or agency for the performance of such technical services as may be desired in the establishment and operation of the personnel program. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 6-16-08) 
Secs. 2-258-2-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CIVIL SERVICE 

Sec. 2-271. - Divisions of city service. 
    All officers and personnel of the city are divided into the classified service and the exempt service. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 6-16-08) 
Sec. 2-272. - Application. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply only to the classified service of the city unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 6-16-08) 
Sec. 2-273. - Exempt service. 
    The exempt service shall include the following: 
(1)  Administrative officers of the city as defined in section 7.1 of the City Charter. 
(2)  All officials elected by the people. 
(3)  Members of appointive boards and commissions. 
(4)  Persons employed or retained in a professional capacity. 
(5)  Persons whose conditions of employment are subject to collective bargaining agreements. 
(6)  Persons whose positions are temporary, part-time or seasonal. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 6-16-08) 
Sec. 2-274. - Classified service. 
    The classified service shall include all other positions in the city service which are not specifically placed in the exempt service by this article. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 6-16-08) 
Sec. 2-275. - How status determined. 
    The class in which each employee shall have status shall be determined in the manner provided in section 2-276. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 6-16-08) 
Sec. 2-276. - Position classification plan. 
(a)  Establishment; scope. The director of human resources shall make an analysis of the duties and responsibilities of all positions in the classified service and shall recommend to the council a position classification plan. Each position in the classified service shall be assigned to a class on the basis of the kind and level of its duties and responsibilities, to the end that all positions in the same class shall be sufficiently alike to permit use of a single descriptive title, the same qualification requirements, the same test of competence, and the same pay scale. A position class may contain one (1) position or more than one (1) position. 
(b)  Revision of plan. The initial classification plan shall be revised from time to time as changing conditions require, upon recommendations of the director of human resources and with the approval of the council. Such revisions may consist of the addition, abolishment, consolidation, division or amendment of existing classes. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 6-16-08) 
Sec. 2-277. - Pay plan. 
(a)  Preparation. The director of human resources under the direction of the city manager and in consultation with the finance director, shall prepare a pay plan and rules for its administration. The rate or range for each class shall be such as to reflect fairly the differences in duties and responsibilities and shall be related to compensation for comparable positions in other places in public and private employment. 
(b)  Approval. The director of human resources shall submit the pay plan and the rules for its administration to the council for adoption. The council, after public hearing, may adopt the plan and the rules, with or without amendment. All amendments shall apply uniformly to all positions within the same class. 
(c)  Assignments. After the pay plan and the rules for its administration have been adopted by the council, the director of human resources shall assign each position class to one of the pay ranges provided in the pay plan. 
(d)  Amendments. The pay plan may be amended from time to time as circumstances require, either through adjustment of rates or by reassignment of position classes to different pay ranges. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 6-16-08) 
Sec. 2-278. - Employment procedures. 
(a)  Appointments. Vacancies are vacant positions in the classified service which the city desires to fill. The vacancy may be filled pursuant to section 2-279 by the recall, reemployment or promotion of an employee. If not so filled the vacancy will be filled by an original appointment. Original appointments to vacancies shall be equally based on merit as determined by competitive examinations and by an interview process. 
(b)  Examinations. Examinations shall be in such form as will fairly test the abilities and aptitudes of candidates for the duties to be performed and may not include any inquiry into characteristics or affiliations which, if used as the basis for determining eligibility for employment, would constitute unlawful discrimination. 
(c)  Eligibility list. Candidates who qualify for employment shall be placed on an eligibility list for the appropriate position class in the rank order of the grades they obtained on the examination and the score received in the interview process. 
(d)  Veterans preference. Preference in entrance examinations, but not in promotion, shall be granted to qualified persons who have been members of the armed forces of the United States in time of war, and who seek to enter the service of the city within five (5) years immediately following their honorable discharge from military service. Such preference shall be in the form of points added to the final grades of such persons, provided that they first achieve a passing grade. The preference may be as much as five (5) points for non-disabled veterans, and as much as ten (10) points for persons currently receiving compensation from the U.S. Veteran's Administration for war-service-incurred disabilities. The rank order of such persons among other eligible persons shall be determined on the basis of their augmented rating. 
(e)  Promotions. Vacancies in positions above the entrance level shall be filled by promotion whenever in the judgment of the city manager it is in the best interest of the city to do so. Promotions shall give appropriate consideration to the applicant's qualifications and record of performance. 
(f)  Promotion to exempt service. Any person in the classified service of the city who is promoted or appointed to a position not under the protection of this division shall not, in the event of demotion or dismissal from such position, or in any case where such person is not reappointed at the end of a specified term, be privileged to return to the position which he or she held before such promotion or appointment, or to a position of equal or similar rank or classification, unless approved by the city manager. 
(g)  Temporary assignments. Pending the availability of an eligibility list determined by the director of human resources to be appropriate for a class, vacancies may be filled by temporary appointment by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord No. 698, § 1, 6-16-08) 
Sec. 2-279. - Eligibility lists. 
(a)  Priority of lists. Eligibility lists shall be recall lists, promotional eligibility lists and original appointment eligibility lists. 
(1)  Recall lists shall contain the names of regular employees laid off in good standing for lack of funds or work or the elimination of the position by the city. 
(2)  Promotional eligibility lists and original appointment eligibility lists shall be created as provided in section 2-278. 
(3)  An employee who has not completed an original orientation period and is laid off for lack of work or lack of funds or resigns and withdraws his or her resignation within one (1) year may, with the approval of the director of human resources, have his name restored to the eligibility list from which his or her appointment was originally made. 
(b)  Appointment procedure. When an appointment is to be made to a vacancy, the director of human resources shall submit to the individual or individuals making the appointment the names of the three (3) persons ranked highest on the appropriate list who have indicated willingness to accept appointment. When more than one (1) vacancy is to be filled the number of names submitted shall equal the number of vacancies plus two (2). 
(c)  Rules for administering lists. Policies and procedures for administering eligibility lists shall be provided in the personnel rules, covering the duration, cancellation, replacement, and consolidation of such lists, and the removal or suspension of names of eligible persons therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 6-16-08) 
Sec. 2-280. - Orientation. 
    Any original or promotional appointment shall be considered to be provisional in nature pending satisfactory completion of an orientation or working test period. The director of human resources shall promulgate rules and procedures relative to administration of the orientation or working test period. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 6-16-08) 
Sec. 2-281. - Discipline, demotions and separations. 
    The director of human resources, under the direction of the city manager, shall promulgate rules and regulations with regard to discipline, demotions and separation of employees from city employment. 
(Ord. No. 487, § 1, 2-3-92; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. 698, § 1, 6-16-08) 
Secs. 2-282-2-315. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference- General finance, ch. 8; taxation, ch. 9. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(1); any ordinance making any appropriation saved from repeal, § 1-6(4); any ordinance levying or imposing annual taxes saved from repeal, § 1-6(5); taxation, ch. 32. 
State Law reference- Municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq.; uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-316. - Investment of idle funds. 
(a)  The council hereby authorizes its finance director to invest idle funds of the city in accordance with Act No. 20 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1943 (MCL 129.91 et seq.), as amended, as follows: 
(1)  In bonds and other direct obligations of the United States or an agency or instrumentality of the United States; 
(2)  In certificates of deposit, savings accounts, deposit accounts, or depository receipts of a bank which is a member of the federal deposit insurance corporation or a savings and loan association which is a member of the federal savings and loan insurance corporation or a credit union which is insured by the national credit union administration; 
(3)  In commercial paper rated at the time of purchase within the two (2) highest classifications established by not less than two (2) standard rating services and which matures not more than two hundred seventy (270) days after the date of purchase; 
(4)  In United States government or federal agency obligation repurchase agreements; 
(5)  In bankers' acceptances of United States banks; 
(6)  In mutual funds registered under the investment company act of 1940, title 1 of chapter 686, 54 Stat. 789, 15 USC 80a-1 to 80a-3 and 80a-4 to 80a-64, with the authority to purchase only investment vehicles that are legal for direct investment by a public corporation. However, a mutual fund is not disqualified as a permissible investment solely by reason of either of the following: 
a.  The purchase of securities on a when-issued or delayed delivery basis. 
b.  The ability to lend portfolio securities as long as the mutual fund receives collateral all times equal to at least one hundred (100) percent of the securities loaned. 
c.  The limited ability to borrow and pledge a like portion of the portfolio's assets for temporary or emergency purposes. 
(7)  Obligations of the state or any of its political subdivisions that at the time of purchase are rated as investment grade by not less than one (1) standard rating service. 
(8)  Obligations described in 1-7 above if purchased through an interlocal agreement under the urban cooperation act of 1967, PA 7, MCL 124.501 to 124.512. 
(9)  Investment pools organized under the surplus funds investment pool act, 1982, PA 367, MCL 129.111 to 129.118. 
(10)  Investment pools organized under the local government investment pool act 1985, PA 121, MCL 129.141 to 129.150. 
(b)  Assets acceptable for pledging to secure deposits of public funds are limited to assets authorized for direct investment under 1-7 above. 
(Ord. No. 574, § 1, 1-19-99) 
Secs. 2-317-2-325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 669, § 1, adopted June 20, 2005, amended the Code by repealing former div. 2, §§ 2-326-2-328, in its entirety. Former div. 2 pertained to the budget stabilization fund, and derived from Ord. No. 398, adopted October 4, 1982. 

Secs. 2-326-2-340. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASES, CONTRACTS AND SALES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 786, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 17, 2017, repealed Div. 3 in its entirety and enacted a new Div. 3 to read as set out herein. Former Div. 3, §§ 2-341-2-348, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 491, § 1, adopted May 19, 1992; Ord. No. 532, § 1, adopted June 5, 1995; Ord. No. 569, § 1, adopted June 1, 1998; Ord. No. 616, § 1, adopted June 17, 2002; Ord. No. 617, § 1, adopted July 15, 2002; Ord. No. 675, § 1, adopted July 3, 2006; Ord. No. 715, § 1, adopted April 19, 2010. 

Sec. 2-341. - Purchasing agent. 
    The city manager shall act as purchasing agent of the city, unless he or she shall designate another officer or employee of the city to act as purchasing agent. Any such designation, shall be in writing filed with the clerk. In the event of such designation every purchase order in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) shall be approved by the manager before being issued. 
(Ord. No. 786, § 2, 7-17-17) 
Sec. 2-342. - Rules. 
    The city manager shall adopt any necessary rules respecting requisitions and purchase orders. 
(Ord. No. 786, § 2, 7-17-17) 
Sec. 2-343. - Purchases or contracts $2,000.00 to $10,000.00. 
    Purchases of services, supplies, materials or equipment, the cost of which is equal to or greater than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) but not more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) may be made in the open market but such purchases shall, where practicable, be based on at least three (3) competitive bids and shall be awarded to the lowest qualified bidder. The purchasing agent may solicit bids verbally, in writing, or through other means. A record shall be kept of all open market orders and the bids submitted thereon, which records shall be available for public inspection. Any or all bids may be rejected. Purchases made pursuant to this section may be made without prior approval of the council. 
(Ord. No. 786, § 2, 7-17-17) 
Sec. 2-344. - Purchases or contracts over $10,000.00. 
    Any expenditure for services, supplies, materials or equipment obligating the city, where the amount of the city's obligation is in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), shall be governed by the provisions of this section, except as provided in section 2-345. 
(1)  Such expenditure shall be made the subject of a written contract. A purchase order shall be a sufficient written contract only in cases where the expenditure is in the usual and ordinary course of the city's affairs and in no case shall it be sufficient for the construction of public works or the contracting for receipt of supplies or services over any period of time in excess of one (1) year or where the quality of the goods or materials or the scope of the services bargained for is not wholly standardized. 
(2)  Notice inviting sealed competitive bids shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least five (5) days before the final date for submitting bids thereon. Such notice shall give briefly the specifications of the services, supplies, materials or equipment or other matter to be contracted for and shall state the amount of security to be given with the bid and the amount of bond or other security to be given with the contract. The notice shall state the time limit, the place of filing and the time of opening bids and shall also state that the right is reserved to reject any or all bids. Any other conditions of award of the contract shall also be stated in general terms. 
(3)  The purchasing agent shall also solicit bids from a reasonable number of such qualified prospective bidders as are known to him/her by sending each a copy of the notice requesting bids and notice thereof shall be posted on the city's website. 
(4)  Unless prescribed by the council, the purchasing agent shall prescribe the amount of any security to be deposited with any bid, which deposit shall be in cash, certified or cashier's check or bond written by a surety company authorized to do business in the state. The amount of such security shall be expressed as a percentage of the bid submitted. Unless fixed by the council, the purchasing agent shall fix the amount of the performance bond and for construction contracts, the amount of the labor and material bond to be required of the successful bidders. 
(5)  Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place designated in the notice requesting bids in the presence of the city clerk and at least one (1) other city official or employee, preferably the head of the department most closely concerned with the subject of the contract. The bids shall thereupon be carefully examined, tabulated and reported to the council with the recommendation of the purchasing agent at the next council meeting. After tabulation, all bids may be inspected by the competing bidders. In lieu of the procedure for opening bids herein specified, the council may direct that bids be opened at a council meeting. 
(6)  When such bids are submitted to the council, the contract to be executed, in a form approved by the city attorney, shall also be submitted. If the council finds any of the bids satisfactory, it shall award the contract to the lowest qualified bidder and shall authorize the execution of the contract. Upon execution of the contract, the successful bidder shall file any required bonds, which shall be approved by the city attorney as to form. Such award may be by resolution or ordinance. The council shall have the right to reject any or all bids, to waive irregularities in bidding and to accept bids which do not conform in every respect to the bidding requirements. 
(7)  For projects exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). At the time the contract is executed, the contractor shall file a bond to the city executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned upon the performance of said contract, and further conditioned to pay all laborers, mechanics, subcontractors and material suppliers as well as all just debts, dues and demands incurred in the performance of such work. The contractor shall also file evidence of public liability insurance and workers compensation in an amount satisfactory to the city attorney, and agree to hold the city harmless from loss or damage caused to any person or property by reason of the contractor's negligence. 
(8)  All bids and deposits of certified or cashier's checks may be retained until the contract is awarded and signed. If any successful bidder fails or refuses to enter into the contract awarded to him or her within ten (10) days after the same has been awarded, or file any bond required within the same time, the deposit accompanying his or her bid shall be forfeited to the city, and the council may, in its discretion, award the contract to the next lowest qualified bidder or the contract may be re-advertised. 
(Ord. No. 786, § 2, 7-17-17) 
Sec. 2-345. - Cooperative purchasing authorized. 
    The city may participate in, sponsor, conduct, or administer cooperative purchasing agreements for the procurement of any supplies, services or construction with one (1) or more other governmental bodies. Such cooperative purchasing may include, but is not limited to, joint or multi-party contracts of a governmental body or opened state and federal contracts which are made available to local governments. The city may also use the pre-existing bid of any other governmental body or public procurement unit for the procurement of any supplies, services, or construction, provided that such bid was derived through a competitive bidding process. In addition, the city may utilize bids or proposals obtained by a nonprofit entity that expressly solicits bids and proposals for governmental agencies, provided that such bids were derived through a competitive bidding process. 
(Ord. No. 786, § 2, 7-17-17) 
Sec. 2-346. - Exceptions to competitive bidding. 
    Subject to the approval of the council, competitive bidding shall not be required in the following cases: 
(1)  Where the service, product or material contracted for is not competitive in nature, and the purchasing agent so certifies to the council in writing; 
(2)  In the employment of professional services; 
(3)  Where the council shall determine that the public interest will best be served by joint purchase with, or purchase from, another unit of government; 
(4)  Where the council shall determine that, due to market conditions, price instability or other reasons, the best interest of the public will be served by using another method of bidding for the acquisition of any item or service. In such circumstances: 
a.  After complying with the notice requirements of section 2-344, a list of potential bidders may be established and prequalified by the council; 
b.  In conjunction with establishing the list of prequalified bidders, or at any other time, the council may direct the method to be used in obtaining bids; and 
c.  At the first regular council meeting after any purchase, the purchasing agent shall report to the council the method of obtaining the bids, the amounts bid, the quantity purchased and the price paid. 
(5)  When an emergency requires an immediate purchase, the purchasing agent, at the first regular council meeting after any such purchase, shall report to the council the nature of the emergency, the item, and quantity purchased and the price paid. 
(Ord. No. 786, § 2, 7-17-17) 
Sec. 2-347. - Inspection of materials. 
    The responsibility for the inspection and acceptance of all materials, supplies and equipment shall rest with the ordering department. 
(Ord. No. 786, § 2, 7-17-17) 
Sec. 2-348. - Sale of surplus material. 
(a)  A department head having charge of any surplus, obsolete or unused supplies, materials or equipment, which may include vehicles, may request that the property be disposed of according to the provision of this section. City council authorization shall be required for the disposal or sale of any work of art, piece of furniture, decorative object, vehicle or the like, which is seventy (70) years or older. 
(b)  The designee appointed by the city manager is authorized to sell the property in any form in the most advantageous manner. The designee may set a minimum sale price and may reject any formal or informal bid that, in his/her judgement is not a fair sale price. Property may be disposed of in the following manner: 
(1)  Sale by auction; 
(2)  Sale by sealed bid; 
(3)  Solicitation of offers to purchase the asset. Such solicitations shall be on the condition that no offer less than the expected sale price carried on the item, as approved by the city manager; 
(4)  Sales based upon a negotiated agreement with a particular vendor, provided that such vendor must be selected according to an established written procedure which provides a mechanism for all interested parties to make proposals in a fair and even manner. Direct negotiations as provided in this subsection may only be used if deemed to be in the best interest of the City of Owosso and facts set forth as to why other means are less desirable; 
(5)  Sales by a third party selected according to the city's standard procedures for selecting providers of services; 
(6)  Transferred, with or without compensation, to any government entity, or other organization designated as a 501(c)(3) by the Internal Revenue Service; or 
(7)  If the property has been designated in a nonusable state by the designee appointed by the city manager, it may be disposed of, consistent with the public interest, in any manner as deemed appropriate by the city. 
(c)  Any compensation resulting from the disposal of surplus property belonging to the City of Owosso shall be transferred to the fund from which the property was acquired or most likely acquired. 
(d)  The designee appointed by the city manager is authorized to act as the agent for the city in the collection, disposal, and execution of agreements for the disposal of surplus property as authorized by the City of Owosso or the city manager. 
(e)  The designee shall forward any funds collected along with written information to allow the correct allocation of the funds and the removal from fixed assets or inventory. 
(Ord. No. 786, § 2, 7-17-17) 
Sec. 2-349. - "Lowest qualified bidder" defined. 
    The term "lowest qualified bidder," as used in this division, shall mean the lowest bidder having qualifications to perform the work which are satisfactory to the council. The lowest bidder shall be determined based on an adjusted bid tabulation which shall be prepared in the following manner: 
(1)  To the bid of any bidder which is neither an Owosso-based business nor a county-based business shall be added an amount equal to six (6) percent of the bid or two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), whichever is less. 
(2)  To the bid of any bidder which is a county-based business shall be added an amount equal to three (3) percent of the bid or two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), whichever is less; provided, however, that if no bid is received from an Owosso-based business, no additional amount shall be added to the bid of a county-based business. 
(3)  "Owosso-based business" shall be interpreted to mean a business registered with the county clerk or a corporation registered with the state having a business address within the city limits which pays real and/or personal property taxes levied by the city. 
The term "county-based business" shall be interpreted to mean a business other than a city-based business registered with the county clerk or a corporation registered with the state having a business address within the county which pays real and/or personal property taxes levied by the county. 
(4)  If twenty-five (25) percent or more of a contract for construction or other services is to be subcontracted by an Owosso-based business bidder to a non-city-based business or businesses, or by a county-based business bidder to a non-county-based business or businesses, the adjusted bid shall be calculated by applying the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) within this section separately to each portion of the contract based on the status of the contractor or subcontractor performing that portion of the contract as an Owosso-based or county-based business. 
(Ord. No. 786, § 2, 7-17-17) 
Secs. 2-350-2-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES' PENSIONS 

Sec. 2-401. - Name and establishment. 
    The city employees' retirement system, hereinafter called the "retirement system," is hereby established for the purpose of providing retirement allowances and survivor benefits for the employees of the city and their eligible dependents. The retirement system shall be maintained for the exclusive benefit of members and is intended to comply with the requirements of section 457(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time (the "code"), with the requirements of any regulations issued thereunder, and with the requirements of any other applicable law. The trustees of the trust established as part of this retirement system are defined in section 2-403. 
    In accordance with the terms of the retirement system, the trustees have the ability at any time, and from time to time, to amend the retirement system. 
    To be administered effective December 31, 2005, this retirement system is amended and restated in its entirety to comply with the requirements of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended by the Uruguay Round Agreements Act, the Small Business Job Protection Act of 1996, the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1996, the Internal Revenue Service Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998, the Community Renewal Tax Relief Act of 2000, the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 and all applicable rulings and regulations issued thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-402. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases as used in this article, unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context, shall have the following meanings: 
    Accumulated contributions means the sum of all amounts deducted from the compensation of a member and credited to the member's individual account in the members savings fund, together with regular interest thereon. 
    Annual benefit means a retirement benefit under the retirement system that is payable annually in the form of a straight life annuity. 
(1)  Actuarial adjustments to annual benefit: Except as otherwise provided in subparagraph b. below, a benefit payable in a form other than a straight life annuity must be adjusted to be the actuarial equivalent of a straight life annuity before applying the limitations of this article as follows: 
a.  For limitation years beginning before January 1, 1995, such actuarial equivalent shall be based on the mortality factors specified under the terms of the retirement system as in effect before such date and is equal to the greater of the annuity benefit computed using an interest rate of seven (7) percent or the interest rate(s) specified for determining actuarial equivalence under the terms of the retirement system in effect before such date. 
b.  For limitation years beginning on or after January 1, 1995, such actuarial equivalent is equal to the greater of the annuity benefit computed using a seven (7) percent interest rate and the 1970 Group Annuity Mortality Table and the annual benefit computed using a seven (7) percent interest rate and 1970 Group Annuity Mortality Table. In determining such actuarial equivalent for a benefit form other than a non-decreasing annuity payment for a period of not less than the life of the participant (or, in the case of a qualified preretirement survivor annuity, the life of the surviving spouse), or decreases during the life of the participant merely because of: 
1.  The death of the survivor annuitant (but only if the reduction is not below fifty (50) percent of the annual benefit payable before the death of the survivor annuitant); or 
2.  The cessation or reduction of Social Security supplements of qualified disability payments as defined in code §401(a)(11), "the applicable interest rate" will be substituted for "a seven (7) percent interest rate" in the preceding sentence. 
(2)  Circumstances in which no actuarial adjustment is required: No actuarial adjustment to the annual benefit is required for: 
a.  The value of a qualified joint and survivor annuity; 
b.  Benefits that are not directly related to retirement benefits (such as the qualified disability benefit, pre-retirement death benefits, and post-retirement medical benefits); and 
c.  The value of post-retirement cost-of-living increases made in accordance with code § 415(d) and treasury regulation § 1.415-3(c)(2)(iii). 
The annual benefit does not include any benefits attributable to employee contributions or rollovers, or the assets transferred from a qualified plan that was not maintained by the city. 
    Beneficiary means any person, except a retirant, who is in receipt of, or who is designated to receive, a pension or other benefit payable by the retirement system. 
    Board means the board of trustees of the retirement system as defined in section 2-403, which is responsible for the administration of the retirement system. 
    City means the city of Owosso. 
    City attorney means the person or persons appointed by the city to the position of city attorney. 
    City clerk means the person appointed by the city to the position of city clerk. 
    City manager means the person or persons appointed by the city to the position of city manager. 
    City treasurer means the person or persons appointed by the city to the position of city treasurer. 
    Code § 401(a)(17) limit means that notwithstanding any provisions of this section to the contrary, compensation for any calendar year will not exceed the code § 401(a)(17) annual compensation limit. If a determination period consists of fewer than twelve (12) months, the code § 401(a)(17) annual compensation limit will be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of months in the determination period, and the denominator of which is twelve (12). If compensation for any prior determination period is taken into account in determining a participant's retirement system benefits for the current plan year, the compensation for such prior determination period is subject to the applicable code § 401(a)(17) annual compensation limit as in effect for that prior period. As used herein, the code § 401(a)(17) annual compensation limit means the following: 
(1)  One hundred seventy thousand dollars ($170,000.00) for twelve-month determination periods which began on or after January 1, 2000. The one hundred seventy thousand dollars ($170,000.00) will be adjusted for increases in the cost of living under code § 401(a)(17) at the same time and in the same manner as under code § 415. A cost of living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to any determination period beginning in such calendar year. 
(2)  One hundred sixty thousand dollars ($160,000.00) for twelve-month determination periods which began on or after January 1, 1997 and not later than December 31, 1999; 
(3)  One hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) for twelve-month determination periods which began prior to January 1, 1997. 
    Compensation means all cash compensation for services to the city, including salary, wages, fees, commissions, bonuses and overtime pay, that is includible in a member's gross income for the calendar year, plus amounts that would be cash compensation for services to the city includible in the member's gross income for the calendar year but for a compensation reduction election under code § 125, 132(f), 401(k), 403(b) or 457(b). In case a member's compensation is not all paid in money, the board shall fix the value of the portion which is not paid in money. 
    Council means the person or persons elected to the city council. 
    Covered member means any member who is covered under the federal social security old-age, survivor's and disability insurance program on account of member's city employment. 
    Credited service means the number of years and months of service standing to a member's credit as provided in this article. 
    Disability pension means the disability pension as established in accordance with the provisions of section 2-422. 
    Disability retirement means the disability retirement of a member as established in accordance with the provisions of section 2-421. 
    Expense fund means the fund established in accordance with the provisions of section 2-432. 
    Final average compensation means the average of the highest annual compensation received by a member during a period of three (3) consecutive years of credited service contained within the member's ten (10) years of credited service immediately preceding the date the member's employment with the city last terminates. If member has less than three (3) years of credited service member's final average compensation shall be the average of member's annual compensation for member's total period of service. 
    Fiscal year means the city's accounting year beginning July 1 and ending the following June 30. 
    Gender and number means words used in the masculine gender will be construed as though they were also used in the feminine or neuter gender where applicable, and words used in the singular will be construed as though they were also used in the plural where applicable. 
    General city member means any member, except a police officer or fire fighter member. 
    Income fund means the fund established in accordance with the provisions of section 2-434. 
    Medical director means the person or persons appointed in accordance with the provisions of section 2-408(5). 
    Member means any person who is included in the membership of the retirement system. 
    Members savings fund means the fund established in accordance with the provisions of section 2-429. 
    Noncovered member means any member who is not covered under the federal social security old-age, survivors' and disability insurance program on account of member's employment with the city. 
    Normal retirement age means the provisions as defined in section 2-416. 
    Pension means an annual amount payable in equal monthly installments, by the retirement system, for the life of a person, or for a shorter period, as provided in this article. 
    Pension reserve means the present value of all payments to be made on account of any pension which shall be computed upon the basis of such mortality and other tables of experience with regular interest, as the board shall from time to time adopt. 
    Pension reserve fund means the fund established in accordance with the provisions of section 2-431. 
    Plan year means the retirement system's accounting year which is the calendar year. 
    Police officer or fire fighter member in the case of a police officer means any officer or employee in the police department of the city holding the rank of patrolman, including probationary patrolman, or higher rank; and in the case of a fire fighter, any officer or employee in the fire department of the city holding the rank of fire-fighter, including probationary fire-fighter, or higher rank: but shall not include: 
(1)  Any civilian employee in the police or fire department; nor 
(2)  Any person who is temporarily employed as a police officer or fire fighter for an emergency; nor 
(3)  Any person who is privately employed as a police officer or fire fighter. 
    Regular interest means such rate or rates of interest per annum, compounded annually, as the board shall from time to time adopt. 
    Retirant means any member who retires with a pension payable by the retirement system. 
    Retirement means a member's severance from employment with the city with a pension payable by the retirement system. 
    Retirement reserve fund means the fund established in accordance with the provisions of section 2-430. 
    Service means personal service rendered to the city by an officer or employee of the city. 
    Spouse means the person to whom a member is legally married. 
    Trust fund means all amounts of assets attributed to the members savings fund, the retirement reserve fund, the pension reserve fund, the expense fund and the income fund of the retirement system, all property and rights purchased with such amounts, and all income attributable to such amounts, property, or rights, whether or not held in trust in the custody of the trustee. The trust fund shall be held and invested in accordance with the provisions of section 2-433. 
    Trustees means the board of trustees of the retirement system as defined in section 2-403, duly appointed and currently serving under the trust agreement. 
    Voluntary retirement age means fifty-five (55) years of age for police officer and fire fighter members, and sixty (60) years of age for general city members. 
    Worker's compensation period means the period a person is in receipt of worker's compensation on account of a member's disability or death arising out of and in the course of member's city employment. If a member is paid a single sum in lieu of future weekly worker's compensation, member's worker's compensation period shall be the period, if any, member was in receipt of weekly worker's compensation plus the period arrived at by dividing the said single sum by member's weekly worker's compensation award. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-403. - Board of trustees. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of trustees (the "board") in whom is vested the general administration, management, and responsibility for the proper operation of the retirement system and for making effective the provisions of this article. The board shall consist of seven (7) trustees as follows: 
(1)  The mayor or a councilman who is not eligible to participate in the retirement system as a member or retirant; 
(2)  A second councilman who is not eligible to participate in the retirement system as a member or retirant; 
(3)  A citizen who has the qualifications required by the Charter for holding an elective city office and who is not eligible to participate in the retirement system as a member or retirant, to be appointed by the council; 
(4)  A police officer member to be chosen by the police officer members; 
(5)  A firefighter member to be chosen by the firefighter members; and 
(6)  Two (2) general city members: One (1) general city member to be chosen by non-unionized general city members and one (1) general city member to be chosen by the unionized general city members. 
(7)  If there are no active members of the employee groups listed in subsections (4), (5) and (6) above able or willing to serve, a retired member of the group may be elected by active and retired members of such group. 
(b)  The choosing of the trustees provided for in paragraphs (4), (5), and (6), above, shall be held in the month of May in each year under such rules and regulations as the board shall, from time to time, adopt. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 663, § 1, 11-15-04; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06; Ord. No. 725, § 1, 12-5-11; Ord. No. 781, § 1, 12-5-16) 
Sec. 2-404. - Trustees' terms of office-oath. 
    The regular term of office of the trustees provided for in subsections 2-403(a)(3), (4), (5), and (6) shall be for four (4) years. The term of office shall expire at the end of each four (4) year period subsequent to July 1, 1965, for the police officer member Trustee; July 1, 1966, for the first general city member trustee; July 1, 1967, for the fire fighter member trustee; and July 1, 1968 for the second general city member trustee. The citizen (non-employee) trustee shall serve at the pleasure of the council. Each trustee shall, within ten (10) days after trustee has been appointed or chosen, as the case may be, take the oath of office which shall be administered by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 663, § 1, 11-15-04) 
Sec. 2-405. - Vacancy on board-How filled. 
    If a vacancy occurs on the board, the vacancy shall be filled, within sixty (60) days from and after the date of the vacancy, in the same manner as required for making appointments or choices to position of trustee. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-406. - Board meetings. 
    The board shall hold meetings regularly, at least one (1) in each quarter in each year, and shall designate the time and place thereof, by rule. The board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. Such rules shall become effective when a copy thereof is filed with the city clerk. A copy of such rules shall also be placed in the Owosso Public Library. All meetings of the board shall be public. The trustees shall serve without compensation for their service as such. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-407. - Quorum-Each trustee entitled to vote. 
    Five (5) trustees shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of the board. Each trustee shall be entitled to one (1) vote on each question before the board, at least five (5) concurring votes shall be necessary for a decision by the trustees. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-408. - Retirement system officers. 
(a)  The officers of the board shall be a chairman and a vice-chairman, elected by the board from the current trustees. 
(b)  The city clerk shall serve as secretary to the board, and the city clerk shall be the administrative officer of the retirement system. 
(c)  The city treasurer shall be treasurer of the retirement system and the custodian of its assets. All payments from moneys of the retirement system shall be made by the city treasurer according to charter provisions and any ordinance relating thereto which is adopted by the council. No payment shall be made unless it shall have been previously authorized by a specific or continuing resolution of the board. 
(d)  The board shall appoint an actuary who shall be the technical advisor to the board on matters regarding the operation of the retirement system, and the actuary chosen shall perform such other duties as are required of the actuary under this article. 
(e)  The board shall appoint as medical director a physician who is not eligible to participate in the retirement system as a member or retirant. The medical director shall be responsible to and shall hold office at the pleasure of the board. The medical director shall arrange for and pass upon all medical examinations required under this article. 
The medical director shall investigate all essential statements and certificates of a medical nature made by or on behalf of a member or retirant, and the medical director shall report in writing to the board the conclusions on medical matters referred to the medical director by the board. 
(f)  The board may employ such professional and other services as are required for the proper operation of the retirement system. The compensation for such services shall be fixed by the board subject to the approval of the council. 
(g)  The city attorney shall be the legal advisor to the board. A copy of all written opinions rendered by the city attorney to the board shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-409. - Records of retirement system-Annual report. 
(a)  The city clerk shall keep, or cause to be kept, in convenient form, such data as shall be necessary for an actuarial valuation of the assets and liabilities of the retirement system. The board shall render a report to the city manager and the council or their designee within ninety (90) days after the close of each fiscal year of the city showing the fiscal transactions of the retirement system for the year ending the preceding June 30, and the last balance sheet showing the financial condition of the retirement system by means of an actuarial valuation of the assets and liabilities of the retirement system. 
(b)  The board shall from time to time adopt such mortality, service, and other tables of experience, and a rate or rates of regular interest, as are necessary to maintain the operation of the retirement system on an actuarial basis. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-410. - Membership consists of. 
(a)  The members of the retirement system shall include all persons who are now and who hereafter become employed by the city. Such persons shall be eligible to participate in the retirement system immediately upon becoming members and shall commence participation as soon as administratively practicable. The members shall not include: 
(1)  Any person whose services are compensated for on a contractual professional, or on a fee basis, unless considered to be a Member on July 1, 1964; nor 
(2)  Any person, except an elected city official, who is employed in a position normally requiring less than one thousand six hundred sixty-four (1664) hours of work per annum; nor 
(3)  The medical director; nor 
(4)  Any person that becomes employed by the city after January 1, 2006, covered by a collectively bargained agreement with Owosso Local Number 1059, Council Number 25 of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, AFL-CIO; nor 
(5)  Any person that becomes employed by the city after January 1, 2006, that is not covered by a collective bargaining agreement. 
(b)  In all cases of doubt, the board shall decide who is a member of the retirement system within the meaning of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06; Ord. No. 672, § 1, 2-21-06) 
Sec. 2-411. - Termination of membership. 
(a)  The accrued financial benefits of the retirement system shall be a contractual obligation of the city and shall not be diminished or impaired by the city. The terms of this article shall constitute the only basis upon which each such contractual obligation shall arise and accrue, and no benefits shall arise or accrue to any member or retirant except those specifically provided in this article and in accordance with the terms thereof. Any member who, in the performance of member's duties, commits a felony or uses member's official or employment status with the city as a means for the commission of a felony shall thereby bring about a forfeiture of member's right to any pension or benefits under authority of this article and shall be entitled only to a refund of member's accumulated contributions. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, should any member have separated or become separated from the service of the city for any reason except member's retirement or death, member shall thereupon cease to be a member and member's credited service at that time shall be forfeited. Should member be re-employed by the city, the re-employed former member shall again become a member. 
(c)  If a former member's re-employment occurs within a period of three (3) years from and after the date the former member last separated from city service, the former member's forfeited credited service shall be restored to member's credit subject to section 2-429(4). Upon member's retirement or death member shall thereupon cease to be a member. 
(d)  If a former member: 
(1)  Is re-employed after January 1, 2007; 
(2)  Has at least thirty (30) months' previous credited service; and 
(3)  His or her re-employment with the city occurs after three (3) years but within a period of fifteen (15) years from and after the date the former member last separated from the city service, then 
the former member's forfeited credited service may be restored to the member's credit, provided the member deposits his or her withdrawn contributions accumulated and interest pursuant to section 2-429(d) within five (5) years after the member becomes reemployed with the city. If a member deposits his or her withdrawn contributions and interest, the service credit for the first period of employment shall be calculated based upon the factor and final average compensation in effect on the date of first separation from employment with the city. Upon a member's retirement or death, the member shall thereupon cease to be a member. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06; Ord. No. 681, § 1, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 2-412. - Service credentials. 
    The service rendered by a member shall be credited to member by the board in accordance with such rules and regulations, consistent with the provisions of this article, as the board shall from time to time adopt, but in no case shall less than ten (10) days of service rendered by a member in any calendar month be credited member as a month of service, nor shall less than nine (9) months of service rendered in any calendar year be credited as a year of service, nor shall more than one (1) year of service be credited any member for all service rendered by member in any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-413. - Military service credit. 
    In accordance with code § 414(u), a member who, while employed by the city, has entered or enters any armed service of the United States, and has been or shall be on active duty in such armed service during any period of compulsory military service shall have such armed service actually required of member credited as city service; provided that: 
(1)  Member reentered or reenters the employ of the city within ninety (90) days from and after termination of such armed service actually required of member; and 
(2)  Member returns to the members savings fund all amounts member withdrew therefrom at the time member entered or while member was in such armed service, together with regular interest thereon from the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment; and 
(3)  In no case shall any member be credited with more than five (5) years of city service for all such armed service rendered by member. 
    In any case of doubt as to the period to be so credited, the board shall have final power to determine such period. During the period of such armed service, and until member's return to city service, member's contributions to the retirement system shall be suspended and member's balance, if any, in the members saving fund shall be accumulated at regular interest. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-414. - Eligible domestic relations orders. 
    An eligible domestic relations order ("EDRO") is a signed domestic relations order issued by a state court which creates, recognizes or assigns to an alternate payee(s) the right to receive all or part of a member's retirement system benefit that is or will become payable to the member. An alternate payee is a spouse, former spouse, child, or other dependent of a member who is treated as a beneficiary under the retirement system as a result of the EDRO. The board may establish EDRO procedures, but in the absence of such procedures, the board will determine if a domestic relations order is an EDRO in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Board of trustees' determination: Promptly upon receipt of a domestic relations order, the board will notify the participant and any alternate payee(s) named in the order of such receipt and will include a copy of this section. Within a reasonable time after receipt of the order, the board will make a determination as to whether or not the order is a EDRO as defined in MCL 38.1701 et seq. and will promptly notify the member and any alternate payee(s) in writing of the determination. If the order is determined to be an EDRO, the retirement system shall begin the payment of the benefit with the next monthly payment or upon retirement of the participant. 
(2)  Specific requirements of an EDRO: In order for a domestic relations order to be an EDRO, it must specifically state all of the following: 
a.  The name, last known mailing address (if any) and the social security number of the member and each alternate payee(s) covered by the order; 
b.  The dollar amount or percentage of the benefit to be paid to each alternate payee, or the manner in which the amount or percentage is to be determined; 
c.  The number of payments or period to which such order applies; and 
d.  The name of the plan to which the order applies. 
The domestic relations order will not be deemed an EDRO if it requires the retirement system to provide any type or form of benefit, or any option not already provided for in the retirement system, or increased benefits determined on the basis of the actuarial value, or benefits in excess of the member's retirement system benefit, or payment of benefits to an alternate payee(s) required to be paid to another alternate payee under another EDRO. 
(3)  Disputed orders: If there is a question as to whether or not a domestic relations order is a EDRO, there will be a delay in any payout to any payee(s) including the member, until the status is resolved. If the retirement system determines that the order is not an EDRO, the retirement system shall promptly notify the alternate payee(s) of this determination. The notification shall specify the reasons the order was not determined to be an EDRO. This determination does not prohibit the alternate payee(s) or the court from filing an amended order with the retirement system for redetermination. 
(4)  Death of alternate payee(s): If an alternate payee(s) dies before receiving any payment of a benefit pursuant to an EDRO, that interest reverts to the member. 
(Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-415. - Voluntary retirement. 
    Any member, with ten (10) or more years of credited service, who has attained the member's applicable voluntary retirement age, may retire upon written application to the board setting forth at what time, not less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days subsequent to the execution and filing thereof, member desires to be retired. Upon retirement, a covered member shall receive a pension provided in section 2-417, and a noncovered member shall receive a pension provided in section 2-418. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-416. - Normal retirement age. 
(a)  Any police officer or fire fighter member who has attained or attains age sixty (60) years, and any general city member, except an elected officer of the city or an officer appointed directly by the council, who has attained or attains age sixty-five (65) years. 
(b)  Any member, who continues in city service beyond the member's normal retirement age, as provided in subsection (1) of this section, shall continue to accrue benefits under this article. 
(c)  If, at the time of member's separation from city service, as provided in this section, a member has ten (10) or more years of credited service member shall be retired and member shall receive a pension provided in section 2-417 if member is a covered member, or as provided in section 2-418 if member is a noncovered member. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06)) 
Sec. 2-417. - Pension-Covered member. 
(a)  Upon a covered member's retirement, as provided in this article, covered member shall receive a straight life pension equal to two and one-half (2.5) percent of covered member's final average compensation multiplied by the number of years, and fraction of a year, of covered member's credited service. Prior to the date of covered member's retirement, covered member may elect to receive covered member's pension under an option provided in section 2-420 in lieu of a straight life pension. 
(b)  According to such rules and regulations as the board shall from time to time adopt, any covered member who retires under section 2-415 prior to attainment of age sixty-five (65) years may elect to have such covered member's straight life pension actuarially equated to provide an increased pension payable until covered member's attainment of age sixty-five (65) years and a reduced pension payable thereafter. Covered member's increased pension payable until such covered member's attainment of age sixty-five (65) years shall approximate the sum of covered member's reduced pension to be payable after covered member's attainment of age sixty-five (65) years and covered member's estimated social security primary insurance amount. This subsection shall not be applicable to a member who elects an option provided in section 2-420. 
(c)  In the event a covered member dies before the covered member has received in straight life pension payments an aggregate amount equal to the covered member's accumulated contributions standing to the covered member's credit in the members savings fund at the time of the covered member's retirement, the difference between the covered member's said accumulated contributions and the said aggregate amount of pension payments received by the covered member shall be paid from the retirement reserve fund to such person or persons as the covered member shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board. If there be no such designated person surviving the covered member such difference, if any, shall be paid to the covered member's legal representative. No benefits shall be paid under this subsection on account of the death of a covered member if the covered member elected an option provided in section 2-420. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-418. - Pension-Noncovered member. 
(a)  Upon a noncovered member's retirement, as provided in this article, noncovered member shall receive a straight life pension equal to the sum of two (2) percent of noncovered member's final average compensation multiplied by the number of years, and fraction of a year, of noncovered member's credited service, not to exceed twenty-five (25) years, plus one (1) percent of noncovered member's final average compensation multiplied by the number of years, and fraction of a year, of noncovered member's credited service in excess of twenty-five (25) years. Prior to the date of noncovered member's retirement, noncovered member may elect to receive noncovered member's pension under an option provided in section 2-420 in lieu of a straight life pension. 
(b)  In the event a noncovered member dies before the noncovered member has received in straight life pension payments an aggregate amount equal to the noncovered member's accumulated contributions standing to the noncovered member's credit in the members savings fund at the time of the noncovered member's retirement, the difference between the noncovered member's said accumulated contributions and the said aggregate amount of pension payments received by the noncovered member shall be paid from the retirement reserve fund to such person or persons as the noncovered member shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board. If there be no such designated person surviving the noncovered member, such difference, if any, shall be paid to the noncovered member's legal representative. No benefit shall be paid under this subsection on account of the death of a noncovered member if the noncovered member elected an option provided in section 2-420. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-419. - Deferred retirement. 
    Should any member who has ten (10) or more years of credited service leave the employ of the city prior to member's attainment of member's applicable voluntary retirement age for any reason except member's retirement or death, member shall be entitled to a pension provided in section 2-417 if member is a covered member, or as provided in section 2-418, if member is a noncovered member, as the applicable section was in effect at the time member left city service. If member withdraws member's accumulated contributions from the members savings fund, member shall thereupon forfeit such member's right to a deferred pension provided in this section. Member's said pension shall begin thirty (30) days after the date member's application for same is filed with the board on or after member's attainment of age sixty (60) years. During the period of member's absence from city service: 
(1)  Member shall not be given credited service for such period, unless otherwise provided in the chapter; and 
(2)  Member's balance in the members savings fund shall be accumulated at regular interest. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-420. - Pension options. 
(a)  Prior to the date of member's retirement, but not thereafter, a member may elect to receive member's pension as a straight life pension payable throughout member's life, or member may elect to receive the actuarial equivalent, at that time, of member's straight life pension in a reduced pension payable throughout member's life, and nominate a beneficiary, in accordance with the provisions of option A, B, or C set forth below, subject to subsection (2) of this section. Any election made hereunder may be revoked at any time prior to the date of member's retirement. 
(1)  Option A-Pension payable 10 years certain and life thereafter. Under option A, a retirant shall receive a reduced pension payable throughout such retirant's life with the provision that if the retirant dies before retirant has received one hundred twenty (120) monthly pension payments the payment shall be continued for the remainder of the period of one hundred twenty (120) months to such beneficiary or beneficiaries, in equal shares, as the retirant shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board. If no such designated beneficiary or beneficiaries survives the retirant such remaining monthly pension payments, if any, shall be paid to the retirant's estate. 
(2)  Option B-One hundred (100) percent survivor pension. Under option B, also called option II, upon the death of a retirant, such retirant's reduced pension shall be continued throughout the life of and paid to such person, having an insurable interest in retirant's life, retirant shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board prior to the date of such retirant's retirement. 
(3)  Option C-Fifty (50) percent survivor pension. Under option C, also called option III, upon the death of a retirant one-half (1/2) of such retirant's reduced pension shall be continued throughout the life of and paid to such person, having an insurable interest in retirant's life, as retirant shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board prior to the date of such retirant's retirement. 
(b)  If any benefits become payable under section 2-425 on account of the death of a retirant: 
(1)  No pension shall be paid to retirant's designated beneficiary under option A, B or C above; and 
(2)  If retirant's death occurs before retirant has received in pension payments an aggregate amount equal to retirant's accumulated contributions standing to retirant's credit in the members savings fund at the time of retirant's retirement, the difference, if any, between retirant's said accumulated contributions and the said aggregate amount of pension payments received by retirant shall be paid to retirant's designated beneficiary, if living, otherwise to retirant's legal representative. 
(3)  In the event a retirant, who elected option B or C, provided in subsection (1) of this section, and retirant's beneficiary both die before they have received in pensions a total amount equal to the retirant's accumulated contributions standing to retirant's credit in the members savings fund at the time of retirant's retirement, the difference between retirant's said accumulated contributions and the said total amount of pension received by retirant and retirant's beneficiary shall be paid to such person or persons as the retirant shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board. If no such designated person survives the retirant and retirant's beneficiary such difference, if any, shall be paid to the estate of the survivor of the retirant and retirant's beneficiary. 
(4)  In no event shall any pension payable under the retirement system begin later than the later of: 
a.  April 1 of the year following the calendar year in which member attains age seventy and one-half (701/2) or 
b.  April 1 of the year following the year in which member retires or otherwise has a severance from employment. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-421. - Disability retirement. 
(a)  Upon the application of a member, or member's department head, a member who: 
(1)  Is in the employ of the city; and 
(2)  Has ten (10) or more years of credited service; and 
(3)  Becomes totally and permanently disabled for duty in the employ of the city, by reason of a personal injury or disease; 
may be retired by the board; provided that after a medical examination of the member, made by or under the direction of the medical director, the medical director certifies to the board: 
(1)  That the member is mentally or physically totally disabled for duty in the employ of the city; 
(2)  That member's disability will probably be permanent; and 
(3)  That the member should be retired; 
provided further, that the report of the medical director is concurred in by the board. Upon member's retirement the member shall receive a disability pension provided in section 2-422. 
(b)  The service requirement contained in subsection (a) of this section shall be waived in the case of a member whom the board finds to be totally and permanently disabled as the natural and proximate result of a personal injury or disease arising out of and in the course of member's actual performance of duty in the employ of the city, and is granted worker's compensation on account of member's total and permanent disability. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-422. - Disability pension. 
    Upon a member's retirement on account of disability, as provided in section 2- 421, a member shall receive a disability pension computed according to section 2-417, exclusive of subsection (b), if member is a covered member, or according to section 2-418 if member is a noncovered member. Member's disability pension, payable to member's attainment of age sixty-five (65) years: 
(1)  Shall in no case be less than twenty (20) percent of member's final average compensation; and 
(2)  Shall be subject to section 2-427. 
    Upon retirement a member may elect to receive member's pension under option A, B or C provided in section 2-420 in lieu of a straight life pension. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-423. - Duty disability-Recomputation of pension. 
    If a disability retirant is granted worker's compensation on account of retirant's disability arising out of and in the course of retirant's employment with the city, upon termination of disability retirant's worker's compensation period, retirant shall be given credited service for such period, and disability retirant's pension shall be recomputed to include such additional credited service. In no case shall disability retirant's recomputed disability pension, payable to disability retirant's attainment of age sixty-five (65) years, be less than the amount disability retirant was receiving in weekly worker's compensation, if, any, converted to an annual basis. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-424. - Member's non-duty death. 
(a)  Any member who continues in the employ of the city after the date member has ten (10) or more years of credited service, may, by written declaration duly executed and filed with the board, elect option B provided in section 2-420 and nominate a beneficiary whom the board finds to be dependent of the member, as defined by Code § 152. Prior to the date of member's retirement the member may revoke member's election of option B and nomination of beneficiary and member may again, prior to the date of member's retirement, elect the said option B and nominate a beneficiary as provided in this subsection. Upon the death of a member, who has an option B election in force, member's beneficiary, if living, shall immediately receive a pension computed in the same manner in all respects as if the member had retired the day preceding the date of member's death, notwithstanding that member might not have attained the member's applicable voluntary retirement age. The said option B shall be applied to a pension computed according to section 2-417 for a beneficiary of a covered member, and according to section 2-418 for a beneficiary of a noncovered member. If a member has an option B election in force at the time of member's retirement, member's said option election and nomination of beneficiary shall thereafter continue in force, unless prior to the date of member's retirement member elects to receive member's pension as a straight life pension or according to another option provided in section 2-420. No pension shall be paid under this subsection on account of the death of a member if any benefits, except children's pensions, are paid or payable under section 2-425 on account of member's death. 
(b)  Any member who continues in the employ of the city after the date member has ten (10) or more years of credited service and does not have an option B election in force as provided in subsection (a) of this section, and: 
(1)  Dies while in city employment; and 
(2)  Leaves a spouse whom the board finds to be a dependent of the member as defined by Code § 152; 
the spouse shall immediately receive a pension computed in the same manner in all respects as if the member had: 
(1)  Retired the day preceding the date of member's death, notwithstanding that member might not have attained member's applicable voluntary retirement age; 
(2)  Elected option B provided in section 2-420; and 
(3)  Nominated member's spouse as beneficiary. 
The said option B shall be applied to a pension computed according to section 2-417 for a beneficiary of a covered member, and according to section 2-418 for a beneficiary of a noncovered member. No pension shall be paid under this subsection on account of the death of a member if any benefits, except children's pensions, are paid or payable under section 2-425 on account of member's death. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-425. - Member's duty death. 
(a)  In the event: 
(1)  A member dies as a result of a personal injury or disease arising solely and exclusively out of and in the course of member's employment with the city; or 
(2)  A disability retirant who, while in receipt of worker's compensation on account of member's city service, dies prior to member's applicable voluntary retirement age as the result of the same injury or disease for which member was retired; 
and in either case (1) or (2) such death, injury or disease resulting in death, be found by the board to have been the result of member's actual performance of duty in the employ of the city, the applicable benefits provided in paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4) below shall be paid, subject to the condition that the beneficiary or beneficiaries eligible to receive a pension apply for and are granted worker's compensation on account of the death of the member or retirant. 
(1)  In the case of the death of a member, the accumulated contributions standing to member's credit in the members savings fund at the time of member's death shall be paid according to section 2-428; provided, that no pension becomes payable under section 2-424 on account of member's death. 
(2)  Spouse's pension. Member's spouse shall receive a pension equal to the spouse's weekly worker's compensation converted to an annual basis. The said pension shall begin upon termination of the spouse's worker's compensation period and shall terminate upon spouse's remarriage or death. 
(3)  Children's pension. Member's unmarried child or children under age eighteen (18) years shall each receive a pension equal to such child's weekly worker's compensation converted to an annual basis. A child's pension shall begin upon termination of the child's worker's compensation period and shall terminate upon child's adoption, marriage, attainment of age eighteen (18) years, or death, whichever occurs first. If the spouse's pension is terminated, as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, each such child's pension shall be increased by an equal share of the spouse's pension. 
(4)  Member's parents shall each receive a pension equal to such parent's weekly worker's compensation converted to an annual basis. A parent's pension shall begin upon termination of the parent's worker's compensation period and shall terminate upon such parent's remarriage or death. 
(b)  Should a claim be made for benefits to be paid under this section and section 2-420 or 2-424 on account of the death of a member or retirant the board shall have final power to decide under which section benefits are to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-426. - Subrogation. 
    In the event an individual becomes entitled to a pension payable from funds of the retirement system as the result of an accident or injury caused by the act of a third party, the city shall be subrogated to the rights of the said individual against such third party to the extent of benefits the city pays or becomes liable to pay. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-427. - Re-examination of disability retirants. 
(a)  At least once during the first five (5) years following the retirement of a member with a disability pension, and at least once in the five-year period thereafter, the board shall require any disability retirant, who has not attained the disability retirant's voluntary retirement age, to undergo a medical examination to be made by or under the direction of the medical director. Should the disability retirant refuse to submit to such medical examination in any such period the board may suspend payment of disability retirant's pension until disability retirant's withdrawal of such refusal. If such refusal continues for one (1) year the board may terminate disability retirant's pension. If, upon such medical examination of the retirant, the medical director reports to the board that the retirant is physically able and capable of resuming employment with the city retirant shall be returned to the employ of the city, if a position is available, and retirant's disability pension shall terminate; provided, that the report of the medical director is concurred in by the board. In returning a retirant to city service reasonable latitude shall be allowed the city in placing retirant in a position commensurate to retirant's type of work and rate of compensation at the time of retirant's retirement. 
(b)  A disability retirant who has been or shall be returned to the employ of the city, as provided in this section, shall again become a member of the retirement system. A disability retirant's credited service in force at the time of such disability retirant's retirement shall be restored to such disability retirant's credit. A disability retirant shall be given credited service for the period disability retirant was receiving a disability pension if within such period disability retirant was in receipt of worker's compensation on account of disability retirant's total and permanent disability arising out of and in the course of disability retirant's city employment; otherwise disability retirant shall not be given credited service for such period. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-427A. - Post-retirement benefit increase. 
    For a monthly benefit after December 31, 1976, beginning with January 1, which is at least twelve (12) full months after the effective date of the benefit, the amount of benefit shall be re-determined effective each January 1 and such re-determined benefit shall be payable for the ensuing year. Such re-determined amount shall be the amount of benefit otherwise payable multiplied by the following percent: One hundred (100) percent plus one and four-tenths (1.4) percent for each full year, to a maximum of ten (10) years, in the period from the effective date of the benefit to the current January 1. 
    The amount of benefit otherwise payable means the monthly amount of benefit which would be payable disregarding the provisions re-determining benefit amounts after retirement. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06)) 
Sec. 2-428. - Refund of member's accumulated contributions. 
(a)  Should any member, who has not satisfied the age and service requirements for retirement provided in section 2-415, cease to be employed by the city, for any reason except member's disability retirement, member shall be paid such member's accumulated contributions standing to member's credit in the members savings fund upon member's request in writing filed with the board. 
(b)  Upon the death of a member member's accumulated contributions standing to member's credit in the members savings fund at the time of member's death shall be paid to such person or persons as member shall have nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the board; provided that no pension becomes payable by the retirement system on account of member's death, except as provided in section 2-425. If no such designated person survives the member, or if member made no such nomination of beneficiary, member's said accumulated contributions shall be paid to member's estate. 
(c)  A former member, who has not satisfied vesting requirements but has thirty (30) or more months of credited service, may leave member's accumulated contributions in member's credit for provisions of the Reciprocal Retirement Act to be effective until the timely election of option of payment. If by April 1 of the calendar year in which the former member attains the age of seventy and one-half (701/2) there has been no election of option of payment, any balance standing to member's credit in member's savings fund shall be transferred to the income fund. 
(d)  Payment of accumulated contributions, as provided in this section, may be made in a single sum or in installments as the board shall determine. 
(e)  Code §401(a)(31) direct rollovers. A member may elect to have all or any portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement plan specified by the member in a direct rollover, which is a payment by the retirement system to the eligible retirement plan specified by the member. 
(1)  Eligible rollover distribution. An eligible rollover distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the refund of accumulated contributions paid to a member under this section, except that an eligible rollover distribution does not include: 
a.  Any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or life expectancy) of the member or for the joint lives (or joint life expectancies) of the member and the member's beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten (10) years or more; 
b.  Any distribution to the extent such distribution is required under code § 401(a)(9); 
c.  The portion of any distribution that is not includible in gross income (determined without regard to the exclusion for net unrealized appreciation on city securities); and 
d.  The portion of any distribution made on or after January 1, 2000 which is attributable to a hardship distribution described in code § 401(k)(2)(B)(i)(IV). 
(2)  Eligible retirement plan. An eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account described in code § 408(a), an individual retirement annuity described in code § 408(b), an annuity plan described in code § 403(a), or a qualified trust described in code § 401(a), that accepts the member's eligible rollover distribution. However, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse, an eligible retirement plan is an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-429. - Members savings fund. 
(a)  The members savings fund, formerly called annuity savings fund, shall be the fund in which shall be accumulated, at regular interest, the contributions deducted from the compensation of members, and from which shall be made refunds and transfers of accumulated contributions, as provided in this article. 
(b)  The contributions of a member shall be five (5) percent of the compensation paid member by the city prior to January 1, 1977 and six (6) percent of the compensation paid member by the city after December 31, 1976. 
(c)  The officer or officers responsible for preparing the payroll shall cause the contributions provided for in this section to be deducted from the compensation of each member on each and every payroll, for each and every payroll period, so long as member continues as a member of the retirement system. The members' contributions provided for herein shall be made notwithstanding that the minimum compensation provided by law for any member shall be changed thereby. Every member shall be deemed to consent and agree to the deductions made and provided for herein and payment of member's compensation less said deduction shall be a full and complete discharge and acquittance of all claims and demands whatsoever for the services rendered by the member during the period covered by such payment, except as to benefits provided by this article. The officer or officers responsible for preparing the payroll shall certify to the city treasurer the amount of contribution to be deducted from the compensation of each member for each calendar quarter. Each of said amounts shall be deducted by the city treasurer and shall be paid to the retirement system and shall be credited to the member's individual account in the members savings fund. 
(d)  In addition to the contributions deducted from the compensation of a member, as hereinbefore provided, the officer shall deposit in the members savings fund, by a single contribution or by an increased rate of contribution as approved by the board the amount, if any, member withdrew from the members savings fund, together with regular interest from the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment. In no case shall any member be given credit for service rendered prior to the date member withdrew member's accumulated contributions until member repays to the members savings fund all amounts due withdrawn by the member. 
(e)  Upon the retirement of any member, the members accumulated contributions shall be transferred from the member's savings fund to the retirement reserve fund. At the expiration of a period of three (3) years from the date an employee who has fewer than thirty (30) months of credited service ceases to be a member any balance standing to member's credit in the members savings fund, unclaimed by the member or member's legal representative, shall be transferred to the income fund. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-430. - Retirement reserve fund. 
    The retirement reserve fund shall be the fund from which shall be paid all pensions payable as provided in this article. Should a disability retirant return to the employ of the city, the pension reserve credited to the disability retirant, as of that time, shall be transferred from the retirement reserve fund to the members savings fund and pension reserve fund in the same proportion as disability retirant's pension reserve was originally transferred from the said funds to the retirement reserve fund. The amount transferred to the members savings fund shall be credited to disability retirant's individual account therein. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-431. - Pension reserve fund. 
(a)  The pension reserve fund shall be the fund to which shall be credited contributions made by the city to the retirement system, and from which shall be made transfers as provided in this section. Upon the basis of such mortality and other experience tables, and regular interest, as the board shall from time to time adopt, the actuary shall annually compute the pension reserves: 
(1)  For pensions being paid retirants and beneficiaries; and 
(2)  Covering service rendered and to be rendered by members. 
    The said pension reserves shall be financed by annual appropriations, to be made by the council, determined according to paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of this subsection. 
(1)  The city's annual appropriation for members' current service shall be a percent of their annual compensation which will be an amount which, if paid annually by the city during their future service, will be sufficient to provide the pension reserves at the time of their retirements for the city-financed portions of the pensions to be paid them based upon their future service; and 
(2)  The city's annual appropriation for members' accrued service shall be a percent of their annual compensations which will be an amount which, if paid annually by the city over a period of years to be determined by the board, will amortize at regular interest the unfunded pension reserves, if any, for the accrued service portions of the pensions to be paid them upon retirement; and 
(3)  The city's annual appropriations for pensions being paid retirants and beneficiaries shall be a percent of the annual compensations of members which will be an amount which, if paid annually by the city over a period of years to be determined by the board, will amortize at regular interest the unfunded pension reserves, if any, for pensions being paid retirants and beneficiaries. 
(b)  Upon the retirement of a member, or at the time of member's death, the difference between the pension reserve for the pension payable and member's accumulated contributions shall be transferred from the pension reserve fund to the retirement reserve fund. The board may from time to time transfer from the pension reserve fund to the retirement reserve fund such additional amounts as it determines to be necessary for the proper maintenance of the retirement reserve fund. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-432. - Expense fund. 
    The expense fund shall be the fund to which shall be credited all money provided by the city to pay the administration expense of the retirement system, and from which shall be paid all expenses necessary in connection with the administration of the retirement system. The board shall, annually, certify to the council, according to budget procedure, the amount of appropriation necessary to administer the retirement system during the ensuing fiscal year. The council shall appropriate such amount to the credit of the expense fund. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-433. - Investment of assets. 
(a)  The board shall be the trustees of the assets of the retirement system, which shall be invested in a trust. The trustees shall have full power to invest and reinvest such assets subject to the provisions of Act No. 314 of the Public Acts of 1965, as amended, and as it might from time to time be amended or replaced by successor acts. 
(b)  The board shall have full power to hold, purchase, sell, assign, transfer, and dispose of any investments in which any of the moneys of the retirement system have been invested as well as the proceeds of such investments and any moneys belonging to the system. There shall be kept on deposit available cash not exceeding five (5) percent of the total assets of the retirement system. The trustees shall ensure that all investments, amounts, property and rights held under the trust fund are held for the exclusive benefit of members and their beneficiaries. The trust fund shall be held in trust pursuant to the trust agreement for the exclusive benefit of members and their beneficiaries and defraying reasonable expenses of the retirement system and of the trust fund. It shall be impossible, prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities with respect to members and their beneficiaries, for any part of the assets and income of the trust fund to be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than for the exclusive benefit of participants and their beneficiaries. 
(c)  The description of the various funds of the retirement system shall be interpreted to refer to the accounting records of the retirement system and not to the segregation of assets in the funds of the retirement system. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-434. - Income fund; crediting of regular interest. 
(a)  The income fund shall be the fund to which shall be credited all regular interest, dividends and other income derived from investments of the retirement system, all gifts and bequests received by the system, all unclaimed accumulated contributions as provided in this article, and all other moneys received by the retirement system the disposition of which is not specifically provided in this article. There shall be transferred from the income fund all amounts required to credit regular interest to the members savings fund, retirement reserve fund and pension reserve fund, as provided in this article. Whenever the board determines the balance in the income fund is more than sufficient to cover current charges to the fund such excess, or any part thereof, may be used to provide contingency reserves or to meet special requirements of the other funds of the retirement system. Whenever the balance in the income fund is insufficient to meet the charges to the fund the amount of the insufficiency shall be transferred from the pension reserve fund to the income fund. A member's accumulated contributions transferred from the members savings fund to the income fund may be paid from the income fund upon claim for same approved by the board. 
(b)  The board shall, at the end of each fiscal year, allow and credit regular interest on the members' individual balances in the members savings fund, computed on the individual balances at the beginning of the fiscal year; and on the mean balances during the fiscal year in the pension reserve fund and retirement reserve fund. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-435. - Assignments prohibited. 
    The right of a person to a pension, to the return of accumulated contributions, the pension itself, any option benefit, any other right accrued or accruing to any person under the provisions of this article, and any moneys belonging to the retirement system shall not be subject to execution, garnishment, attachment, the operation of bankruptcy or insolvency law, or any other process of law whatsoever, and shall be unassignable, except as is specifically provided in this article. If a member is covered by a group insurance or prepayment plan participated in by the city, and should member be permitted to, and elect to, continue such coverage as a retirant, member may authorize the board to have deducted from member's pension the payments required of member to continue coverage under such group insurance or prepayment plan. The city shall have the right of set off for any claim arising from embezzlement by or fraud of a member, retirant or beneficiary. 
(Ord. No. 638, § 1, 9-15-03; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Sec. 2-436. - Amendment, termination and merger. 
(a)  Amendment of the retirement system. The city will have the right to amend the retirement system at any time subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  General requirements. Amendments (including a change in the actuarial basis for determining optional or early retirement benefits) must be in writing and cannot: 
a.  Increase the responsibilities of the city without written consent; 
b.  Deprive any member or beneficiary of retirement system benefits to which member is entitled; 
c.  Decrease the amount of any member's accrued benefit except as permitted under code § 412(c)(8); 
d.  Permit any part of the trust fund to be used for or diverted to purposes other than the exclusive benefit of the members or their beneficiaries except as required to pay taxes and administration expenses, or cause or permit any portion of the trust fund to revert to or become the property of the city; or 
e.  Eliminate or reduce a retirement-type subsidy, or an early retirement benefit, or an optional form of benefit with respect to benefits attributable to service before the amendment. 
In the case of a retirement-type subsidy, this provision will apply only to a member who satisfies the pre-amendment conditions for the subsidy either before or after the amendment. In general, a retirement-type subsidy is a subsidy that continues after retirement, but does not include a qualified disability benefit, a medical benefit, a social security supplement, or a death benefit (including life insurance). 
(2)  Certain corrective amendments. To satisfy the minimum coverage requirements of code § 410(b), the nondiscriminatory amount requirement of regulation § 1.401(a)(4)-1(b)(2), or the nondiscriminatory plan amendment requirement of regulation § 1.401(a)(4)-1(b)(4), a corrective amendment may retroactively increase accrued benefits for members who benefited under the retirement system during the plan year being corrected, or may grant accrued benefits to members who did not benefit under the retirement system during the plan year being corrected. To satisfy the nondiscriminatory current availability requirement of regulation § 1.401(a)(4)-4(b) for benefits, rights or features, a corrective amendment may make a benefit, right or feature available to members to whom it was previously not available. A corrective amendment will not be effective prior to the date of adoption unless it satisfies the applicable requirements of regulation § 1.401(a)(4)-11(g)(3)(ii) through (vii), including the requirement that, in order to be effective for the preceding plan year, such amendment must be adopted by the fifteenth day of the tenth month after the close of the preceding plan year. 
(b)  Termination of retirement system by city. The city at any time can terminate the retirement system and trust fund in whole or in part in accordance with, and subject to, the following provisions: 
(1)  Termination of retirement system. The city can terminate the retirement system and trust fund by filing written notice of any such termination with the city. If required by law, such written notice will be provided at least sixty (60) days (or any other period as may be required by law or regulation) prior to the date of termination. 
(2)  Vesting requirement. Upon complete termination of the retirement system, all members will have a one hundred (100) percent vested interest in member's unpaid accrued benefit to the date of complete termination. 
(3)  Continued administration of retirement system pending distribution. Upon complete termination of the retirement system the city will continue to administer the retirement system until distribution has been made to the members (which distribution must occur within a reasonable time after the termination of the retirement system) with full settlement of all such benefits made by lump sum payments of the actuarial equivalent of benefits and/or through the purchase of a group annuity contract or individual annuity contracts to the extent of trust fund assets. 
(4)  Allocation of trust fund assets to members, spouses and beneficiaries. If the retirement system is terminated, the trust fund will be allocated on the basis of the costs of benefits due covered members and noncovered members as referenced in sections 2-417 and 2-418. 
(c)  Retirement system merger or consolidation. The retirement system and trust fund may not be merged or consolidated with, nor may any of its assets or liabilities be transferred to, any other plan, unless the benefits payable to each member if the retirement system was terminated immediately after such merger, consolidation or transfer would be equal to or greater than the benefits to which such member would have been entitled if this retirement system had been terminated immediately before such merger, consolidation or transfer. 
(Ord. No. 671, § 1, 1-17-06) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Disorderly intoxication, § 19-109; possession and consumption of alcoholic liquor in parks, § 21-2. 
State Law reference- Liquor control act, MCL 436.1 et seq., MSA 18.971 et seq. 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
    The meaning of "alcoholic liquor" and "license," when used in this chapter, shall be as defined in Act No. 8 of the Public Acts of Michigan, 1933 Extra Session (MCL 436.1 et seq., MSA 18.971 et seq.) 
(Code 1977, § 9.171) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 3-2. - Consumption in public. 
(a)  Except as provided in paragraph (c) below, no alcoholic liquor shall be consumed on the public streets, alleys, parks, or in any other public places, including any store or establishment doing business with the public not licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises; nor shall any one who owns, operates or controls any such public establishment or store permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor therein. 
(b)  Except as provided in paragraph (c) below, no person shall have in his or her possession any open bottle, open cans or other open containers, containing alcoholic beverages, on a public street, alley, park, or in any other public place. 
(c)  Exceptions: 
(1)  Notwithstanding contrary provisions of this section, and with the approval of the city council, alcoholic liquor may be consumed on the public streets and alleys immediately adjacent to business establishments licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in areas of the public streets and alleys for which an occupancy permit has been issued by the city engineer pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 29 of this Code. 
(2)  Notwithstanding contrary provisions of this section, and with the approval of the city council, beer and wine may be sold and consumed on the public streets, alleys, and public parking lots for events sponsored by a not-for-profit organization holding the required Michigan liquor license or permit within a fenced-in area. 
(3)  Within Curwood Castle Park, public events where wine and beer may be sampled and sold by a winery or brewery under a Michigan license or permit. During public or private events within the arts center and Curwood Castle and a fenced-in area immediately adjacent to either structure, liquor, wine and beer may be dispensed, provided that three (3) days prior to the event the city clerk shall be provided a certificate of liability insurance with a limit of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), including "host liquor liability" coverage for alcoholic beverages served at no charge. Either "host liquor liability" or "liquor liability insurance" must include the City of Owosso as an additional insured for primary and non-contributory limits of liability. 
(Code 1977, § 9.172; Ord. No. 537, § 1, 7-5-95; Ord. No. 785, § 1, 7-17-17) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 29. 
State Law reference- Consumption of liquor on public highways or in parts and places of amusement, MCL 436.34, MSA 18.1005. 
Sec. 3-3. - Sales restricted. 
    No licensee, by himself or herself, or another, shall sell, furnish, give or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any person: 
(1)  Who is so intoxicated as not to be in control of all his or her facilities; 
(2)  On any day during the hours not permitted by state law or the state liquor control commission. 
(Code 1977, § 9.173) 
State Law reference- Sale of alcoholic liquor to intoxicated person, MCL 436.29, MSA 18.1000; hours and days of sale, MCL 436.19E, MSA 18.990(5). 
Sec. 3-4. - Bars; rules of conduct. 
    No licensee shall permit on licensed premises: 
(1)  Spirits to be consumed if licensed to sell only beer or wine or both; 
(2)  Any disorderly conduct or action which disturbs the peace and good order of the neighborhood; 
(3)  Any resorting of thieves, prostitutes or other disorderly persons; 
(4)  Any gambling, or the placing or using of any gambling apparatus or paraphernalia therein; 
(5)  Any lewd or obscene exhibition or entertainment. 
(Code 1977, § 9.174) 
Sec. 3-5. - Purchases by minors. 
    No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall at any time purchase, obtain, consume, or bring into any premises within the city, for which a license has been issued to sell intoxicating liquor on the premises, any alcoholic liquor as defined by this chapter. Nor shall any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years, make any false representations as to the age of the person for whom said alcoholic liquor is desired. Nor shall any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years furnish any false information regarding his or her age or make any false representations as to his or her age to any law enforcement officer, or to any person in charge of or employed in a place of business where alcoholic liquor is sold, for the purpose of obtaining a sale of any alcoholic liquor to himself or herself; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prohibit the purchase of alcoholic liquor by a minor under authority of and pursuant to a prescription of a duly licensed physician. 
(Code 1977, § 9.175; Ord. No. 493, 8-3-92) 
Sec. 3-6. - Underage purchase, consumption or possession. 
    A person less than twenty-one (21) years of age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, or possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, except as provided in this section and section 3-10. A person less than twenty-one (21) years of age who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the following civil fines and sanctions: 
(a)  For the first violation of a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and may be ordered to perform community service and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense. 
(b)  For a second violation a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), and may be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in section 6107 of the public health code, Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, being section 333.6107 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense. The person is also subject to sanctions against his or her operator's or chauffeur's license imposed by state law. 
(c)  For a third or subsequent violation, a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and may be ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention or substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services as defined in section 6107 of Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense. The person is also subject to sanctions against his or her operator's or chauffeur's license imposed by state law. 
(d)  A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a person less than twenty-one (21) years of age has consumed alcoholic liquor may require the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. A legal presumption shall be made by the court that the person less than twenty-one (21) years of age has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor if a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test indicates the person's blood contained two-tenths (0.2) percent or more by weight of alcohol. A person less than twenty-one (21) years of age who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath test analysis as required in this subsection is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1977, § 9.175A; Ord. No. 550, § 1, 12-18-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 436.33b, MSA 18.1004(2). 
Sec. 3-7. - Underage sale. 
    No person, either directly or indirectly, by himself, his or her clerk, agent, servant, or employee, shall at any time sell, furnish, give or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any person unless such person shall have attained the age of twenty-one (21) years; nor shall any person, either directly or indirectly by himself, his or her clerk, agent, servant or employee, at any time, sell, furnish, give or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any person who is so intoxicated as not to be in control of all his faculties; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prohibit the sale of alcoholic liquor to a minor upon authority of and pursuant to a prescription of a duly licensed physician. 
(Code 1977, § 9.175B; Ord. No. 492, 8-3-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 436.33, MSA 18.1004. 
Sec. 3-8. - False representations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to falsely represent himself or herself to be twenty-one (21) years of age or over and thereby procure or attempt to procure the sale or furnishing to himself or herself of any alcoholic liquor, or for any person to make false representations as to the age of another and thereby procure or attempt to procure the sale or furnishing to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years of any alcoholic liquor. 
(Code 1977, § 9.176) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 436.33b, (3); MSA 18.1004(2), (3). 
Sec. 3-9. - Right to demand proof of age. 
    The person in charge of any beer garden, tavern, restaurant, store or place where alcoholic liquor is sold or furnished for consumption, either on or away from the premises, shall have the right at any time to demand of any person offering to buy, buying, obtaining or drinking any alcoholic liquor in such establishment who may appear to him or her to be under the age of twenty-one (21), proof of age and identity, and on failure of such person to produce the same, shall refuse to serve, sell and furnish such person with any alcoholic liquor and may exclude such person from such place of business. It shall be unlawful for any such person to refuse to leave such place of business. 
(Code 1977, § 9.177) 
State Law reference- Proof of age defensive evidence in prosecution, MCL 436.33, (2); MSA 18.1004, (2). 
Sec. 3-10. - Possessing or transporting alcoholic liquor by an underage person. 
    No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall possess or transport any alcoholic liquor, nor shall any person less than twenty-one (21) years of age knowingly possess, transport, or have under the person's control in any motor vehicle any alcoholic liquor unless the person is employed by a duly licensed dealer in alcoholic liquors or beverages under the state laws and is possessing, transporting, or having the alcoholic liquor in a motor vehicle under the person's control during regular working hours and in the course of a person's employment. 
(Code 1977, § 9.178) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 436.33a, (1); MSA 18.1004(1), (1). 
Sec. 3-11. - Transporting open containers. 
    It shall be unlawful to transport in the passenger compartment of any motor vehicle any open bottles, cans or other containers containing any alcoholic beverage. Bottles of spirits containing alcoholic in excess of sixteen (16) percent by volume shall be deemed to be open if the state seal is broken. 
(Code 1977, § 9.179) 
Sec. 3-12. - Renewal and revocation of licenses. 
(a)  The city manager shall cause an annual review of each alcoholic beverage license for on-premises consumption. All applicants and licensees should be aware that, once a license is received, compliance with all state and city regulations is necessary and that failure of such compliance can result in the council requesting the state liquor control commission not to renew the license. 
(b)  It is recognized that the locations and establishments of tavern licensees lawfully existing in the city on January 29, 1973 may not conform to all of its present or future standards. It is not the general intent of this section to now require conformance and the council may waive such requirements as would be impossible, impractical or which would cause undue hardship. 
(c)  The city manager shall, at least sixty (60) days before a license is due for renewal, inform the licensee of the city manager's intent to recommend to the council that the city should or should not file an objection with the state liquor control commission, and if an objection is to be recommended by the council, what corrective action the licensee must take to be subject for approval. In no way will recommended action by the city manager be considered as approval by the council. 
(Code 1977, § 9.180(5)) 
State Law reference- State licenses, MCL 436.17 et seq., MSA 18.988 et seq. 
Chapter 4 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Crimes relating to public exhibitions and entertainment, MCL 750.463 et seq., MSA 21.718 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1-4-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POOLROOMS AND CARD ROOMS (RESERVED)[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 544, § 1, adopted September 5, 1995, repealed §§ 4-16-4-33 in their entirety. Former §§ 4-16-4-33 pertained to poolrooms and card rooms, and derived from the Code of 1977, §§ 7.221-7.223. 

Secs. 4-16-4-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ROLLER SKATING RINKS (RESERVED)[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 545, § 1, adopted September 5, 1995, repealed §§ 4-66, 4-67. Former §§ 4-66 and 4-67 pertained to roller skating rink licenses, and derived from the Code of 1977, § 7.241. 

Secs. 4-51-4-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - THEATERS, SHOWS AND EXHIBITIONS (RESERVED)[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 546, § 1, adopted September 5, 1995, repealed §§ 4-96-4-98. Former §§ 4-96-4-98 pertained to licenses for theaters, shows, and exhibitions, and derived from the Code of 1977, §§ 7.201-7.203. 

Secs. 4-81-4-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC DANCES (RESERVED)[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 547, § 1, adopted September 5, 1995, repealed §§ 4-116-4-133, Former §§ 4-116-4-133 pertained to public dances and derived from the Code of 1977, §§ 7.231-7.233, and 7.235. 

Secs. 4-116-4-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MECHANICAL AND ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES (Reserved)[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 558, § 1, adopted September 16, 1996, repealed former Art. VI, §§ 4-151-4-155 and 4-171-4-179, in its entirety. Former Art. VI derived from Ord. No. 404, adopted March 14, 1983. 
State Law reference- Offenses concerning coin-operated devices, MCL 752.811, MSA 28.643(101). 

Secs. 4-151-4-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS LICENSING[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 573, § 1, adopted November 2, 1998, amended the Code by amending Art. VII in its entirety to read as herein set out; therefore, the editor has treated said ordinance as repealing former Art. VII, §§ 4-191-4-194 and 4-206-4-212, and adding a new Art. VII, §§ 4-191-4-201. Former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter, and carried no history note. 
Cross reference- Licensing generally, Ch. 16. 

Sec. 4-191. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall mean: 
    Adult bookstore. An establishment that has a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade and offers for sale, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: a) books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, movies, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations that are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or b) instruments, devices or paraphernalia designated for use as part of, or in connection with, specified sexual activities. 
    Adult cabaret. Any place which features one or more topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, wait staff or other persons any of whom reveal or show specific anatomical areas of their bodies or who engage in, perform or simulate specified sexual activities. 
    Adult motion picture theater. An establishment, where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videos, slides, or other photographic reproductions are shown and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation is devoted to the showing of material characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
    Specified anatomical areas. Specified anatomical areas means and includes any one (1) or more of the following: a) Less than completely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or b) Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities. Specified sexual activities means and includes any one (1) or more of the following: a) The fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; b) Human sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including but not limited to intercourse, oral copulation, and sodomy; c) Human masturbation, actual or simulated; d) Human excretory functions as part of, or as related to, any of the activities described above; and e) Physical violence, bondage, mutilation, or rape, actual or simulated, as part of or as related to, any of the activities described above. 
    Substantial portion. Substantial portion means a use or activity accounting for more than twenty (20) percent of any one or more of the following: Stock-in-trade, display space, usable floor area, or viewing time, movie display time, or entertainment time measured per month. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 11-2-98) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 4-192. - License. 
(a)  From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derived, no adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or adult cabaret hereinafter referred to as adult entertainment establishments, shall be operated or maintained in the city without first obtaining a license to operate issued by the city. 
(b)  A license may be issued only for one (1) adult entertainment establishment located at a fixed and certain place. Any person, partnership, or corporation which desires to operate more than one (1) adult entertainment establishment must have a license for each. 
(c)  No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any person, partnership, or corporation. 
(d)  Exclusions. All private schools and public schools located within the city are exempt from obtaining a license hereunder when instructing pupils in sex education as part of its curriculum or when instructing students at Baker College as part of its curriculum. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 11-2-98) 
Sec. 4-193. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company or corporation desiring to secure a license shall make application to the city clerk. The application shall be dated by the city clerk. A copy of the application shall be distributed promptly by the city clerk to the city police department and to the applicant. 
(b)  The application for a license shall be a form provided by the city clerk. An applicant for a license, which shall include all partners or limited partners of a partnership applicant, and all officers and directors of a corporate applicant and all stockholders owning more than five (5) percent of the stock in a corporate applicant, any members and managers of a joint venture or limited liability company, or any other person who is interested directly in the ownership or operations of the business, shall furnish the following information under oath: 
(1)  Name and address, including all aliases. 
(2)  Date of birth. 
(3)  Social Security number. 
(4)  Michigan vehicle operator's license number. 
(5)  Written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(6)  All residential addresses of the applicant for the past three (3) years. 
(7)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair. 
(8)  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(9)  Whether the applicant previously operated in this or any other county, city, or state under an adult entertainment establishment license or similar business license; whether the applicant has ever had such a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business entity or trade name under which the applicant operated that was subject to the suspension or revocation. 
(10)  All criminal statute, whether federal or state, or city ordinance violation convictions, forfeiture of bond or pleadings of nolo contendere on all criminal charges, except minor traffic violations. 
(11)  Fingerprints and (2) portrait photographs at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches of the applicant. 
(12)  The address of the adult entertainment establishment to be operated by the applicant. 
(13)  If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify the name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the name and address of the registered agent and the name and address of all shareholders owning more than five (5) percent of the stock in said corporation and all officers and directors of the corporation. 
(14)  If the applicant is a limited liability company, the application shall specify the name of the company, the date and state of formation of the company, the name and address of the resident agent and the names and addresses of all members owning more than five (5) percent interest in the company and all managers. 
(c)  Within thirty-five (35) days of receiving an application for a license the city clerk shall notify the applicant whether application is granted or denied. 
(d)  Whenever an application is denied, the city clerk shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for such action. If the applicant requests a hearing within ten (10) days of receipt of notification of denial, a public hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days thereafter before the council, as hereinafter provided. 
(e)  Failure or refusal of the applicant to give any information relevant to the investigation of the application or his or her refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination under oath regarding said application or his or her refusal to submit to or cooperate with any investigation required by this article shall constitute an admission by the applicant that he or she is ineligible for such license and shall be grounds for denial thereof by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 11-2-98) 
Sec. 4-194. - Standards for issuance of license. 
(a)  To receive a license to operate an adult entertainment establishment, an applicant must meet the following standards: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual: 
a.  The applicant shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
b.  The applicant shall not have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
c.  The applicant shall not have been found to have previously violated this article or a substantially similar ordinance within one (1) year immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(2)  If the applicant is a corporation: 
a.  All officers, directors and stockholders required to be named under section 4-193(b) shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
b.  No officer, director or stockholder required to be named under section 4-193(b) shall have been convicted or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
c.  No officer, director or stockholder required to be named under section 4-193(b) shall not have been found to have previously violated this article or a substantially similar ordinance within one (1) year immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(3)  If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture, limited liability company or any other type of organization where two (2) or more persons have a financial interest: 
a.  All persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture, limited liability company or other type organization shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
b.  No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture, limited liability company or other type organization shall have been convicted or pleaded nolo contendere to a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in any jurisdiction within ten (10) years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
c.  No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint venture, limited liability company or other type organization shall not have been found to have previously violated this article or a substantially similar ordinance within one (1) year immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(b)  No license shall be issued unless the city police department has investigated the applicant's qualifications to be licensed. The results of that investigation shall be filed in writing with the city clerk no later than twenty-eight (28) days after the date of the application. An inspection shall include: 
(1)  An inspection of the premises to determine whether the operations conducted by the applicant and the general condition of the premises, both interior and exterior, are in compliance with all applicable city and state statutes and regulations; 
(2)  An inspection of the premises to determine that the applicant is in compliance with any existing licenses, its approved site plan and plan of operation. 
(3)  An inspection of the city's records to determine whether all taxes and other monies due the city are timely paid; and 
(4)  An inspection of police files or other sources of information to determine whether any activity in connection with the licensed premises is in violation of the law, disturbs the public peace and tranquility or contributes to the disruption of the normal activities of those in the neighborhood of the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 11-2-98) 
Sec. 4-195. - Fees. 
    A license fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be submitted with the application for a license. If the application is denied, one-half (1/2) of the fee shall be returned. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 11-2-98) 
Sec. 4-196. - Display of license or permit. 
    The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 11-2-98) 
Sec. 4-197. - Renewal of license or permit. 
(a)  Every license issued pursuant to this article will terminate at the expiration of one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless sooner revoked, and must be renewed before operation is allowed in the following year. Any operator desiring to renew a license shall make application to the city clerk. The application for renewal must be filed not later than sixty (60) days before the license expires. The application for renewal shall be filed in triplicate with and dated by the city clerk. A copy of the application for renewal shall be distributed promptly by the city clerk to the city police department and to the business operator. The application for renewal shall be upon a form provided by the city clerk and shall contain such information and data, given under oath or affirmation, as is required for an application for a new license. 
(b)  A license renewal fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be submitted with the application for renewal. In addition to the renewal fee, a late penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed against the applicant who files for a renewal less than sixty (60) days before the license expires. If the application is denied, one-half (1/2) of the total fees collected shall be returned. 
(c)  If the city police department is aware of any information bearing on the operator's qualifications, that information shall be filed in writing with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 11-2-98) 
Sec. 4-198. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
(a)  The city can revoke or suspend a license or permit for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on any application or material facts were omitted from any application. 
(2)  The operator or any employee of the operator has violated any provision of this article or any other ordinance of the city or any rule or regulation adopted by the city council pursuant to this article; provided however, that in the case of a first offense by an operator where the conduct was solely that of an employee, the penalty shall not exceed a suspension of thirty (30) days if the council shall find that the operator had no actual or constructive knowledge of such violation and could not by the exercise of due diligence have had such actual or constructive knowledge. 
(3)  The operator becomes ineligible to obtain any required license or permit or the operator is convicted of, or pleads nolo contendere to, any felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature. 
(4)  Any intoxicating liquor or cereal malt beverage is served or consumed on the premises of the adult entertainment establishment, unless the establishment is properly licensed. 
(5)  Maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection with the licensed premises, including but not limited to any of the following: 
a.  Existing violations of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, zoning, health, fire or other applicable regulatory codes; 
b.  A pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of the licensed premises which is in violation of the law and/or disturbs the peace, order, and tranquility of the neighborhood; 
c.  Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed premises, including litter, debris, or refuse blowing or being deposited upon adjoining premises; 
d.  Entertainment on the licensed premises without a permit and/or entertainment which disturbs the peace, order and tranquility in the neighborhood of the licensed premises; 
e.  Any advertising, promotion or activity in connection with the licensed premises which by its nature causes, creates or contributes to disorder, disobedience to rules, ordinances or laws, or contributes to the disruption of normal activity of those in the neighborhood of the licensed premises; 
(6)  The failure to permit the inspection of the licensed premises by the city's agents or employees in connection with the enforcement of city code; 
(7)  The failure to comply with the terms of its liquor license or any conditions imposed by the city council or the liquor control commission at the time of issuance or transfer of the licenses; 
(8)  The failure to comply with all standards and plans established and approved by the city council at the time of original approval or transfer of the license. 
(9)  The failure to timely pay its taxes or other monies due the city. 
(b)  The council, before revoking or suspending any license or permit shall give the operator at least ten (10) days written notice of the charges against him, and the opportunity for a public hearing before the city council, as hereinafter provided. 
(1)  Before the city council revokes or suspends a license issued herein the city council shall cause written notice to be sent by certified mail to the licensee or applicant affected, at the address stated in the license or application informing such person of the right to a hearing upon request. 
(2)  If the licensee does not request a hearing within fourteen (14) days of the date the notice was sent, the license may be forthwith revoked or suspended. If the licensee requests a hearing before the city council regarding said proposed revocation or suspension, said hearing shall be held within twenty-one (21) days after the date of the written request. 
(3)  Both the city and the licensee shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to present evidence on the issue at the hearing. Action taken by the city council shall be final and any fees hereunder shall not be refunded to the applicant or licensee. 
(c)  Any license issued by the city may be immediately suspended by the city manager or duly appointed city official if it is determined that the licensee has violated or someone at or upon the licensed location has violated a city ordinance or state law and that continued operation under the license is contrary to the public health, safety, and welfare. A licensee shall have the right to a hearing before the city council on any license suspension by the city manager and notice thereof shall be given in accordance with paragraphs 4-198(b)(1) and (2). 
(d)  The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically and immediately revoke the license. 
(e)  Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive a license for one (1) year from the date of revocation. No location or premises for which a license has been issued shall be used as an adult entertainment establishment for six (6) months from the date of revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 11-2-98) 
Sec. 4-199. - Physical layout of adult entertainment establishment. 
    Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers, patrons or members, any booth, room or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment shall be located on the first floor of the building and must comply with the following requirements. 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the adult entertainment establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any door, lock or other control-type devices. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Have at least one (1) side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six (6) feet and be light colored, non-absorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, non-absorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle, when not in use shall be a minimum of ten (10) foot candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one (1) individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 11-2-98) 
Sec. 4-200. - Responsibilities of the operator. 
(a)  The operator shall maintain a register of all employees, showing the name and aliases used by the employee, home address, age, date of birth, sex, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, phone numbers, social security numbers, date of employment and termination, and duties of each employee. The above information on each employee shall be maintained in the register on the premises for a period of three (3) years following termination. 
(b)  Daily hours of operation of any adult entertainment establishment shall be limited to the period of time from 8.00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. 
(c)  The operator shall make the register of employees available immediately for inspection by police upon demand of a member of the city police department at all reasonable times. 
(d)  No merchandise or pictures of the products or entertainment on the premises shall be displayed in window areas or any areas where they can be viewed from a public sidewalk adjacent to the establishment. 
(e)  No employee or patron under 18 years of age shall be allowed on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary manner at all times and in compliance with all applicable codes. 
(g)  Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or caused the omission. 
(h)  Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed. 
(i)  No employee of an adult entertainment establishment shall allow any minor to loiter around or to frequent an adult entertainment establishment or to allow any minor to view adult entertainment as defined herein. 
(j)  The operator shall maintain at least ten (10) foot candles of light to the public portions of the establishment, including aisle, at all times measured from the floor. However, if a lesser level of illumination in the aisle shall be necessary to enable a patron to view the adult entertainment in a booth, room or cubicle adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be maintained in such aisle, provided, however, at no time shall there be less than one (1) foot candle of illumination in said aisle, as measured from the floor. 
(k)  The operator shall insure compliance of the establishment and its patrons with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 11-2-98) 
Sec. 4-201. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person convicted under this chapter shall be subject to a maximum penalty of ninety (90) days in jail, or an equal amount of time of community service, or any combination thereof not exceeding ninety (90) days, plus five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine, plus actual costs of prosecution, plus mandatory restitution to victims. 
(b)  Continuing violations. In addition to the penalty provided in division (a) of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of the provisions of this code, or any ordinance, shall be deemed a new and separate offense for each day that such condition continues to exist. 
(Ord. No. 573, § 1, 11-2-98) 
Sec. 4-202. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- As directed by the city, § 4-202 has been removed. Former § 4-202 pertained to expiration and derived from Ord. No. 573, adopted Nov. 2, 1998; and Ord. No. 620, adopted Nov. 18, 2002. 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Unlawful noise from animals and birds, § 18-92. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt animal control ordinance, MCL 287.290; crimes relating to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Cruelty to animals. 
    No person shall cruelly treat or abuse any animal or bird in this city. Cruel and abusive treatment shall include but not be confined to inhumanely beating, not adequately feeding, and adequately watering, abandoning, or confining in an area not sufficient to allow the animal adequate exercise. 
(Code 1977, § 9.121) 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, MCL 752.21 et seq., MSA 28.161 et seq. 
Sec. 5-2. - Poisoning animals. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any poisonous substance on any exposed public or private place where it endangers, or is likely to endanger, any animal or bird. 
(Code 1977, § 9.122) 
State Law reference- Malicious poisoning of animals, MCL 750.377, MSA 28.609; exposing poisonous substances where liable to be eaten by animals, MCL 750.437, MSA 28.692. 
Sec. 5-3. - Birds and birds' nests. 
    No person, except a police officer acting in his or her official capacity, shall molest, injure, kill or capture any wild bird, or molest or disturb any wild bird's nest or the contents thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 9.123) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 312.10, (1)(e), MSA 13.1339, (1)(e). 
Sec. 5-4. - Domestic animals and fowl. 
    No person shall keep or house any animal or domestic fowl within the city except dogs, cats, canaries or other animals commonly classified as pets which are customarily kept or housed inside dwellings as household pets. No person or family or household shall keep more than three (3) adult cats and/or dogs at or in any residence within the city. For purposes of this section a cat or dog is deemed to be an adult upon becoming ten (10) weeks old. 
(Code 1977, § 9.124) 
Sec. 5-5. - Homing pigeons. 
    Section 5-4 to the contrary notwithstanding, it shall be lawful for any member of a recognized national pigeon association, which supplies pigeons to the United States Armed Forces in time of emergency to keep, house and allow to fly for exercise within the corporate limits, homing or racing pigeons which are suitable and of the type used as messengers in time of war and in civil defense and which are banded with numbered leg bands showing the same to be registered with such associations, providing such pigeons are not kept so as to constitute a nuisance or create a hazard to public health. 
(Code 1977, § 9.125) 
Sec. 5-6. - Baby chicks, ducklings, and rabbits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale, barter or give-away baby chicks, rabbits, ducklings, or other fowl as pets or novelties, whether or not dyed, colored or otherwise artificially treated. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the display or sale of natural chicks or ducklings in proper brooder facilities by hatcheries or stores engaged in the business of selling same to be raised for commercial purposes. 
(Code 1977, § 9.126) 
State Law reference- Baby chicks, MCL 287.161 et seq., MSA 12.471 et seq.; sale of dyed baby chicks, rabbits, ducklings, MCL 752.91 et seq., MSA 12.482(1) et seq. 
Secs. 5-7-5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dog law, MCL 287.261 et seq., MSA 12.511 et seq. 

Sec. 5-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dog exercise areas are city designated fence enclosed facilities owned or operated by the city specifically intended for dogs to acquire owner/custodian supervised "off leash" exercise. 
    Dog pound or pound means any facility used by the county dog warden for the confinement or care of animals within the county. 
    Owner, when applied to the proprietorship of a dog, shall include every person having a right of property in such dog, and every person who keeps or harbors such dog or has it in his or her care, and every person who permits such dog to remain in or about any premises occupied by him or her. 
    Reasonable control shall mean keeping the dog on a leash other than while upon owner's property, unless the dog is confined in a closed automobile or shipping receptacle. 
(Code 1977, § 9.141; Ord. No. 718, § 1, 11-1-10) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 5-27. - Running at large. 
    No person owning any dog, four (4) months of age or over, shall permit such dog to be at large at any time in the city in violation of any of the following restrictions: 
(1)  No person shall permit any vicious dog of which he or she is the owner to be unconfined unless securely muzzled and led by a leash. Any dog shall be deemed vicious which has bitten a person or domestic animal without molestation, or, which, by its actions gives indication that it is liable to bite any person or domestic animal without molestation. 
(2)  No person who is in the ownership of any female dog shall permit or allow such female dog to go beyond the premises of such owner when the dog is in heat. 
(3)  No person who is the owner of any dog shall permit it to be unconfined unless under the reasonable control of some person. 
(4)  No person who is the owner of any dog shall permit it to be unconfined at any time unless licensed as required by law and unless wearing its license tag and evidence of rabies immunization. 
(Code 1977, § 9.142(1-4)) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 29. 
Sec. 5-28. - Noise restriction. 
    No person shall own any dog which by loud or frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling, shall unreasonably annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in the vicinity. 
(Code 1977, § 9.142(5); Ord. No. 679, § 1, 9-5-06) 
Cross reference- Noise control generally, § 18-86 et seq. 
Sec. 5-29. - Seizure, impoundment. 
    Any dog which is in violation of any section of this article may be seized and impounded by the dog warden or any police officer of the city, or authorized city employee. 
(Code 1977, § 9.143) 
Sec. 5-30. - Rabies control. 
(a)  Surrender for observation. Any person who shall have in his or her possession a dog which has contracted rabies or which has been subjected to the same or which is suspected of having rabies or which has bitten any person, shall upon demand of the dog warden, the police department or the health officer, produce and surrender up such dog to be held for observation. 
(b)  Exposure to rabies; notice. It shall be the duty of any person owning or harboring a dog which has been attacked or bitten by another dog or other animal showing the symptoms of rabies, immediately to notify the police department of his or her possession of such dog. 
(c)  Quarantine order. Any dog that has bitten a person or animal will be quarantined for a period of ten (10) days. The owner, or his or her representative, will receive a quarantine order and such animal will be kept securely confined within a building or enclosure so as to prevent it from coming into contact with any other person or any other animal. It shall not be removed for any reason, during this period, without permission. Failure to comply with this order may result in immediate impoundment at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9.144-9.146) 
State Law reference- Rules for control of rabies and the disposition of nonhuman agents carrying disease, including rabid animals, MCL 333.5111, MSA 14.15(5111). 
Sec. 5-31. - Released from pound. 
    No dog shall be released from the pound unless the owner or persons entitled to claim the same shall pay the fees established by the county dog department. If the dog was impounded by any police officer or other authorized employee of the city, the owner shall pay the additional sum to the city to reimburse for said expense as prescribed by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1977, § 9.147) 
Sec. 5-32. - Responsibility for animal wastes. 
    No person shall keep a dog on leash or maintain a stationary dog house or kennel within sixty (60) feet of a neighboring residence. No person shall allow animal waste to accumulate for more than forty-eight (48) hours on the ground in the open air. No person walking a dog shall knowingly allow it to deposit its feces on property not belonging to that person, and shall clean up after said dog in case such incident does occur. 
(Code 1977, § 9.148) 
Sec. 5-33. - Dog exercise area. 
    The provisions of this subsection are applicable to all dog exercise areas which are to be used exclusively by dogs. It is prohibited to allow any other type of animal, wild, or domestic, into a dog exercise area. 
(1)  All dogs must be leashed in the dog exercise area parking lot. 
(2)  Any person bringing a dog or dogs to the dog exercise area must have one (1) leash per dog. 
(3)  There shall be no more than three (3) dogs per person allowed in the dog exercise area. Any person bringing a dog or dogs to the dog exercise area must have at least one (1) dog feces waste bag per dog in his or her possession and must remove any feces deposited by the dog(s) in their care. 
(4)  Persons under sixteen (16) years of age visiting the dog exercise area must be accompanied and supervised by a parent or guardian or other responsible adult with permission of the parent or guardian. 
(5)  No persons under sixteen (16) years of age are allowed in the dog agility area unless accompanied and supervised by a parent or guardian or other responsible adult with permission of the parent or guardian. 
(6)  Each dog must be under visual and voice control of the owner or other responsible person at least sixteen (16) years of age at all times. 
(7)  All dogs must have current vaccinations and licenses and shall wear a collar with tags as proof thereof. 
(8)  Aggressive dogs, as defined below, are not permitted in or around the dog exercise area, including but not limited to, the parking lot. Owners or other responsible persons will be held legally responsible for any injury caused by a dog that they bring in or around the dog exercise area. 
a.  An aggressive dog is defined as: 
1.  A dog that bites a person. However, a dog shall not be considered aggressive if the dog bites a person wrongfully assaulting the dog or the dog's owner, or if the dog bites a person after being provoked by that person. 
2.  A dog that injures or kills another domestic animal without provocation while at the dog exercise area. 
(9)  Female dogs in heat are not permitted in or around the dog exercise area including, but not limited to, the parking lot. 
(10)  Dog owners or other responsible persons shall provide dogs with drinking water while visiting the dog exercise area when weather conditions require. 
(11)  Dog owners or other responsible persons shall not keep dogs enclosed in a vehicle during hot weather which may cause injury to the dog. 
(12)  Any person having knowledge of a dog having bitten, scratched, or injured a person or other animal within the dog exercise area, including but not limited to the parking lot, shall report the incident to the police department. 
(Ord. No. 718, § 1, 11-1-10) 
Secs. 5-34-5-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FERAL/STRAY CAT TRAP-NEUTER-RETURN PROGRAM 

Sec. 5-40. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to set the following standards for management of feral and community cats. 
(Ord. No. 766, § 1, 6-1-15) 
Sec. 5-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the content clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Caretaker means any person who regularly provides food /water/shelter to a feral cat colony. 
    Cat care organization means the organization recognized by the city to oversee a trap-neuter-return (TNR) program to reduce the feral cat population, benefitting public health, improving the quality of life for residents, and ensuring the humane treatment of feral/stray cats. 
    Eartip means a mark identifying a feral or stray cat as having been sterilized, specifically, the removal of the tip of the cat's left ear while the cat is anesthetized. 
    Feral cat means a cat that is free roaming, not socialized to people and not an owned cat. 
    Feral cat colony and colony mean a group of feral or stray cats that congregate, more or less, together as a unit and share a common food source. 
    Foster home means a household in which cat(s)/kitten(s) are temporarily placed for providing shelter, care and, if necessary, socialization before permanent placement in an adoptive home. 
    Kitten means a member of the species felis catus under the age of ten (10) weeks. 
    Nuisance means conduct by feral or stray cat that disturbs the peace, including (a) habitually or continually howling or making loud noises and (b) destroying property and as defined in section 18-1 of this Code. 
    Owned cat means a cat that is a companion to a person, is regularly fed and is sheltered in that same person's habitation. 
    Shelter means a structure that provides feral/stray cats with protection from weather-related elements and natural enemies. 
    Sterilize means to spay or neuter. 
    Stray cat means a cat that is socialized to humans and is not an owned cat. 
    TNR means the method of managing feral and stray cats known as trap-neuter-return. 
    TNR program means a program pursuant to which feral and stray cats are trapped, sterilized, vaccinated against rabies, eartipped, and returned to the location where they were captured and provided with long-term care by a caretaker. 
(Ord. No. 766, § 1, 6-1-15) 
Sec. 5-42. - Management of feral cat colonies. 
    A TNR program shall be permitted and caretakers shall be entitled to maintain feral cat colonies according to the terms and conditions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 766, § 1, 6-1-15) 
Sec. 5-43. - Caretaker requirements. 
    It shall be the responsibility of a caretaker to: 
(1)  Register all feral cat colonies managed by the caretaker with the cat care organization pursuant to the requirements of section 5-44; 
(2)  Make reasonable efforts to trap all cats in a registered colony and have all trapped cats sterilized, vaccinated against rabies and eartipped by a licensed veterinarian; 
(3)  Provide or arrange for the provision of adequate food and water on a regular basis to colony cats and make reasonable efforts to ensure adequate shelter for colony cats; 
(4)  Make reasonable efforts to trap and obtain proper medical attention for any colony cat that appears to require it; 
(5)  Make reasonable efforts to remove, socialize, and find permanent adoptive homes or foster homes for kittens born to colony cats; and 
(6)  Make reasonable efforts to work with the city and the cat care organization to resolve any complaints concerning the colony of cats managed by the caretaker. 
(Ord. No. 766, § 1, 6-1-15) 
Sec. 5-44. - Feral cat colony registration. 
    Upon registration of a feral cat colony, the caretaker shall provide the cat care organization with: 
(1)  Address, telephone number and, if applicable, email address of the caretaker; 
(2)  Location of the colony; and 
(3)  Approximate number of cats in the colony and the number currently sterilized/vaccinated. 
(4)  The cat care organization shall provide the Clerk of the City of Owosso with current listings of all registered feral cat colonies. 
(Ord. No. 766, § 1, 6-1-15) 
Sec. 5-45. - Change of caretaker. 
    If a caretaker is unable or unwilling to continue in that role, the caretaker shall notify the cat care organization and shall make reasonable efforts to secure a replacement caretaker. The cat care organization shall advise the Clerk of the City of Owosso whenever a caretaker ceases to function as such. 
(Ord. No. 766, § 1, 6-1-15) 
Sec. 5-46. - Ordinance enforcement. 
    Nothing in this article shall interfere with the right of the city to: 
(1)  Investigate nuisance complaints allegedly caused by a feral or stray cat or feral cat colony. If a cat/cats belonging to a registered feral cat colony is causing a nuisance, the city shall give the caretaker written notice delineating the nuisance and location of the cat or cats with specificity, including the person making the complaint. The caretaker shall have thirty (30) days from the date that written notice was provided to alleviate the nuisance. If the caretaker fails to effectively address the nuisance after thirty (30) days, the city shall have the right to remove the offending cat or cats; 
(2)  Seize and remove a registered feral cat colony if the caretaker regularly fails to comply with the requirements of section 5-43 and the caretaker does not correct the situation within thirty (30) days of being given written notice by the city delineating the failures with specificity; 
(3)  A caretaker in compliance with this article shall be exempt from all provisions of this Code that impose requirements on cats that are owned, kept, harbored, or in the custody of a person. 
(Ord. No. 766, § 1, 6-1-15) 
Chapter 7 - BED AND BREAKFAST OPERATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Purpose. 
    This chapter is established to enable single-family dwelling units of historic significance to conduct bed and breakfast operations as defined in section 38-5. This chapter is enacted on the basis of the public policy that supports the city as a tourist destination for persons interested in the architectural and historic significance of the city's single-family structures. This chapter also focuses on the need to provide an incentive for owners to continue occupancy and maintenance of historic structures. This chapter emphasizes protection to neighborhoods with the provision of standards that prohibit nuisance and detrimental change in the single-family character of any site proposed for a bed and breakfast operation. 
(Ord. No. 427, § 1(7.401), 9-17-84) 
Sec. 7-2. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the phrase "bed and breakfast operation" shall be as defined in section 38-5. 
(Ord. No. 427, § 1(7.403), 9-17-84) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 7-3. - Exclusions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to hotels, motels, motor lodges, boardinghouses, or roominghouses doing business within the city on September 17, 1984. 
(Ord. No. 427, § 1(7.403), 9-17-84; Ord. No. 431, § 1, 11-19-84) 
Sec. 7-4. - Structure must be historically significant. 
    The structure to be used as a bed and breakfast establishment shall be of historic significance. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to show proof of historic significance to the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 427, § 1(7.402(1)), 9-17-84) 
Sec. 7-5. - Minimum specifications. 
    No premises shall be utilized for a bed and breakfast operation unless there are at least two (2) exits to the outdoors from such premises. Rooms utilized for sleeping shall have a minimum size of one hundred (100) square feet for two (2) occupants with an additional thirty (30) square feet for each additional occupant to a maximum of four (4) occupants per room. Each sleeping room used for the bed and breakfast operation shall have a separate smoke detector alarm as required in the building code. Lavatories and bathing facilities shall be available to all persons using any bed and breakfast operation. 
(Ord. No. 427, § 1(7.402(2)), 9-17-84) 
Sec. 7-6. - Parking requirements. 
(a)  Two (2) parking spaces plus one (1) additional space per room to be rented must be provided at each bed and breakfast establishment. 
(b)  Tandem parking is allowed; however, not more than two (2) cars per space shall be allowed. 
(c)  No residential structure shall be removed in order to allow for a bed and breakfast use nor shall such a structure be removed in order to provide parking for such a use. 
(d)  All parking spaces shall be paved or graded to city standards with material which maintain the historical character of the neighborhood. 
(e)  If the applicant is unable to meet subsections (a) through (d) above, the applicant may request special consideration from the planning commission through a site plan review process. The city's intent is not to encourage yards to be destroyed, landscaping removed or the integrity of the neighborhood altered in order to provide parking. In such a case the applicant shall submit an analysis of parking required and parking provided within a three-hundred-foot radius of the subject parcel. After analyzing this study, the planning commission may lower the number of the required parking spaces based on the fact that sufficient parking exists in the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 427, § 1(7.402(3-7)), 9-17-84) 
Cross reference- Off-street parking requirements generally, § 38-380. 
Sec. 7-7. - Signs. 
    Identifying signs for a bed and breakfast operation are not permitted. If a bed and breakfast league or comparable organization is established, then a uniform symbol or logo adopted by such an organization and not exceeding two (2) square feet may be mounted flat against the wall of the principal building. The symbol or logo shall be non-illuminated and unanimated. 
(Ord. No. 427, § 1(7.402(8)), 9-17-84) 
Cross reference- Signs generally, Ch. 26. 
Sec. 7-8. - Residence of operator/owner. 
    The dwelling unit in which the bed and breakfast operation takes place shall be the principal residence of the operator/owner. The operator/owner shall live on the premises while the bed and breakfast operation is active. 
(Ord. No. 427, § 1(7.402(9)), 9-17-84) 
Sec. 7-9. - Residential status of structure. 
    The structure utilized in a bed and breakfast operation shall remain a residential structure; i.e. the kitchen shall not be remodeled into a commercial kitchen. 
(Ord. No. 427, § 1(7.402(10)), 9-17-84) 
Sec. 7-10. - Meal service restricted. 
    Meals at a bed and breakfast operation shall be served only to residents and overnight guests. 
(Ord. No. 427, § 1(7.402(11)), 9-17-84) 
Sec. 7-11. - Guest register. 
    Each operator shall keep a list of the names of all persons staying at the bed and breakfast operation. Such list shall be available for inspection by city officials at any time. 
(Ord. No. 427, § 1(7.402(12)), 9-17-84) 
Sec. 7-12. - Maximum length of stay. 
    The maximum stay for any occupants of bed and breakfast operations shall be fourteen (14) days. 
(Ord. No. 427, § 1(7.402(13)), 9-17-84) 
Sec. 7-13. - Maximum space to be used in operation. 
    The bed and breakfast room(s) shall occupy no more than a total of twenty-five (25) percent of the dwelling unit floor space. 
(Ord. No. 427, § 1(7.402), 9-17-84; Ord. No. 431, § 1, 11-19-84) 
Sec. 7-14. - Public nuisance violations. 
    Bed and breakfast operations shall not be permitted whenever the operation endangers, or offends, or interferes with the safety or rights of others so as to constitute a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 427, § 1(7.406), 9-17-84) 
Cross reference- Nuisances generally, Ch. 18. 
Secs. 7-15-7-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Licensing generally, Ch. 16. 

Secs. 7-31-7-38. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 534, § 1, adopted June 19, 1995, repealed §§ 7-31-7-38 in their entirety. Former §§ 7-31-7-38 pertained to bed and breakfast operation licenses and derived from Ord. No. 427, § 1(7.403-7.408), adopted September 17, 1984. 
Chapter 8 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Community development, Ch. 11; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 13; flood protection, Ch. 14; building inspector's certifications for business licensing, § 16-13 et seq.; mobile homes and recreational vehicles, Ch. 17; dangerous structures, § 18-26 et seq.; unlawful noise from construction, § 18-95; planning, Ch. 23; signs, Ch. 26; soil erosion control, Ch. 27; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 29; subdivision regulations, Ch. 30; swimming pools, Ch. 31; utilities and services, Ch. 34; zoning, Ch. 38. 
State Law reference- State construction code act, MCL 125.1501 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Right of entry and search warrant. 
    Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Code, or whenever the building official or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or Code violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous, hazardous, or harmful to the public health or welfare, the building official or his authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this code; provided that if such buildings or premises be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or premises be unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If the owner or occupier of the premises fails to arrange entry or refuses entry, no inspection shall be made without the procurement of a search warrant from a judge or magistrate. The issuing official may consider any of the following factors, together with such other matters it deems pertinent to its decision as to whether a warrant shall issue: 
(1)  Eyewitness account of violation; 
(2)  Citizen complaints; 
(3)  Tenant complaints; 
(4)  Plain-view violations; 
(5)  Violations apparent from city records; 
(6)  Property deterioration; 
(7)  Age of property; 
(8)  Nature of alleged violation; 
(9)  Similar properties in the area; 
(10)  Documented violations of similar properties in the area; 
(11)  Passage of time since last inspection; and 
(12)  Previous violations on the property. 
    Cause for issuance of a warrant shall be deemed to exist in light of reasonable legislative and administrative standards if it is shown that there is reason to believe that the condition of a particular property violates a city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 464, § 1, 11-6-89) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 464, § 1, adopted Nov. 6, 1989, amended this chapter by adding provisions to be included as Art. IX, § 8-171; inasmuch as such provisions pertain generally throughout this chapter, they have been codified as § 8-1 at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 8-2-8-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 8-16. - Agency designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Building Code, in accordance with section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the building official of the city is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the city under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended. The city assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits. 
(Code 1977, § 8.2; Ord. No. 406, § 1, 2-21-83; Ord. No. 442, § 1, 3-17-86; Ord. No. 466, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 504, 4-5-93; Ord. No. 601, § 1, 11-20-00) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Secs. 8-17-8-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 601, § 4, adopted Nov. 20, 2000, repealed sections 8-17, 8-18, in their entirety. Former sections 8-17, 8-18 pertained to references in code and changes in code, respectively, and derived from the Code of 1977, §§ 8.3, 8.4; and Ord. No. 466, § 3, adopted Dec. 18, 1989. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICAL CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 602, § 4, adopted Nov. 20, 2000, repealed divisions 1-3, sections 8-37-8-40, 8-56-8-70, 8-86-8-89, in their entirety. Former divisions 1-3 pertained to general provisions, permits and inspections, and licensing, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 372, §§ 1(5602-5622), adopted March 16, 1981. 

Sec. 8-36. - Agency designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Electrical Code, in accordance with section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the electrical official of the city is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the city under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended. The city assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 372, § 1(5601), 3-16-81; Ord. No. 419, § 1, 12-19-83; Ord. No. 449, § 1, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 472, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 505, 4-5-93; Ord. No. 602, § 1, 11-20-00) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Secs. 8-37-8-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Water generally, § 34-66 et seq.; sewer service, § 34-101 et seq. 
State Law reference- Regulation of plumbing and licensing of plumbers, MCL 338.901 et seq.; local rules and regulations, MCL 338.904. 

Sec. 8-101. - Agency designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Plumbing Code, in accordance with section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the plumbing official of the city is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the city under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended. The city assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 486, § 1, 11-18-91; Ord. No. 599, § 1, 11-20-00) 
Secs. 8-102-8-115. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 599, § 4, adopted Nov. 20, 2000, repealed sections 8-102, 8-103, in their entirety. Former sections 8-102, 8-103 pertained to references in code and local provisions, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 486, § 1, adopted Nov. 18, 1991. 
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Forbes mechanical contractors act, MCL 338.971 et seq. 

Sec. 8-116. - Agency designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Mechanical Code, in accordance with section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the mechanical official of the city is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the city under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended. The city assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 357, §§ 1, 2, 3-17-80; Ord. No. 443, §§ 1, 2, 3-17-86; Ord. No. 467, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 600, § 1, 11-20-00) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Secs. 8-117-8-140. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 600, § 4, adopted Nov. 20, 2000, repealed sections 8-117, 8-118, in their entirety. Former sections 8-117, 8-118 pertained to references in code and permit fees, respectively, and derived from Ord. No. 357, § 3, adopted March 17, 1980; and Ord. No. 443, § 3, adopted March 17, 1986. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 8-141. - International Property Maintenance Code. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition as promulgated, published and approved by the International Code Council, Inc. is adopted as the property maintenance code; for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as is fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 8-142. Three (3) printed copies of the law, code, or rule shall be kept in the office of the city clerk, available for purchase and/or inspection. 
(Ord. No. 407, § 1, 2-21-83; Ord. No. 468, § 1, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 506, 4-5-93; Ord. No. 733, §§ 1, 2, 7-2-12; Ord. No. 790, § 1, 1-16-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 733, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 2, 2012, changed the title of § 8-141 from "Adoption of BOCA National Property Maintenance Code" to "International Property Maintenance Code." 
Cross reference- Authority to adopt technical codes by reference MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 8-142. - Changes in Code. 
    The following chapters, articles or sections of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 [edition] adopted by the provisions of this article are hereby added, amended or deleted as hereinafter set forth. Subsequent articles, divisions, and section numbers used in this section shall refer to the like numbered articles, divisions, and sections of such property maintenance code unless specified otherwise. 
Section 101.1: Insert for name of jurisdiction: City of Owosso, Michigan 
Section 103.5: Insert for fee schedule: Fees shall be set by resolution of the Owosso city council. 
Section 106.4: Inserting section establishing violation penalties: 
106.4 Violation penalties. 
a.  First and Second Offenses. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this code for a first or second time, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, for each violation, as provided for in Section 1-8(c) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Owosso, Michigan, plus costs and other sanctions. 
b.  Third and Subsequent Offenses. Any person firm or corporation who shall violate the same provision of this Code for a third or more instances shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, for each violation, punishable as provided in Sections 1-8(a) and (b) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Owosso, Michigan, plus costs and other sanctions. 
c.  The code official, building inspector, building official, code enforcement officer, police officer or firefighter are hereby designated and authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations and municipal civil infraction violation notices pursuant to this section. 
Sections 111.2 through Section 111.2.5: Delete Sections 111.2 through Section 111.2.5 
Section 111.2: Insert the following wording: 
PM-111.2. Membership. The Owosso Building Board of Appeals which serves as the construction board of appeals provided by the Michigan Uniform Construction Code Section 125.1514 (Act 230 0f 1972) shall hear all appeals of this ordinance. 
Section 112.4: Insert amount of fine: $50.00 and $500.00 
Section 302.4: Insert maximum height for weeds: Eight inches (8?) 
Section 304.14: Insert dates requiring window screens: April 15 and November 15 
Section 602.3: Insert dates requiring heat: September 1 and May 1 
Section 602.4: Insert dates requiring heat: September 1 and May 1 
(Ord. No. 407, § 4, 2-21-83; Ord. No. 422, § 1, 5-7-84; Ord. No. 468, § 2, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 506, 4-5-93; Ord. No. 530, § 1, 5-15-95; Ord. No. 733, §§ 3, 4, 7-2-12; Ord. No. 758, 1-5-15; Ord. No. 790, § 2, 1-16-18) 
Secs. 8-143-8-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RENTAL DWELLING REGISTRATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 704, § 1, adopted March 16, 2009, amended article VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article VII, §§ 8-151-8-154, pertained to similar subject matter. 

Sec. 8-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building inspector means the official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code, or any duly authorized representative by the city manager. 
    Occupant includes all tenants, lessees and persons residing within a rental dwelling or rental unit. 
    Owner means any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity having a legal or equitable interest in the premises. 
    Owner's representative means a person or representative of a corporation, partnership, firm, joint venture, trust, association, organization or other entity designated by the owner of the premises as responsible for operating such property in compliance with all the provisions of the city's ordinances. 
    Rental dwelling unit means any single structure, building or other facility promised and/or leased to a residential tenant for use as a home, residence or sleeping unit. Such term includes, but is not limited to, one-family or two-family dwellings, multiple dwellings and apartment units. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 3-16-09) 
Sec. 8-152. - Purpose of standards. 
    The city recognizes a compelling interest in establishing standards for the maintenance of sanitary and safe residential rental structures in the city as an important factor for the general health, safety and welfare of all of its citizens. This article is designed to promote the continued maintenance of quality and safe rental properties and to enhance and maintain property values. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 3-16-09) 
Sec. 8-153. - Applicability; exclusions. 
(a)  This article shall apply to any rental dwelling unit, or part thereof, which is occupied by persons pursuant to any oral or written rental or lease agreement or other valuable compensation. Such dwelling shall include, but not be limited to, single-family dwellings, multiple-family dwellings, rooming houses and boardinghouses. No person shall lease or rent a rental dwelling unit unless they have registered their property. 
(b)  This article does not apply to jails, hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes, foster homes or temporary group shelters provided by legal nonprofit agencies which are inspected, certified and/or licensed by the state. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 3-16-09) 
Sec. 8-154. - Registration. 
(a)  Compliance required. All rental dwelling unit owners are required to register their rental dwelling units every five (5) years pursuant to this article and shall comply with the following: 
(1)  All existing rental dwelling units property shall be registered within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of the ordinance. 
(2)  All newly constructed rental dwelling units shall be registered prior to any use or occupancy as a rental dwelling unit and every five (5) years thereafter. 
(3)  A new owner shall register a rental dwelling unit, which is sold, transferred or conveyed, within thirty (30) days of the date of the closing of such sale. Any existing registration shall be transferred to the new owner and shall be valid until its expiration or revocation for noncompliance with city codes and ordinances. 
(4)  All existing nonrental dwelling units, which are converted to rental dwelling units, shall be registered prior to the date on which the property is first occupied for rental purposes and every five (5) years thereafter. Failure to comply will result in penalties as described in this article or by resolution. 
(b)  Applications. 
(1)  Applications for registration shall be made in such form and in accordance with such instructions as may be provided by the building inspector designated by the city manager and shall include at least the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner (no post office box shall be accepted). 
b.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner's representative, if the rental property owner has opted to appoint a representative. 
(2)  Upon registration, the owner shall be responsible for notifying the building inspector of any change of address of either the owner or owner's representative. 
(c)  Fee. At the time of registration of the dwelling unit, there will be a prescribed fee, as adopted by resolution. Any unpaid registration fees shall become a lien on the property immediately and collected as an assessment pursuant to city ordinance. An owner shall not have a property as a rental dwelling unless it has registered with the city. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 3-16-09; Ord. No. 754, § 1, 8-4-14) 
Sec. 8-155. - Applicable standards. 
    The standards used to determine rental property and dwelling unit compliance with city codes and ordinances shall be the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and amended by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 3-16-09) 
Sec. 8-156. - Noncompliance with code. 
(a)  The building inspector may enter rental dwelling units under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  After the registration of the rental dwelling unit which shows the possibility of not complying with local or state law. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a written complaint from an owner, owner's representative or occupant that the premises is in violation of this article. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a report or referral from the police department, fire department, public or private school, or another public agency, or a failure to comply with this article. 
(4)  Upon evidence of an existing ordinance violation observed by the building inspector. 
(5)  At the request of the owner to determine compliance with the International Property Maintenance Code. 
(6)  If the proposed rental dwelling unit is being converted from a single-family home, the building inspector shall evaluate the property for public safety violations before first occupied for rental purposes. 
(b)  The building inspector may make an appointment with the owner or owner's representative of the rental dwelling unit. The owner or owner's representative must give the building inspector at least twenty-four (24) hours' notice when changing the scheduled appointment with an alternative date and time. The building inspector shall issue a written report noting any violations of this article or any other provision of the city's ordinances and shall provide a copy of the report to the owner or owner's representative. The building inspector shall direct the owner or owner's representative to correct violations within the time set forth in the report. A reasonable time for correcting violations shall be determined by the building inspector in light of the nature of the violations and all relevant circumstances, which shall not exceed sixty (60) days, unless correction of the violation within a 60-day period is impossible due to seasonal considerations. Upon request of the person responsible for correcting violations, the building inspector may extend the time for correcting violations, but not to exceed an additional thirty (30) days. 
(c)  The building inspector may charge a nominal fee that equals the actual administrative cost to enter premises as established by resolution. If the building inspector determines that a complaint was filed without a factual basis and with malice, a fee may be charged to the complainant. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 3-16-09) 
Sec. 8-157. - Fees. 
    Fees for registration of rental units and penalties shall be established by resolution. The fee schedule shall be available to the public from the city clerk. Any unpaid inspection fees shall become a lien on the property and collected as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 3-16-09) 
Sec. 8-158. - Violations. 
(a)  If the owner or owner's representative does not correct a violation of any provision of this article, the building inspector may bring an action to seek the enforcement of this article by an appropriate legal remedy. Any structure not in compliance with this article is deemed a nuisance. 
(b)  Any owner or owner's representative of a rental dwelling unit who violates any section of this article for the first offense shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction as provided for in section 1-8 of this Code with the fines as stated in subsection (c) below. 
(c)  The fines for municipal civil infractions for violating this article shall be: Two hundred dollars ($200.00) per occurrence for the first offense; four hundred dollars ($400.00) for a second offense if it occurs within two (2) years of the prior offense even if it occurs at the same time as the prior offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
(d)  The building inspector, building official, code enforcement officer and any other person designated by the city manager are hereby designated as the authorized individuals to issue municipal civil infraction citations for violations of this article. 
(e)  In addition to any penalties imposed by law, a finding of responsibility by the court for a violation of this article, the city shall be entitled to immediately revoke any existing certificate of compliance and shall entitle the city to seek the issuance of a court order compelling the eviction of all persons and property upon the premises until a certificate of compliance is issued by the city. 
(f)  An owner or owner's representative may be charged with more than one (1) violation of the provisions of this article in a single complaint or municipal civil infraction, provided that each violation so charged relates to the same property. 
(Ord. No. 704, § 1, 3-16-09) 
Sec. 8-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - REGISTERING ABANDONED OR FORECLOSED HOMES 

Sec. 8-160. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose and intent of the City of Owosso, through the adoption of this article, to establish an abandoned residential property registration program as a mechanism to protect residential neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned properties. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 2, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 8-161. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: 
    Abandoned means a property that is vacant and is under a current complaint for foreclosure or notice of foreclosure and/or notice of trustee's sale, pending tax sale, and/or properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
    Accessible property means a property that is accessible through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc. 
    Accessible structure means a structure/building that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons. 
    Agreement means any agreement or written instrument which provides that title to residential property shall be transferred or conveyed from one (1) owner to another owner after the sale, trade, transfer, or exchange. 
    Assignment of rents means an instrument that transfers the beneficial interest under a mortgage from one (1) lender/entity to another. 
    Beneficiary means a lender under a note secured by a mortgage. 
    Buyer means any person, co-partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary who agrees to transfer anything of value in consideration for property described in an agreement of sale, as defined in this section. 
    Dangerous building means any building/structure that is in violation of any condition referenced in chapter 8 of this Code. 
    Days means consecutive calendar days. 
    Deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale means a recorded document that transfers ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder of a mortgage upon consent of the beneficiary of the mortgage of a deed from mortgagor to mortgagee. 
    Default means the failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, monetary, or conditional. 
    Distressed means a property that is under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale and/or pending tax assessor's lien sale or has been foreclosed upon by the trustee or has been conveyed to the beneficiary/trustee via a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. 
    Evidence of vacancy means any condition that on its own or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/nor mail, past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds and/or shutters, the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with residential habitation, statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, government employees that the property is vacant. 
    Foreclosure means the process by which a property, placed as security for a real estate loan, is sold at auction to satisfy the debt if the trustor or mortgagor (borrower) defaults. 
    Local means within forty (40) road/driving miles distance of the subject property. 
    Mortgage means an instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan or by which a mortgagor grants mortgagee a lien on real estate. 
    Mortgagee means a lender that has taken a lien on real property to secure a loan. 
    Mortgagor means an owner of real property that has granted a lien on real property to secure a loan. 
    Neighborhood standard means those conditions that are present on a simple majority of properties within a three-hundred-foot radius of an individual property. A property that is the subject of a neighborhood standard comparison, and any other abandoned property within the three-hundred-foot radius, shall not be counted toward the simple majority. 
    Out-of-area means in excess of forty (40) road/driving miles distance of the subject property. 
    Owner means any person, co-partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary having a legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property excluding governmental agencies. 
    Owner of record means the person having recorded title to the property. 
    Property means any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city and includes the buildings or structures located on the property regardless of condition. 
    Residential building means any improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the city, designed, or permitted to be used for dwelling purposes, and shall include the buildings or structures located on such improved real property. This includes any real property being offered for sale, trade, transfer, or exchange as residential whether or not it is legally permitted and/or zoned for such use. 
    Secure or secured means such measures as may be directed by the City of Owosso building official or his or her designee that render the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to the repairing of fences and walls, chaining/padlocking of gates, and the repair or boarding of doors, broken windows and/or other openings. In the case of broken windows, securing means the reglazing or boarding of the window. Boarding shall be completed or required. In addition, secure or secured means closing and locking widows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage), gates and any other opening of such size that it may allow a person to access the interior of a property and/or structure(s). 
    Trustee means the person, firm, or corporation holding a mortgage on a property. 
    Trustor means a borrower under a mortgage, who deeds property to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt. 
    Vacant means a building/structure that is not legally occupied. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 2, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 8-162. - Registration. 
    Any beneficiary/trustee or mortgagee, who holds a mortgage on a property located within the city, shall perform an examination, to the extent permitted by law or under the mortgage, of the property that is the security for the mortgage, upon default by the trustor or mortgagor, within five (5) days after either filing a complaint for foreclosure (if foreclosure is by judicial action) or publishing a notice of foreclosure (if foreclosure is by advertisement). If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by this article, deemed abandoned and the beneficiary/trustee or mortgagee shall, within ten (10) days of the examination, register the property with the city of Owosso building official or his or her designee on forms provided by the city. 
    If the property is occupied but remains in default, it shall be examined, to the extent permitted by law and the mortgage, by the beneficiary/trustee or mortgagee, or his designee, monthly until (1) the trustor, mortgagor or other party remedies the default or (2) it is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy at which time it is deemed abandoned, and the trustee shall, within ten (10) days of that examination, register the property with the city of Owosso building official or his or her designee on forms provided by the city. 
    In either case the registration shall contain the name of the beneficiary/trustee or mortgagee (corporation or individual), the direct street/office mailing address of the beneficiary/trustee or mortgagee (no P.O. boxes), a direct contact name and phone number for the beneficiary/trustee or mortgagee and, in the case of a corporation or out-of-area beneficiary/trustee or mortgagee, the local property management company responsible for the security, maintenance, and marketing of the property. Registration fees will not be prorated. 
    An annual registration fee shall accompany the registration form. The fee and registration shall be valid for the calendar year, or remaining portion of the calendar year, in which the registration was initially required. Subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1 of each year and must be received no later than January 31 of the year due. 
    This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgage or mortgagee involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. Such properties shall be registered with the city in accordance with the terms of this section upon transfer even if occupied at the time of transfer. 
    Properties subject to this article shall remain under the annual registration requirement, security, and maintenance standards of this section as long as they remain vacant. 
    A person, firm, or corporation that has registered a property under this article must report any change of information contained in the registration to the city of Owosso building official within ten (10) days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 2, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 727, § 2, 2-6-12) 
Sec. 8-163. - Maintenance requirements. 
    Vacant and abandoned properties subject to this section shall be, in comparison to the neighborhood standard, kept free of weeds, dry bush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circular, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state, or local law, discarded personal items including but not limited to furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned. 
    The property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging, or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure. 
    Visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and maintained to the neighborhood standard at the time registration was required. Landscape includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential installation. Landscape does not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, plastic sheeting, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material. 
    Maintenance includes but is not limited to regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning, and moving of required landscape and removal of all trimmings. 
    Pools and spas shall be either kept in working order so the water remains clear and free of pollutants and debris or drained and kept dry or drained and covered. In either case properties with pools and/or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements of the State of Michigan. 
    Adherence to this section does not relieve the beneficiary/trustee or property owner of any obligations set forth in any covenants, conditions, and restrictions and/or homeowners' association rules and regulations which may apply to the property. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 2, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 727, § 2, 2-6-12) 
Sec. 8-164. - Security requirements. 
    Properties subject to this section shall be secured so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. If the property is owned by a corporation and/or out-of-area beneficiary/trustee/owner/mortgagee, a local property management company shall be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws, are being met. 
    The local property management company shall inspect the property on a weekly basis to determine if the property is in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 2, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 8-165. - Additional authority. 
    In addition to the enforcement remedies established in this article or other chapters of the Code of Ordinances, the City of Owosso building official or his or her designee shall have the authority to require the beneficiary/trustee/owner/mortgagor/mortgagee and/or owner of record of any property affected by this section to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including, but not limited to, securing any/all door, window, or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be reasonably required to arrest the decline of the property. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 2, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 8-166. - Fees. 
    The fee for registering an abandoned residential property shall be set by resolution of the City of Owosso. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 2, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 8-167. - Failure to secure and maintain. 
    If a property has not been maintained or secured, the city and/or its contracted agent may maintain and/or secure the property and assess costs to the owner, beneficiary or trustee. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 2, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 8-168. - Re-occupancy. 
    A registered property may not be occupied until all outstanding costs, assessments and/or liens owed to the city have been paid in full. 
    An abandoned and/or vacant residential structure registered under this ordinance shall not be re-occupied until a copy of a home inspection report by a certified building official in the State of Michigan, a registered building inspector in the State of Michigan, or a home inspection company of the buyers choice that is certified by MAHI, ASHI, AHIT, NAHI, or NACHI has been signed by the buyer and a copy delivered to the city. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 2, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 727, § 2, 2-6-12) 
Sec. 8-169. - Violation/abatement. 
    Violations of this article shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent. Violations of this article may be enforced as allowed in this chapter. Alternatively, at the sole discretion of the city, the city may issue to the beneficiary/trustee/owner/mortgagor/mortgagee and/or owner of record a notice to abate. The notice to abate shall include: 
(1)  The nature and location of the violation; 
(2)  The time within which the violation must be abated; 
(3)  Notice that the city may act to abate the violation if it is not abated by the owner within a reasonable time stated in the notice, but which may not exceed fifteen (15) days; 
(4)  Notice that the cost of such action by the city, plus an administrative fee, shall be a personal debt of the owner, which may be assessed as a lien against the property until paid; and 
(5)  Notice that any refusal to allow the city to abate an uncorrected violation shall be a separate violation under this Code. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 2, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 8-170. - Authorization for city abatement. 
    Upon failure of a beneficiary/trustee/owner/mortgagor/mortgagee and/or owner of record to abate a violation as ordered in a notice to abate, the city may abate the nuisance. This abatement may be performed by the city, by a contract vendor, or by other means determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 2, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 8-171. - Administrative fees. 
    The fees necessary for the administration of this article shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. Such administrative fees shall include the following: 
(1)  Notice to abate: 
(2)  Search warrant; 
(3)  Contact request or warning of abatement action; 
(4)  Warning letter; 
(5)  Civil infraction preparation; 
(6)  Additional inspections; 
(7)  Vendoring; 
(8)  Second and subsequent vendoring; 
(9)  Vehicle removal; 
(10)  Second and subsequent vehicle removal; and 
(11)  Denied entry. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 2, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 8-172. - Charge for costs. 
    When the city has abated a cited nuisance, the cost of abatement, plus any applicable administrative charges as established by city council resolution, shall be billed to the property owner or beneficiary/trustee/mortgagor/mortgagee. Such billing shall be a personal debt of the owner to the city, which may be assessed as a lien against the property, including interest thereon, until paid. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 2, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 8-173. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any of the requirements of this section may appeal to the Owosso Building Board of Appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within twenty (20) days after the day the decision, notice, or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do not fully apply, the requirements of this Code are adequately satisfied by other means, or the strict application of any requirement of this Code would cause an undue hardship. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 2, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 8-174. - Owner, unoccupied premises. 
    If a property is not in foreclosure but is otherwise vacant for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days, the owner shall comply with all of the following: 
(1)  Maintain the property in accordance with section 8-163 herein and article VI of this chapter. 
(2)  Register the property in accordance with section 8-162. 
(3)  Responsible for the fee identified pursuant to section 8-166 herein. 
(4)  Keep the property secure in accordance with sections 8-164 and 8-165 herein. 
(5)  Not permit reoccupancy until all outstanding costs, assessments and/or liens owed to the city are paid in full. 
(6)  If the owner leases or lets the property, the owner shall comply with article VII of this chapter in addition to the requirements herein. 
(7)  Inspect the property in accordance with section 8-168. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 2, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 727, § 2, 2-6-12) 
Sec. 8-175. - Exempt properties. 
    Properties currently registered with the city as a rental dwelling unit in accordance with article VII of this chapter are exempt from the City of Owosso Abandoned or Foreclosed Property Registration and Maintenance Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 2, 11-21-11) 
Sec. 8-176. - Penalty. 
    Violation of this article is a civil infraction wherein a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) may be assessed for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 724, § 2, 11-21-11) 
Secs. 8-177-8-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Section 3 of Ord. No. 724, adopted Nov. 21, 2011, renumbered the former art. VIII, §§ 8-161 and 8-162, as art. IX, §§ 8-190 and 8-191. 

Sec. 8-190. - Required. 
    All buildings in the city shall bear a distinctive street number in accordance with and as designated upon the street plan map on file in the office of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 409, § 1(4.77), 7-18-83; Ord. No. 724, § 3, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 769, § 1, 8-17-15) 
Sec. 8-191. - Specifications. 
    The owners and occupants of all buildings in the city shall cause the correct numbers to be placed thereon in accordance with the street plan map. Such numbers and letters shall comply with the specifications of the International Property Maintenance Code as to size and placement. 
(Ord. No. 409, § 1(4.78), 7-18-83; Ord. No. 724, § 3, 11-21-11; Ord. No. 769, § 1, 8-17-15) 
Secs. 8-192-8-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - HISTORIC DISTRICTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 598, § 1, adopted September 5, 2000, amended the Code by repealing former art. IX, §§ 8-200-8-216, and adding a new art. IX, §§ 8-200-8-215. Former art. IX pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 577, adopted May 3, 1999.  Subsequently, Ord. No. 724, § 3, adopted Nov. 21, 2011, renumbered the former art. IX as art. X. 

Sec. 8-200. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "historic districts ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 8-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alteration means work that changes the detail of a resource but does not change its basic size or shape. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means the written approval of a permit application for work that is appropriate and that does not adversely affect a resource. 
    Commission means the city historic district commission created by the city pursuant to PA 169 of 1970 as amended. 
    Committee means a historic district study committee appointed by the city council. 
    Demolition means the razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a resource and includes, but is not limited to, demolition by neglect. 
    Demolition by neglect means neglect in maintaining, repairing, or securing a resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource or the loss of structural integrity of the resource. 
    Denial means the written rejection of a permit application for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource. 
    Department means the department of history, arts and libraries. 
    Fire alarm system means a system designed to detect and annunciate the presence of fire or byproducts of fire. Fire alarm system includes smoke alarms. 
    Historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that contains one (1) resource or a group of resources that are related by history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture. 
    Historic preservation means the identification, evaluation, establishment, and protection of resources significant in history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture. 
    Historic resource means a publicly or privately owned building, structure, site, object, feature, or open space that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture of the city, county, state or the United States. 
    Notice to proceed means the written permission to issue a permit for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource, pursuant to a finding under Section 399.205(6) of Public Act 169 of 1970, as amended. 
    Open space means undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal or manmade landscaped area that provides a connective link or a buffer between other resources. 
    Ordinary maintenance means keeping a resource unimpaired and in good condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time, in its exterior condition. Ordinary maintenance does not change the external appearance of the resource except through the elimination of the usual and expected effects of weathering. Ordinary maintenance does not constitute work for the purposes of this article. 
    Proposed historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries and that is under review by a committee or a standing committee for the purpose of making a recommendation as to whether it should be established as a historic district or added to an established historic district. 
    Repair means to restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound condition by any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of a resource constitutes work for purposes of this act. 
    Resource means one (1) or more publicly or privately owned historic or non-historic buildings, structures, sites, objects, features, or open spaces located within a historic district. 
    Smoke alarm means a single-station or multiple-station alarm responsive to smoke and not connected to a system. As used in this subdivision, a "single-station alarm" means an assembly incorporation a detector, the control equipment, and the alarm sounding device into a single unit, operated from a power supply either in the unit or obtained at the point of installation. "Multiple-station alarm" means two (2) or more single-station alarms that are capable of interconnection such that actuation of one (1) alarm causes all integrated separate audible alarms to operate. 
    Work means construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, or demolition. The definition of work specifically excludes painting and ordinary maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 717, § 2, 8-2-10) 
Sec. 8-202. - Historic preservation as public purpose; purpose of article. 
    Historic preservation is declared to be a public purpose and the city council may by ordinance regulate the construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, and demolition of resources in historic districts within the city limits. The purpose of this article shall be to do one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving one (1) or more historic districts in the city that reflects elements of the unit's history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture. 
(2)  Stabilize and improve property values in each district and the surrounding areas by protecting the value and preserving historic resources. 
(3)  Foster civic beauty. 
(4)  Strengthen the local economy. 
(5)  Promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the citizens of the city and of the state. 
(6)  To take advantage of state tax credits available to owners of historic properties. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 8-203. - Compliance required for construction, repair, demolition, etc. 
    There shall be no work performed on a resource within any designated historic district, unless such action complies with the requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 8-204. - Historic districts; establishment; study committee; duties; public hearing; notice; actions; availability of writings to public. 
(a)  The city, from time to time, may, by ordinance, establish one (1) or more historic districts. The historic district commission shall administer the historic districts. Before establishing a historic district, the city council shall appoint a historic district study committee. The committee shall contain a majority of persons who have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation, and shall contain representation from one (1) or more duly organized local historic preservation organizations. The committee shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each proposed historic district following procedures established or approved by the center. 
(2)  Conduct basic research of each proposed historic district and the historic resources located within that district. 
(3)  Determine the total number of historic and nonhistoric resources within a proposed historic district and the percentage of historic resources of that total. In evaluating the significance of historic resources, the committee shall be guided by the selection criteria for evaluation issued by the United States Secretary of the Interior for inclusion of resources in the National Register of Historic Places, as set forth in 36 CFR part 60, and criteria established or approved by the center, if any. 
(4)  Prepare a preliminary historic district study committee report that addresses at a minimum all of the following: 
a.  The charge of the committee. 
b.  The composition of the committee membership. 
c.  The historic district or districts studied. 
d.  The boundaries for each proposed historic district in writing and on maps. 
e.  The history of each proposed historic district. 
f.  The significance of each district as a whole, as well as a sufficient number of its individual resources to fully represent the variety of resources found within the district, relative to the evaluation criteria. 
(5)  Transmit copies of the preliminary report for review and recommendations to the local planning body, to the center, to the Michigan Historical Commission, and to the state historic preservation review board. 
(6)  Make copies of the preliminary report available to the public. 
(b)  Not less than sixty (60) calendar days after the transmittal of the preliminary report, the committee shall hold a public hearing in compliance with Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended, being MCL sections 15.261 to 15.275. Public notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing shall be given in the manner required by Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended. Written notice shall be mailed by first-class mail not less than fourteen (14) calendar days before the hearing to the owners of properties within the proposed historic district, as listed on the tax rolls of the city. 
(c)  After the date of the public hearing, the committee and the city council shall have not more than one (1) year, unless otherwise authorized by the city council, to take the following actions: 
(1)  The committee shall prepare and submit to the city council a final report with its recommendations and the recommendations, if any, of the historic district commission and the planning commission. If the recommendation is to establish a historic district or districts, the final report shall include a draft of a proposed ordinance or ordinances. 
(2)  After receiving a final report that recommends the establishment of a historic district or districts, the city council, at its discretion, may introduce and pass or reject an ordinance or ordinances. If the city council passes an ordinance or ordinances establishing one (1) or more historic districts, the city council shall file a copy of that ordinance or those ordinances, including a legal description of the property or properties located within the historic district or districts, with the register of deeds. The city council shall not pass an ordinance establishing a contiguous historic district less than sixty (60) days after a majority of the property owners within the proposed historic district, as listed on the tax rolls of the local unit, have approved the establishment of the historic district pursuant to a written petition. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 8-205. - Historic district commission; establishment; appointment, qualifications, and terms of members; vacancy. 
    In order to execute the purposes of this article, the city council hereby appoints a historic district commission to serve as the governing body. 
    Each member of the commission shall reside within the city. The membership of the historic district commission shall consist of not less than seven (7) or more than nine (9) members. A majority of the members shall have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. The mayor, with the approval of the city council, shall appoint the members. Initial members shall be appointed within six (6) months after the ordinance establishing the commission is enacted. Members shall be appointed for three-year terms except the initial appointments of some of the members shall be for less than three (3) years so that the initial appointments are staggered and that subsequent appointments do not recur at the same time. Members shall be eligible for reappointment. A vacancy on the commission shall be filled within sixty (60) calendar days by an appointment made by the appointing authority. The city council shall appoint at least one (1) member from a list of citizens submitted by one (1) or more duly organized local historic preservation organizations. The commission shall include as a member, if available, a graduate of an accredited school of architecture who has two (2) years of architectural experience or who is an architect registered in this state. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 8-206. - Rules of procedure; compensation; meetings; freedom of information. 
(a)  The commission shall adopt rules governing its procedure and the holding of regular meetings, subject to the approval of the city council. Special meetings may be held when called in the manner provided in the rules of the commission. 
(b)  The business that the commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting of the commission held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended, being MCL sections 15.261 to 15.275. Public notice of the time, date, and place of the meeting shall be given in the manner required by Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended. A meeting agenda shall be part of the notice and shall include a listing of each permit application to be reviewed or considered by the commission. 
(c)  The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(d)  The commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings, and actions. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the commission in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act, Act No. 442 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended, being MCL sections 15.231 to 15.246. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 8-207. - Duties and powers. 
    It shall be the duty of the commission to review all plans for work in the historic district, and the commission shall have the power to pass upon such plans before a permit for such activity can be granted. In reviewing the plans, the commission shall follow the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings, as set forth in 36 CFR Part 67, or their equivalent as approved and established by the Michigan Historical Center of the Department of State. 
    Nothing in this section shall bar the commission from meeting in an emergency session should there occur a severe and imminent threat to the health, safety, welfare of the public when two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the commission members decide that delay would be detrimental to efforts to lessen or respond to the threat. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 8-208. - Permit required; completed application; certificate of appropriateness or notice to proceed; issuance; permit fee; appeal to review board and circuit court; plan review standards, guidelines and considerations; scope of review; preservation plan; approval; conditions; availability of writings to public; approval of minor work; finding of demolition by neglect; restoration or modification of work done without permit. 
(a)  A permit shall be obtained before any work affecting the exterior appearance of a resource is performed within a historic district or, if required under subsection (d), work affecting the interior arrangements of a resource is performed within a historic district. The person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of government proposing to do that work shall file an application for a permit with the city building official. The building official shall immediately refer the application, together with all required supporting materials that make the application complete, to the commission. A permit shall not be issued and proposed work shall not proceed until the commission has acted on the application by issuing a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed as prescribed in this ordinance. Applicants shall pay the normal permit fee. 
(b)  An applicant aggrieved by a decision of a commission concerning a permit application may file an appeal with the state historic preservation review board of the Michigan Historical Commission within the Department of State. The appeal shall be filed within sixty (60) days after the decision is furnished to the applicant. The appellant may submit evidence or arguments in written form, which the review board shall consider at its first regularly scheduled meeting after receiving the appeal. There is no charge or fee for considering an appeal. The review board may affirm modify, or set aside a commission's decision and may order a commission to issue a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed. A permit applicant aggrieved by the decision of the state historic preservation review board may appeal the decision to the county circuit court. 
(c)  In reviewing plans, the commission shall follow the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings, as set forth in 36 CFR part 67. Design review standards and guidelines that address special design characteristics of historic districts administered by the commission may be followed if they are equivalent in guidance to the secretary of interior's standards and guidelines and are established or approved by the center. The commission shall also consider all of the following: 
(1)  The historic or architectural value and significance of the resource and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area. 
(2)  The relationship of any architectural features of the resource to the rest of the resource and to the surrounding area. 
(3)  The general compatibility of the design, arrangement, texture, and materials proposed to be used. 
(4)  Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the commission finds relevant. 
(5)  Whether the applicant has certified in the application that the property where the work will be undertaken has, or will have, before the proposed project completion date, a fire alarm system or a smoke alarm system complying with the requirements of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act of 1972 (MCL 12.1501 to 125.1531). 
(d)  The commission shall review and act upon only exterior features of a resource and shall not review and act upon interior arrangements unless interior work will cause visible change to the exterior of the resource. The commission shall not disapprove an application due to considerations not prescribed in subsection (c). 
(e)  If an application is for work that will adversely affect the exterior of a resource the commission considers valuable to the local unit, state, or nation, and the commission determines that the alteration or loss of that resource will adversely affect the public purpose of the local unit, state, or nation, the commission shall attempt to establish with the owner of the resource an economically feasible plan for preservation of the resource. 
(f)  Work within a historic district shall be permitted through the issuance of a notice to proceed by the commission if any of the following conditions prevail and if the proposed work can be demonstrated by a finding of the commission to be necessary to substantially improve or correct any of the following conditions: 
(1)  The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or to the structure's occupants. 
(2)  The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program that will be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals, financing, and environmental clearances. 
(3)  Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to the owner when a governmental action, an act of God, or other events beyond the owner's control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource for sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site within the historic district, have been attempted and exhausted by the owner. 
(4)  Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority of the community. 
(g)  The commission may delegate the issuance of certificates of appropriateness for specified minor classes of work to its staff, to the building official, or to another delegated authority. The commission shall provide to the delegated authority specific written standards for issuing certificates of appropriateness under this subsection. On at least a quarterly basis, the commission shall review the certificates of appropriateness, if any, issued for work by its staff, the building official, or another authority to determine whether or not the delegated responsibilities should be continued. 
(h)  Upon a finding by a commission that a historic resource within a historic district or a proposed historic district subject to its review and approval is threatened with demolition by neglect, the commission may do either of the following: 
(1)  Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions contributing to demolition by neglect. 
(2)  If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time, the commission or its agents may enter the property and make such repairs as are necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the city council as a special assessment against the property. The commission or its agents may enter the property for purposes of this section upon obtaining an order from the circuit court. 
(i)  When work has been done upon a resource without a permit, and the commission finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission may require an owner to restore the resource to the condition the resource was in before the inappropriate work or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply with the restoration or modification requirement within a reasonable time, the commission may seek an order from the circuit court to require the owner to restore the resource to its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the order of the court, the commission or its agents may enter the property and conduct work necessary to restore the resource to its former condition or modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the court's order. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the local unit as a special assessment against property. When acting pursuant to an order of the circuit court, a commission or its agents may enter a property for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 717, § 3, 8-2-10) 
Sec. 8-209. - Grants, gifts, and programs. 
    The city may accept state or federal grants for historic preservation purposes, may participate in state and federal programs that benefit historic preservation, and may accept public or private gifts for historic preservation purposes. The historic district commission is hereby appointed the agent to accept and administer grants, gifts, and program responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 8-210. - Historic resource; acquisition by local legislative body. 
    If all efforts by the commission to preserve a resource fail, or if it is determined by the city council body that public ownership is most suitable, the city council, if considered to be in the public interest, may acquire the resource using public funds, public or private gifts, grants, or proceeds from the issuance of revenue bonds. 
    The acquisition shall be based upon the recommendation of the commission or standing committee. The commission or entity appointed by the city council is responsible for maintaining publicly owned resources using its own funds, if not specifically designated for other purposes, or public funds committed for that use by the city council. Upon recommendation of the commission or entity appointed by the city council, the city may sell resources acquired under this section with protective easements included in the property transfer documents, if appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 8-211. - Historic district commission; filings with delegated authority; duties of local public officials, employees, and Michigan Historical Center. 
    The commission shall file certificates of appropriateness, notices to proceed, and denials of applications for permits with the city building official. A permit shall not be issued until the commission has acted as prescribed by this act. If a permit application is denied, the decision shall be binding on the building official or other authority. A denial shall be accompanied with a written explanation by the commission of the reasons for denial and, if appropriate, a notice that an application may be resubmitted for commission review when suggested changes have been made. The denial shall also include notification of the applicant's rights of appeal to the state historic preservation review board and to the circuit court. The failure of the commission to act within sixty (60) calendar days after the date a complete application is filed with the commission, unless the applicant and the commission agree upon an extension in writing, shall be considered to constitute approval. 
    Local public officials and employees shall provide information and records to committees, commissions, and standing committees, and shall meet with those bodies upon request to assist with their activities. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 8-212. - Ordinary maintenance. 
    Nothing in this act shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repair of a resource within a historic district, or to prevent work on any resource under a permit issued by the city building official or other duly delegated authority before the ordinance was enacted. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1, 9-5-00; Ord. No. 717, § 4, 8-2-10) 
Editor's note- Section 4 of Ord. No. 717, adopted Aug. 2, 2010, changed the title of § 8-212 from "Construction of act" to "Ordinary maintenance." 
Sec. 8-213. - Appeal of a commission decision. 
(a)  An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the commission concerning a permit application may file an appeal with the state historic preservation review board. The appeal shall be filed within sixty (60) calendar days after the decision is furnished to the applicant. The appellant may submit all or part of the appellant's evidence and arguments in written form. The state historic preservation review board shall consider an appeal at its first regularly scheduled meeting after receiving the appeal. A permit applicant aggrieved by the decision of the state historic preservation review board may appeal the decision to the circuit court having jurisdiction over the historic district commission whose decision was appealed to the state historic preservation review board. 
(b)  Any citizen or duly organized historic preservation organization in the City of Owosso, as well as resource property owners, jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the historic district commission may appeal the decision to the circuit court, except that a permit applicant aggrieved by a decision rendered under this article may not appeal to the court without first exhausting the right to appeal to the state historic preservation review board. 
(Ord. No. 717, § 5, 8-2-10) 
Editor's note- Section 5 of Ord. No. 717, adopted Aug. 2, 2010, repealed the former § 8-213, and enacted a new § 8-213 as set out herein. The former § 8-213 pertained to appeal of decisions and derived from Ord. No. 598, § 1, adopted Sept. 5, 2000. 
Sec. 8-214. - Establishing, modifying, or eliminating historic districts; study committee; considerations; review of applications within proposed historic district; emergency moratorium. 
(a)  The city council may at any time establish by ordinance additional historic districts, including proposed districts previously considered and rejected, may modify boundaries of an existing historic district or may eliminate an existing historic district. Before establishing, modifying, or eliminating a historic district, a historic district study committee appointed by the city council shall comply with the procedures set forth herein and shall consider any previously written committee reports pertinent to the proposed action. To conduct these activities, the city council may retain the initial committee, establish a standing committee, or establish a committee to consider only specific proposed districts and then be dissolved. 
(b)  If considering elimination of a historic district, a committee shall follow the procedures set forth herein for issuing a preliminary report, holding a public hearing, and issuing a final report but with the intent of showing one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  The historic district has lost those physical characteristics that enabled establishment of the district. 
(2)  The historic district was not significant in the way previously defined. 
(3)  The historic district was established pursuant to defective procedures. 
(c)  Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic, architectural, archeological, engineering, or cultural significance of a proposed historic district, the city council, at its discretion, may adopt a resolution requiring that all applications for permits within the proposed historic district be referred to the commission as prescribed herein. The commission shall review permit applications with the same powers that would apply if the proposed historic district was an established historic district The review may continue in the proposed historic district for not more than one (1) year, or until such time as the city council approves or rejects the establishment of the historic district by ordinance, whichever occurs first. 
(d)  If the city council determines that pending work will cause irreparable harm to resources located within an established historic district or a proposed historic district the legislative body may by resolution declare an emergency moratorium of all such work for a period not to exceed six (6) months. The legislative body may extend the emergency moratorium for an additional period not to exceed six (6) months upon finding that the threat of irreparable harm to resources is still present. Any pending permit application concerning a resource subject to an emergency moratorium may be summarily denied. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 8-215. - Violation; fine; payment of costs. 
    A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of government, including the historic district commission, that violates this act is responsible for a civil violation and may be fined not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
    A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of government that violates this act may be ordered by the court to pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved, excavated, or demolished. 
(Ord. No. 598, § 1, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 8-216. - Owosso Downtown Historic District. 
    The Owosso Downtown Historic District shall be described as follows: 
The plat of J.H. Calkins Subdivision of Reserve Number 7 of the City of Owosso, also the following blocks in the original plat of the village, now City of Owosso, 11, 12,14, 15, 16, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, Lots 11 through 18 in block 27, that portion of Reserve No. 1 and 2 south and west of the following described line, beginning at a point on the west line of Water Street where the north line of Mason Street, if extended, intersects said west line, then north along the west line of Water Street 326 feet, thence west parallel with the south line of William Street 143.8 feet thence south 62 feet parallel with the west line of Water Street, thence east parallel with the south line William Street 38 feet thence south parallel with the west line of Water Street 110 feet, thence west parallel with the south line of William Street 80 feet, thence north parallel to the west line of Water Street 110 feet, thence west parallel to the south line of William Street 292.7 feet thence south to the east bank of the Shiawassee River, and that portion of Reserve No. 3 that is north and west of a line perpendicular to the southwest line of Water Street that intersects the south line of Comstock Street and the Northeast line of Water Street and extends to the Shiawassee River. Also lots 8, 7, 3, and the west 1/2 of lot 2 in Block 17, and the west 82' of lot 11, and the west 82' of the south 33' of lot 10 in Block 10. This description also includes all street and alley right of ways in and adjoining these blocks and Reserves. Approximately 44.6 acres. 
    A map of the Owosso Downtown Historic District is attached as Exhibit A. 
Exhibit A 

(Ord. No. 717, § 6, 8-2-10) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 604, adopted December 4, 2000, from which former § 8-216 derived, was repealed by a vote of the electors of the city on August 14, 2001. Former § 8-216 pertained to establishment of historic districts. 
 Subsequently, section 6 of Ord. No. 717, adopted Aug. 2, 2010, added a new provision as set out herein. 
Chapter 9 - CABLE TELEVISION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 29; utilities and services, Ch. 34. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases and words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is mandatory not merely directory. 
City is the City of Owosso. 
Company is the grantee of this franchise. 
Council is the City Council of Owosso. 
Person is any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, company or organization of any kind. 
Television is the transmission of audio signals and/or visual images by means of electrical impulses. 
Signal shall mean the transmission of any signal or data. 
(Code 1977, § 7.271; Ord. No. 370, § 1, 3-16-81) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 9-2. - Grant of authority. 
(a)  The city hereby grants to the company the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys and public ways now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the city, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, man holes and all television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the city of a community television system for the interception, sale and distribution of television. 
(b)  The city reserves the right to require the company to place its conductors underground in all areas where electrical and telephone conductors now are or may hereafter be placed underground, and also to order the removal or relocation of poles, wires and other appurtenances, erected by the company whenever in the judgment of the council such action is in the public interest and the company shall forthwith comply with any and all instructions and directions in such matters at its own expense. 
(c)  The company shall, at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power of the city, and to such reasonable regulations as the city shall hereafter by resolution or ordinance provide. 
(d)  The right to use and occupy said streets, alleys and public places for the purposes herein set forth shall not be exclusive, and the city reserves the right to grant a similar use to any other person at any time during the term of this franchise. 
(Code 1977, § 7.272) 
State Law reference- Consent for construction in rights-of-way by cable television companies required from municipalities, MCL 247.183, MSA 9.263. 
Sec. 9-3. - Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
    The company at all times during the life of the franchise shall be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power of the city, and to such reasonable regulations as the city shall by resolution or ordinance provide. 
(Code 1977, § 7.273) 
Sec. 9-4. - Company liability; indemnification. 
(a)  The company shall at all times indemnify, protect and save the city harmless from and against all liability, claims and damages whatsoever, including any payments required by the worker's compensation law, which may arise out of or be caused by the erection, location, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement and/or removal of any of its equipment for facilities used in its television business in the city and by any act or omission of the company, its agents or employees. 
(b)  The company shall carry insurance with a responsible insurance company licensed to do business in the state, of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) against property damage for any one accident, and the company shall carry insurance of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per person and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per accident for liability due to personal injury or death. Such insurance shall protect the parties hereto from and against all claims, demands, accidents, judgments, and liability which may arise or result directly or indirectly from or by reason of such loss, injury or damages as set out in the first sentence of this section. All insurance required hereby shall be kept and maintained by the company in full force and effect during the entire life of this franchise. The company shall also carry insurance to protect it from all claims under the worker's compensation law applicable to it. To meet the foregoing requirements the policies of such insurance and the companies issuing them must be those approved by the city attorney, and copies thereof or certificates of insurance filed in the office of the city clerk, and shall be purchased and filed prior to the commencement of any construction by the company. 
(c)  The city shall notify the company or any representative thereof within ten (10) days after any claim or demand, either by suit or otherwise, if made against the city on account of company operations. Notice by registered or certified mail deposited in the U.S. Post Office with postage pre-paid addressed to the company or its representatives at its last known address within such ten (10) day period shall satisfy this requirement, or notice by telephone, telegraph, or other means of communication may be given with like effect within said period. 
(Code 1977, § 7.274) 
Sec. 9-5. - Service standards. 
(a)  The company shall maintain and operate its system in good working order at all times and render efficient service in accordance with such rules and regulations as are, or may be, set forth by the council as provided for in section 9-12 or by the public service commission of the state. 
(b)  Construction and maintenance of the transmission distribution system, including house connections, shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code, prepared by the National Bureau of Standards, the National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters and such applicable ordinances of the city, laws of the state, and of the United States, affecting such installations which may be presently in effect or may from time to time in the future be in effect, including the securing of all permits for such construction and maintenance required by any city ordinances. All installations of equipment shall be of a permanent nature, durable and installed in accordance with good engineering practice, and maintained in a safe suitable and substantial condition in good order and repair, and of sufficient height to company with all city regulations, ordinances and state laws, and so as not to interfere in any manner with the rights of the public or individual property owners, or to endanger the lives of any persons or interfere with travel and the use of public places by the public, and the construction, repair or removal thereof shall be done in such a manner as not to obstruct or impede traffic. 
(c)  Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service for the purpose of making repairs, adjustments or installations, the company shall do so at such time as will cause the least amount of inconvenience to its customers, and unless such interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary, it shall give reasonable notice thereof to its customers. 
(d)  The company shall maintain its service in accordance with the best accepted standards of the industry, and the antenna and receiving equipment shall be installed and maintained so as to give a reasonably noise-free picture on each channel. Installation and maintenance of equipment shall be such that the standard NTSC color signals shall be transmitted to any subscriber receiver without objectionable picture degradation. 
(e)  The company is granted the right to contract with subscribers for what is commonly called "Pay TV" at rates to be set by the company, provided, however, that in the provision of said service the company shall not diminish its present level of service or number of channels presently provided to its present subscribers at current rates. Provided, further, that no materials or programs offensive to the community standards of morality shall be transmitted over such cable network nor MPAA X-rated films. 
(Code 1977, § 7.275; Ord. No. 370, § 2, 3-16-81) 
Sec. 9-6. - Company rules. 
    The company shall have authority to promulgate such rules and regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable it to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under this franchise, and to assure uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers; provided, however, that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof, the laws of the state, or the rules and regulations of any state or federal regulatory body having jurisdiction thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 7.276) 
Sec. 9-7. - Conditions on street occupancy. 
(a)  Use. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the company within the city shall be so located as to cause a minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners adjoining same. 
(b)  Restoration. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the company shall, at its own cost and expense, and in a manner approved by the city engineer, replace and restore same in as good condition as before the work was commenced, and shall maintain said restoration in a condition approved by the city engineer. 
(c)  Relocation. If at any time during the life of this franchise the city shall elect to alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other public way, or to close, vacate, abandon, relocate, reopen, extend, pave or repave same, the company, upon reasonable notice by the city, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures and equipment as the city shall direct, at its own expense. 
(d)  Placement of fixtures. The company shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will interfere with any gas, electric or telephone facility, water hydrant, main or sewer, and all such fixtures placed in any street shall be placed at the edge of the sidewalk and inside the curb line, and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on said alley and in such manner as not to interfere with travel on said streets, alleys and public ways. 
(e)  Temporary removal of wires for building moving. The company shall on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city temporarily remove, raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising, or lowering the wires shall be paid by the person requesting same, and the company shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The company shall be given not less than forty-eight (48) hours' advance notice to arrange for complying with the provisions of this paragraph. 
(f)  Tree trimming. The company shall have the authority to trim trees overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public ways of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the company, all trimming to be done under the supervision and direction of the city at the expense of the company. 
(Code 1977, § 7.277) 
Sec. 9-8. - Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited. 
    The company shall not, as to rates charged, service, facilities, rules, regulations or in any other respect, make or grant any preference or advantage to any person, not subject any person to any discrimination, prejudice or disadvantage, providing that nothing in this franchise shall be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such classification would be entitled, or be deemed to prohibit the suspension of the terms of this section for a limited time during advertised promotional campaigns of the company. 
(Code 1977, § 7.278) 
Sec. 9-9. - Extension policy. 
(a)  The company shall file with the city clerk its extension policy approved by the council and the state public service commission and federal communications commission, if required, and the company shall not make or refuse to make any extension except in accordance with the policy and permitted by this franchise. 
(b)  The company shall extend its lines to serve all applicants for television service whose dwellings or places of business are located in the city who in good faith have entered into a contract for such service, provided, that additional charges in any area of the city with a population density of less than fifty (50) homes per cable mile of system may be added to the installation charges when necessary to cover extra installation costs. 
(c)  Publication. Upon acceptance of this franchise the company, at its own expense, shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the city its extension policy filed and approved as aforesaid. 
(Code 1977, § 7.279) 
Sec. 9-10. - Approval of transfer. 
    The company shall not sell or transfer its plant or system to another or transfer any rights under this franchise to another without city approval. No sale or transfer shall be effective until the vendee or transferee has filed in the office of the city clerk as instrument duly executed reciting the fact of such sale, or transfer, accepting terms, conditions and provisions thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 7.280) 
Sec. 9-11. - Subcontracting construction. 
    The company may subcontract the construction, erection and maintenance of poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures and equipment necessary for the operation and maintenance of its community television system, or may lease such facilities from a utility or utilities now serving the community or which may subsequently be authorized to serve same. 
(Code 1977, § 7.281) 
Sec. 9-12. - City rules. 
    The city hereby reserves the right to adopt such additional rules and regulations as it may find necessary in the exercise of its police power, in addition to the provisions herein contained and those of existing applicable ordinances, provided, that such regulations, by ordinance or otherwise, shall be reasonable and not in conflict with the rights herein granted nor the laws of the state. 
(Code 1977, § 7.282) 
Sec. 9-13. - Supervision and inspection. 
    The city shall have the right to supervise all construction and installation work done under this franchise and to make such inspections of same and of the maintenance thereof as it shall deem necessary to ensure compliance with this franchise and the provisions of other applicable ordinances. 
(Code 1977, § 7.282) 
Sec. 9-14. - Payment to city. 
(a)  For and in consideration of the granting of this franchise, the company, upon the execution hereof, shall pay to the city the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and in the event the company shall fail to commence giving cable television service in the city on or before eighteen (18) months from the date of this agreement, then, this amount shall be forfeited as a penalty for failing to commence giving cable television service to the city. 
(b)  And for the privilege of operating a community television system under this franchise the company shall pay to the city annually, not later than sixty (60) days after the company's fiscal year end, a sum of money equal to three (3) percent of the annual gross revenues received by it from sales of its service to its customers in the city, excluding all installation and connection charges necessary to enable the company to give service. 
(c)  The one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) down payment will be credited to any monies due the city for service revenue percentage payment during the period of the franchise. 
(Code 1977, § 7.273) 
Sec. 9-15. - Rates. 
(a)  The rates to be charged shall be fair and reasonable and no higher than necessary to meet cost of service, assuming efficient and economical management and including a fair rate of return. 
The council shall be notified thirty (30) days in advance of any rate increase, and if such rates are not in compliance with the standards set forth in this subsection, the council may, after hearing, put into effect such rates as it deems fair to the public and the franchise holder. 
(b)  The company shall provide one (1) community channel. This channel shall be equipped and maintained by the company to provide the following: Audio override on all channels, equipment necessary for character generation and video and audio feed or video tapes. The above equipment shall be located in the public safety building, and shall be installed and completed within twelve (12) months from this date. 
(Code 1977, § 7.284; Ord. No. 370, § 3, 3-16-81) 
Sec. 9-16. - Records and reports. 
    The city shall have access at all reasonable hours to all of the company's financial, customer and service records relating to its operation in the city. The following records and reports shall be filed with the city clerk in the local office to the company: 
(1)  Company rules and regulations. Copies of such rules, regulations, terms and conditions as are adopted by the company for the conduct of its business. 
(2)  Gross revenues. The company shall provide a financial accounting of gross revenues received, certified by an independent auditing firm, acceptable to the city and attested to by an officer of company. The financial accounting shall be presented not later than sixty (60) days after the end of the company's fiscal year. 
(Code 1977, § 7.215; Ord. No. 370, § 4, 3-16-81) 
Sec. 9-17. - Term of franchise. 
(a)  This franchise and the rights herein granted shall take effect and be in force from and after its acceptance by the company, the final adoption of this chapter by the city, and payment by the company of the initial fee provided for in section 9-16 hereof, and shall continue in force and effect for a term of twenty-five (25) years after its effective date, unless sooner revoked for any of the reasons hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  The company shall proceed as soon as possible and no longer than ninety (90) days from the effective date hereof to obtain all other necessary permits, authorizations and licenses which may be required in the conduct of its business, both public and private, and shall commence construction within six (6) months from the granting of such permits or licenses, as required. 
(c)  Installation of the system shall be completed and the company shall be prepared to furnish service to subscribers within a period of eighteen (18) months from the effective date of this franchise. If for any reason the company shall fail or neglect to complete its installation and be prepared to furnish service by that date this franchise shall become null and void and have no further force or effect. 
(d)  The company may surrender this franchise at any time upon filing with the city a written notice of its intention so to do at least sixty (60) days before the surrender date. On the surrender date specified in such notice all the rights and privileges and the obligations, duties and disabilities of the company shall cease and terminate, except that the company shall have an additional six (6) months to remove its plant and equipment from the city. At the end of said six (6) months' period any property owned by the company not removed from the city shall become the property of the city to do with it as it may choose. Any costs or expense incurred by the city in removing the company's former property from its streets or lands shall be a valid claim against the company's performance bond. 
(e)  The company shall not engage in the sale, rental or repair of television receivers. The installations and operation by the company shall be so maintained as not to interfere in any way with television reception already in existence. 
(Code 1977, § 7.286) 
Sec. 9-18. - Special service. 
(a)  The company shall, without charge for installation, maintenance or service, make single installations of its standard community antenna facilities at each fire station, public and parochial school in the city. 
(b)  The company shall make its facilities available on a temporary basis without charge, to the city, the state and/or the United States of America, or the civil defense authorities for the communication to residents of any information pertaining to war, threat of war, natural catastrophe, or other information designed to protect or save lives or property. 
(Code 1977, § 7.287) 
Sec. 9-19. - Penalties. 
    Any violation by the company, its vendee, lessee or successor of the provisions of this franchise, or failure promptly to perform any of the provisions of this franchise shall be cause for the forfeiture of same and all rights thereunder to the city. 
(Code 1977, § 7.288) 
Secs. 9-20-9-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BASIC CABLE RATE REGULATION 

Sec. 9-30. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, "Act" shall mean the Communications Act of 1934, as amended (and specifically as amended by the Cable Televisions Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. 102-385), and as may be amended from time to time; "FCC" shall mean the Federal Communications Commission; "FCC Rules" shall mean all rules of the FCC promulgated from time to time pursuant to the Act; "basic cable service" shall mean "basic service" as defined in the FCC Rules, and any other cable television service which is subject to rate regulation by the city pursuant to the Act and the FCC Rules; "associated equipment" shall mean all equipment and services subject to regulation pursuant to 47 CFR § 76.923; and an "increase" in rates shall mean an increase in rates or a decrease in programming or customer services. All other words and phrases used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined in the Act and FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 9-31. - Purpose; interpretation. 
    The purpose of this article is to: (1) adopt regulations consistent with the Act and the FCC Rules with respect to basic cable service rate regulations, and (2) prescribe procedures to provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties in connection with basic cable service rate regulation by the city. This article shall be implemented and interpreted consistent with the Act and FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 9-32. - Rate regulations promulgated by FCC. 
    In connection with the regulation of rates for basic cable service and associated equipment, the City of Owosso shall follow all FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 9-33. - Filing; additional information; burden of proof. 
(a)  A cable operator shall submit its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates in accordance with the Act and the FCC Rules. The cable operator shall include as part of its submission such information as is necessary to show that its schedule of rates or its proposed increase in rates complies with the Act and FCC Rules. The cable operator shall file ten (10) copies of the schedule or proposed increase with the city clerk. For purposes of this article, the filing of the cable operator shall be deemed to have been made when at least ten (10) copies have been received by the city clerk. The city council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations prescribing the information, data and calculations which must be included as part of the cable operator's filing of the schedule of rates or a proposed increase. 
(b)  In addition to information and data required by rules and regulations of the city pursuant to subsection (a) above, a cable operator shall provide all information requested by the city manager in connection with the city's review and regulation of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates. The city manager may establish deadlines for submission of the requested information and the cable operator shall comply with such deadlines. 
(c)  A cable operator has the burden of proving that its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates complies with the Act and the FCC Rules including, without limitation, 47 USC § 543 and 47 CFR §§ 76.922 and 76.923. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 9-34. - Proprietary information. 
(a)  If this article, any rules or regulations adopted by the city pursuant to section 9-33(a), or any request for information pursuant to section 9-33(b) requires the production of proprietary information, the cable operator shall produce the information. However, at the time the allegedly proprietary information is submitted, a cable operator may request that specific, identified portions of its response be treated as confidential and withheld from public disclosure. The request must state the reason why the information should be treated as proprietary and the facts that support those reasons. The request for confidentiality will be granted if the city determines that the preponderance of the evidence shows that nondisclosure is consistent with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Acts, 5 U.S.C. § 552 and MCL 15.231. The city shall place in a public file for inspection any decision that results in information being withheld. If the cable operator requests confidentiality and the request is denied: (1) where the cable operator is proposing a rate increase, it may withdraw the proposal, in which case the allegedly proprietary information will be returned to it; or (2) the cable operator may seek review within five (5) working days of the denial in any appropriate forum. Release of the information will be stayed pending review. 
(b)  Any interested party may file a request to inspect material withheld as proprietary with the city. The city shall weigh the policy considerations favoring nondisclosure against the reasons cited for permitting inspection in light of the facts of the particular case. It will then promptly notify the requesting entity and the cable operator that submitted the information as to the disposition of the request. It may grant, deny or condition a request. The requesting party or the cable operator may seek review of the decision by filing an appeal with any appropriate forum. Disclosure will be stayed pending resolution of any appeal. 
(c)  The procedures set forth in this section shall be construed as analogous to and consistent with the rules of the FCC regarding requests for confidentiality including, without limitations, 47 CFR § 0.459. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 9-35. - Public notice; initial review of rates. 
    Upon the filing of ten (10) copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates pursuant to section 9-33(a) above, the city clerk shall publish notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city which shall state that: (1) the filing has been received by the city clerk and (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) is available for public inspection and copying, and (2) interested parties are encouraged to submit written comments on the filing to the city clerk not later than seven (7) days after the public notice is published. The city clerk shall give notice to the cable operator of the date, time, and place of the meeting at which the city council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. This notice shall be mailed by first-class mail at least three (3) days before the meeting. In addition, if a written staff or consultant's report on the schedule of rates or the proposed increase is prepared for consideration of the city council, then the city clerk shall mail a copy of the report by first-class mail to the cable operator at least three (3) days before the meeting at which the city council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 9-36. - Tolling order. 
    After a cable operator has filed its existing schedule of rates or a proposed increase in these rates, the existing schedule of rates will remain in effect or the proposed increase in rates will become effective after thirty (30) days from the date of filing under section 9-33(a) above unless the city council (or other properly authorized body or official) tolls the thirty-day deadline pursuant to 47 CFR § 76.933 by issuing a brief written order, by resolution or otherwise, within thirty (30) days of the date of filing. The city council may toll the thirty-day deadline for an additional ninety (90) days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings and for an additional one hundred fifty (150) days in cases involving cost-of-service showings. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 9-37. - Public notices; hearing on basic cable service rates following tolling of thirty-day deadline. 
    If a written order has been issued pursuant to section 9-36 and 47 CFR § 76.933 to toll the effective date of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates, the cable operator shall submit to the city any additional information required or requested pursuant to section 9.33 of this article. In addition, the city council shall hold a public hearing to consider the comments of interested parties within the additional ninety (90) days or one hundred fifty-day period, as the case may be. The city clerk shall publish a public notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall state: (1) the date, time, and place at which the hearing shall be held; (2) interested parties may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such hearing to submit comments on or objections to the existing rates or the proposed increase in rates; and (3) copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates and related information (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) are available for inspection or copying from the office of the clerk. The public notice shall be published not less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing. In addition, the city clerk shall mail by first-class mail a copy of the public notice to the cable operator not less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 9-38. - Staff or consultant report; written response. 
    Following the public hearing, the city manager shall cause a report to be prepared for the city council which shall (based on the filing of the cable operator, the comments or objections of interested parties, information requested from the cable operator and its response, staff or consultant's review, and other appropriate information) include a recommendation for the decision of the city council pursuant to section 9-39. The city clerk shall mail a copy of the report to the cable operator by first-class mail not less than twenty (20) days before the city council acts under section 9-39. The cable operator may file a written response to the report with the city clerk. If at least ten (10) copies of the response are filed by the cable operator with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the report is mailed to the cable operator, the city clerk shall forward it to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 9-39. - Rate decisions and orders. 
    The city council shall issue a written order, by resolution or otherwise, which in whole or in part, approves the existing rates for basic cable service and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates, denies the existing rates or proposed increase, orders a rate reduction, prescribes a reasonable rate, allows the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, or orders other appropriate relief, in accordance with the FCC Rules. If the city council issues an order allowing the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, it shall also direct the cable operator to maintain an accounting pursuant to 47 CFR § 76.933. The order specified in this section shall be issued within ninety (90) days of the tolling order under section 9-36 in all cases not involving a cost-of-service showing. The order shall be issued within one hundred fifty (150) days after the tolling order under section 9-36 in all cases involving a cost-of-service showing. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 9-40. - Refunds; notice. 
    The city council may order a refund to subscribers as provided in 47 CFR § 76.942. Before the city council orders any refund to subscribers, the city clerk shall give at least seven (7) days written notice to the cable operator by first-class mail of the date, time, and place at which the city council shall consider issuing a refund order and shall provide an opportunity for the cable operator to comment. The cable operator may appear in person, by agent, or by a letter at such time for the purpose of submitting comments to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 9-41. - Written decisions; public notices. 
    Any order of the city council pursuant to section 9-39 or section 9-40 shall be in writing, shall be effective upon adoption by the city council, and shall be deemed released to the public upon adoption. The clerk shall publish a public notice of any such written order in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall: (1) summarize the written decision; and (2) state that copies of the text of the written decision are available for inspection or copying from the office of the clerk. In addition, the city clerk shall mail a copy of the text of the written decision to the cable operator by first-class mail. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 9-42. - Rules and regulations. 
    In addition to rules promulgated pursuant to section 9-33, the city council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations for basic cable service rate regulation proceedings (including, without limitation, the conduct of hearings), consistent with the Act and the FCC rules. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 9-43. - Failure to give notice. 
    The failure of the city clerk to give the notices or to mail copies of the reports as required by this article shall not invalidate the decisions or proceedings of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 9-44. - Additional hearings. 
    In addition to the requirements of this article, the city council may hold additional public hearings upon such reasonable notice as the city council, in its sole discretion, shall prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 9-45. - Additional powers. 
    The city shall possess all powers conferred by the Act, the FCC Rules, the cable operator's franchise, and all other applicable law. The powers exercised pursuant to the Act, the FCC Rules, and this article shall be in addition to powers conferred by law or otherwise. The city may take any action not prohibited by the Act and the FCC Rules to protect the public interest in connection with basic cable service rate regulation. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 9-46. - Failure to comply; remedies. 
    The city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies against the cable operator (including, without limitation, all remedies provided under a cable operator's franchise with the city) for failure to comply with the Act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this article, any requirements of this article, or any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder. Subject to applicable law, failure to comply with the Act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this article, any requirements of this article, or any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, shall also be sufficient grounds for revocation or denial of renewal of cable operator's franchise. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 9-47. - Severability. 
    The various parts, sections, and clauses of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the article shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 9-48. - Conflicting provisions. 
    In the event of any conflict between this article and the provisions of any prior ordinance, or any franchise, permit, consent agreement or other agreement with a cable operator, then the provisions of this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Sec. 9-49. - Effective date. 
    This article shall become effective October 24, 1993. 
(Ord. No. 510, § 1, 10-4-93) 
Secs. 9-50-9-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OWOSSO COMMUNITY TELEVISION 

Sec. 9-100. - Purpose of OCTV. 
(a)  The Owosso Community Television (OCTV) facility has been established to provide support services necessary for video casting locally produced television programs. 
(b)  It is the purpose of OCTV to provide the people of the city and organizations in the Owosso area with an opportunity to be involved in using the television medium to inform, communicate, educate and entertain. It is also the purpose of OCTV to provide the Owosso community with locally produced programs of public interest. 
(c)  The following television channels shall be operated by OCTV: 
(1)  Channel 95. This channel or its successor shall be known as the "public access channel" and shall be used solely to cablecast non-profit, non-commercial programming produced or sponsored by individuals or organizations in the Owosso area. When the aforementioned programming is not scheduled, this channel may cablecast either an electronic message board to be known as the "public access electronic message board" or the Channel 96 electronic message board. The public access electronic message board shall be used solely for promotion of the public access channel and shall not be used for "for-profit" commercials or advertisements. Messages cablecast on the public access electronic message board may not contain any of the following: 
a.  Obscene material as the same is defined and regulated under Act No. 343 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1984, being MCL 752.362 et seq. 
b.  Slanderous or libelous material. 
(2)  Channel 96. This channel or its successors shall be known as the "government/education access channel" and shall be used to cablecast non-profit, non-commercial programs produced or submitted by government or educational agencies. When the aforementioned programming is not scheduled, this channel shall cablecast an electronic message board containing government or educational messages submitted by government or educational agencies, or an electronic message board used for the promotion of community activities, meetings or events by non-profit organizations within the county, as determined by the city administration. Electronic messages advising of emergencies, including but not limited to weather emergencies, shall take precedence over all other programming on this channel. 
(Ord. No. 687, § 1, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 722, § 1, 7-5-11) 
Sec. 9-101. - Access channels program restrictions. 
(a)  No program, production or presentation shall be cablecast that contains any of the following: 
(1)  Information which relates directly or indirectly to a lottery, gift, enterprise or similar scheme, offering prizes dependent upon lot or chance. 
(2)  Obscene material as the same is defined and regulated under Public Act 343 of the Public Acts of the State of Michigan of 1984, being MCL 752.362 et seq. 
(3)  Slanderous or libelous material. 
(b)  Cablecasting of programs, productions or presentations shall be for noncommercial, nonprofit purposes only and accordingly, the following shall be excluded: 
(1)  Material, the primary purpose of which is to promote a commercial service, product, trade or business. 
(2)  Program material which identifies any product, service, trademark or brand name in a manner that is not reasonably related to the noncommercial use of such product, service, trademark or brand name, portrayed on the program material. 
(3)  Any solicitation for funds or other goods that would benefit the access user or his/her agent. 
(Ord. No. 687, § 1, 10-15-07) 
Sec. 9-102. - Electronic message board restrictions. 
(a)  The electronic message board is for informational purposes only and may be used for: 
(1)  The promotion of community activities, meetings or events by non-profit organizations. 
(b)  The electronic message board shall not be used for "for-profit" commercials or advertisements. 
(c)  No electronic message shall be cablecast that contains any of the following: 
(1)  Obscene material as the same is defined and regulated under Act No. 343 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1984, being MCL 752.362 et seq. 
(2)  Slanderous or libelous material. 
(Ord. No. 687, § 1, 10-15-07) 
Sec. 9-103. - Rules and procedures. 
    The city council shall establish by resolution such rules and procedures relative to the general administration, control, supervision and uses of OCTV facilities as shall be deemed necessary or advisable. Scheduling of cablecast time on any channels that may now or hereafter be designated as a government or school district channel by the city council of the city and any use of a OCTV access channel or channels, including the use of any OCTV studio or equipment, by the city council of the city or by the city manager or his or her designee may be exempt from all or part of these rules, as determined by the city manager or his designee. A copy of said rules and procedures shall be published and maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 687, § 1, 10-15-07) 
Sec. 9-104. - Cable access advisory commission-Created. 
    There is hereby established an advisory body to the city council to be known as the cable access advisory commission, hereinafter to be known as the "commission," which shall act solely in an advisory capacity to the city council with regard to all aspects of public access cable service in the city. 
(Ord. No. 687, § 1, 10-15-07) 
Sec. 9-105. - Same-Membership. 
    Membership of the commission shall consist of three (3) citizen at large voting members possessing the qualifications to hold appointed office as stated in Charter sections 4.2 and 4.3. Whenever possible, members shall be cable subscribers. 
    The person from the administrative staff of the city who has been designated by the city manager as the OCTV coordinator shall be an ex officio member of the commission but without the right to vote. 
(Ord. No. 687, § 1, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 706, § 1, 4-20-09;; Ord. No. 722, § 2, 7-5-1) 
Sec. 9-106. - Same-Term of members. 
    Each at large member of the commission shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years commencing on July 1 except that the members at the time of this reorganization shall receive terms of one (1) year, two (2) years, and three (3) years respectively. 
(Ord. No. 687, § 1, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 706, § 1, 4-20-09; Ord. No. 722, § 2, 7-5-11) 
Sec. 9-107. - Same-Internal administration. 
    The commission shall select one (1) of its voting members as chair and shall designate the ex-officio member as secretary. The commission may adopt such rules as it deems necessary for the transaction of its business. Any decision of the commission shall require the concurrence of a majority of the members. The commission shall meet as often as necessary with at least one (1) meeting each calendar quarter and all of its meetings shall comply with the open meetings act. 
(Ord. No. 687, § 1, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 706, § 1, 4-20-09; Ord. No. 722, § 2, 7-5-11) 
Sec. 9-108. - Same-Specific duties. 
    The commission shall have the following specific duties: 
(1)  Advise the city council regarding general policy matters related to the services provided to public access producers and viewers pursuant to the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(2)  Encourage the use of public access channels among the widest range of institutions, groups, and individuals within the city. 
(3)  Make an annual report to the city which shall include, but not be limited to, a summary report on the utilization of any public access channels and a summary report of the commission's deliberations throughout the year. 
(4)  Request comments and encourage suggestions from the public regarding public access channels. 
(5)  Perform such other functions as the city council may direct. 
(6)  Conduct public hearings at the request of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 687, § 1, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 722, § 2, 7-5-11) 
Sec. 9-109. - Same-Finances. 
    The commission shall not have the power to expend public funds but may make recommendations to the city council for budget purposes. 
    The commission shall not engage in rate regulation, rate change request processing, financial analysis, legal interpretation, or contractual negotiation with a cable operator or public service channel operator. 
(Ord. No. 687, § 1, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 722, § 2, 7-5-11) 
Sec. 9-110. - Effective date. 
    This article shall become effective July 25, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 687, § 1, 10-15-07; Ord. No. 722, § 2, 7-5-11) 
Chapter 10 - CIVIL RIGHTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Civil rights act, MCL 37.210 et seq., MSA 3.548(101) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOUSING DISCRIMINATION 

Sec. 10-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Housing accommodation includes improved or unimproved real property, or a part thereof, which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied, as the home or residence of one (1) or more persons. 
    Real estate broker or salesman means a person, whether licensed or not, who, for or with the expectation of receiving a consideration, lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents, or leases real property; who negotiates or attempts to negotiate any of those activities; who holds himself or herself out as engaged in those activities; who negotiates or attempts to negotiate a loan secured or to be secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance upon real property; who is engaged in the business of listing real property in a publication; or a person employed by or acting on behalf of a real estate broker or salesman. 
    Real estate transaction means the sale, exchange, rental, or lease of real property, or an interest therein. 
    Real property includes a building, structure, mobile home, real estate, land, mobile home park, trailer park, tenement, leasehold, or an interest in a real estate cooperative or condominium. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, MCL 37.2501, MSA 3.548(501) et seq. 
Sec. 10-27. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  A person engaging in a real estate transaction, or a real estate broker or salesman, shall not on the basis of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, or marital status of a person or a person residing with that person: 
(1)  Refuse to engage in a real estate transaction with a person; 
(2)  Discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith; 
(3)  Refuse to receive from a person or transmit to a person a bona fide offer to engage in a real estate transaction; 
(4)  Refuse to negotiate for a real estate transaction with a person; 
(5)  Represent to a person that real property is not available for inspection, sale, rental, or lease when in fact it is so available, or knowingly fail to bring a property listing to a person's attention, or refuse to permit a person to inspect real property; 
(6)  Print, circulate, post, mail, or otherwise cause to be published a statement, advertisement, notice, or sign, or use a form of application for a real estate transaction, or make a record of inquiry in connection with a prospective real estate transaction, which indicates, directly or indirectly, an intent to make a preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination with respect thereto. 
(7)  Offer, solicit, accept, use, or retain a listing of real property with the understanding that a person may be discriminated against in a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith. 
(b)  This section is subject to section 10-28. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9.291, 9.293, 9.294, 9.295, 9.296) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 37.2502, MSA 3.548(502). 
Sec. 10-28. - Exclusions. 
(a)  Section 10-27 shall not apply: 
(1)  To the rental of a housing accommodation in a building which contains housing accommodations for not more than two (2) families living independently of each other if the owner or a member of the owner's immediate family resides in one (1) of the housing accommodations, or to the rental of a room or rooms in a single-family dwelling by a person if the lessor or a member of the lessor's immediate family resides therein; 
(2)  To the rental of a housing accommodation for not more than twelve (12) months by the owner or lessor where it was occupied by him or her and maintained as his or her home for at least three (3) months immediately preceding occupancy by the tenant and is temporarily vacated while maintaining legal residence; 
(3)  With respect to the age provision only, to the sale, rental, or lease of housing accommodations meeting the requirements of federal, state, or local housing programs for senior citizens, or accommodations otherwise intended, advertised, designed or operated, bona fide, for the purpose of providing housing accommodations for persons fifty (50) years of age or older. 
(b)  As used in subsection (a), "immediate family" means a spouse, parent, child, or sibling. 
(c)  Information relative to the marital status of an individual may be obtained when necessary for the preparation of a deed or other instrument of conveyance. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9.298, 9.299) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 37.2503, MSA 3.548(503). 
Sec. 10-29. - Financing; prohibited conduct. 
(a)  A person to whom application is made for financial assistance or financing in connection with a real estate transaction or in connection with the construction, rehabilitation, repair, maintenance, or improvement of real property, or a representative of that person, shall not: 
(1)  Discriminate against the applicant because of the religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, or marital status of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant. 
(2)  Use a form of application for financial assistance or financing or make or keep a record or inquiry in connection with an application for financial assistance or financing which indicates, directly or indirectly, a preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination as to the religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, or marital status of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant. 
(b)  Subsection (a)(2) shall not apply to a form of application for financial assistance prescribed for the use of a lender regulated as a mortgagee under the national housing act, as amended, being 12 USC sections 1701 to 1750g (Supp. 1973) or by a regulatory board or office acting under the statutory authority of this state or the United States. 
(Code 1977, § 9.292) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 37.2504, MSA 3.541(504). 
Sec. 10-30. - Limitations on use or occupancy; religious or charitable institution or organization or property. 
(a)  A condition, restriction, or prohibition, including a right of entry or possibility of reverter, which directly or indirectly limits the use or occupancy of real property on the basis of religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, or marital status is void, except a limitation of use as provided in section 10-28(a)(3) or on the basis of religion relating to real property held by a religious institution or organization, or by a religious or charitable organization operated, supervised or controlled by a religious institution or organization, and used for religious or charitable purposes. 
(b)  A person shall not insert in a written instrument relating to real property a provision that is void under this section or honor such a provision in the chain of title. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 37.2505, MSA 3.548(505). 
Sec. 10-31. - Inducing of transactions. 
    A person shall not represent, for the purpose of inducing a real estate transaction from which the period may benefit financially, that a change has occurred or will or may occur in the composition with respect to religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex, or marital status of the owners or occupants in the block, neighborhood, or area in which the real property is located, or represent that this change will or may result in the lowering of property values, an increase in criminal or antisocial behavior, or a decline in the quality of schools in the block, neighborhood, or area in which the real property is located. 
(Code 1977, § 9.297) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 37.2506, MSA 3.548(506). 
Chapter 11 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance affecting any specific urban renewal projects saved from repeal, § 1-6(10); administration, Ch. 2; planning, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference- Downtown development authority, MCL 125.1651 et seq., MSA 5.3010(1) et seq.; housing and slum clearance projects, MCL 125.651 et seq., MSA 5.3011 et seq.; housing corporation law, MCL 125.601 et seq., MSA 5.3057(1) et seq.; urban redevelopment corporations, MCL 125.901 et seq., MSA 5.3058(1) et seq.; rehabilitation of blighted areas, MCL 125.71 et seq., MSA 5.3501 et seq.; economic development corporations, MCL 125.1601 et seq., MSA 5.3520(1) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 11-1-11-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 11-16. - Boundaries designated. 
    Pursuant to the requirements of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq., MSA 5.3010(1) et seq.), as amended, the boundaries of the downtown district shall be amended to include: 
(1)  Beginning at the north line of Main Street and the Shiawassee River; thence northwesterly along the east bank of the Shiawassee River to a point 478.50' west of the west line of Water Street; thence north to the north line of Williams Street; thence east 57.75'; thence south 198'; thence east 277'; thence north 62'; thence east 143.8' to the west line of Water Street; thence north to the north line of Williams Street; thence east to the west line of Ball Street; thence north to the north line of Lot 5 Block 5 of the Original Plat of the City of Owosso. Thence east to the east line of Washington Street; thence south to the north line of Lot 8 Block 6 of the Original Plat of the city; thence east along the north line of Lot 8 to the west line of Lot 6 Block 6 of the Original Plat of the City of Owosso. Thence north to the north line of said Lot 6; thence east to the east line of Park Street; thence south to the north line of Lot 10 Block 10 of the Original Plat of the City of Owosso. Thence east to the center line of Lot 9 in said block; thence south 48 feet; thence east to the east line of Saginaw Street; thence south to the north line of Main Street; thence east to the east line of Hickory Street; thence south to the Shiawassee River; thence northwesterly along the north line of the Shiawassee River to the point of beginning. Also, 
(2)  Beginning at a point which is the southeast corner of Lot 12 Block 2 of A. L. Williams Addition to the village; thence traveling northerly along the Shiawassee River to a point which is the northwest corner of Lot 7 Block 2 of Lucy L. Comstock's Addition; thence southerly along the west line of Lot 7 and continuing south along the west line of Block 6 to a point 132' north of the southwest corner of Block 6 of said addition; thence westerly along the south line of Lots 2 and 4 of Block 9 of said addition to a point which is the southwest corner of Lot 2 Block 9 of said addition; thence southerly along the east line of Shiawassee Street to the southwest corner of Lot 15, Woodards Subdivision, of Block 1 of A. L. Williams Addition to the village; thence easterly to the point of beginning, City of Owosso, Shiawassee County, Michigan. And, 
(3)  Commencing 70' south of the northeast corner of Block 38; thence west 143.8'; thence south 62'; thence west 334.7'; thence south to the Shiawassee River; thence southeasterly to a point 6? north of the point where the north line of Exchange Street, if extended westerly, would intersect the east bank of said river; thence on a line parallel with the north line of Exchange Street so extended to a point 126' west of the west line of Water Street; thence north 2'; thence easterly on a line parallel with the north line of Exchange Street so extended 38'; thence south 2'6? to the north line of Exchange Street so extended; thence east on the west line of Exchange Street so extended 88' to the west line of Water Street; thence north to the beginning, Block 38 Original Plat, Village (now City) of Owosso, Shiawassee County, Michigan. And, 
(4)  All the area bounded by Exchange, Hickory, East Main and Saginaw Streets. Also, 
(5)  Commencing on the south line of Main Street and 33' east of the northwest corner of Section 19, Township 7 North, Range 3 East; thence east 132', south 132', west 66', north 50', west 66', north 82' to the point of beginning. 
(6)  Commencing on the south line of Main Street (M-21) 231' east of the northwest corner of Section 19; thence east 148.5', south 132', west 148.5', north 132' to the point of beginning, Section 19, Township 7 North, Range 2 East, City of Owosso. 
(7)  The south 1/2 Lot, East Dewey and Stewart's Addition. 
(8)  The north 34' of Lots 17 and 18; also the south 20' of Lot 9, Outlot 6 of A. L. and B. O. Williams Subdivision of Outlots 6 and 7. 
(9)  The south 98' of Lots 17 and 18; Outlot 6 of A. L. and B. O. Williams Subdivision of Outlots 6 and 7. 
(10)  Lot 9 (except the south 20'), Outlot 6 of A. L. and B. O. Williams Subdivision of Outlots 6 and 7. 
(11)  Section 19, commencing on the south line of Main Street 165' east of the northwest corner Section 19, south 132', east 66', north 132', west to the beginning. 
(12)  Lots 1 through 8, Block 12 and all of Block 8, A. L. Williams Addition, including closed streets and alleys. 
(13)  Lots 2 and 3, Block 20, A. L. Williams Addition to City of Owosso. 
(14)  Lot 6, Block 20, A. L. Williams Addition. 
(15)  Lot 7, Block 20 of A. L. Williams Addition (except triangular piece extending from northwest corner Lot 7; thence south 23', easterly 66.5' to a point on the north line of Lot 7; thence 71.5' northwesterly to the beginning). 
(16)  Lots 11 and 12, Block 20, A. L. Williams Addition. 
(17)  Commencing at the intersection of the center line, GTWRR track east line, Washington Street; thence northerly 72' along the street line to the point of beginning; thence easterly 139'; thence northerly 96' parallel west of said street line; thence westerly 139'; thence southerly 96' on the east line of Washington Street to the point of beginning (13,344 square feet), A. L. Williams Addition to the Village of Owosso. 
(18)  Commencing at the intersection of the center line, GTWRR track and the east line of Washington Street; thence northerly 168' along the street line to the point of beginning; thence northerly 39' to the southerly bank of the Shiawassee River; thence easterly 144'; thence southerly 39' parallel west of said street line; thence westerly 142' to the east line of Washington Street to the point of beginning, A. L. Williams Addition to the Village of Owosso. 
(19)  Part of A. L. Williams Addition to the City of Owosso, Williams and Lyons Addition to the city, Louisa Merell's Addition to the Village (now City) of Owosso and J.L. Wright's Addition to the City, all in Section 24, Township 7N, Range 2E, City of Owosso and Section 19, T7N, R3E, City of Owosso, Shiawassee County, Michigan, described as beginning at a point on the East line of Washington Street which is N01°04'16?E 178.33' from the southwest quarter of Reserve #8 of said A.L. Williams Addition to the City; thence N88°58'17?E 58.87'; thence S87°29'00?E 141.47'; thence S80°59'30?E 208.51 '; thence N79°53'15?E 249.61'; thence N84°44'04?E 98.81'; thence S83°12'46?E 107.12'; thence S69°48'57?E 185.83'; thence S87°18'35?E 285.30'; thence S80°22'21?E 184.20'; thence N78°09'52?E 88.58'; thence S86°52'31?E 65.28'; thence S73°37'20?E 230.94'; thence S72°36'38?E 136.78'; thence S56°07'29?E 85.61'; thence S54°32'48?E 156.92'; thence S43°19'04?E 100.70'; thence S36°46'08?E 53.67'; thence S39°18'45?E 84.17'; thence S23°55'42?E 93.89'; thence S20°30'21 ?E 98.80'; thence S30°45'56?E 89.82'; thence S30°03'46?E 94.95'; thence S40°48'33?E 87.92'; thence S58°16'37?E 179.85'; thence S70°38'55?E 75.50' to the westerly line of Oakwood Avenue; thence northwesterly to the water's edge of the Shiawassee River; thence northwesterly along said water's edge to the east line of Washington Street; thence southerly along said east line to the point of beginning (3,214.43 lineal feet), except the above described lands lying within a parcel of land commencing at the intersection of the center line GTWRR track and the east line of Washington Street; thence northerly 168 feet +/- along the street line to the point of beginning, thence 39 feet to the southerly bank of the Shiawassee River, thence easterly 144 feet, thence southerly 39 feet parallel west of said street line, thence westerly 142 feet +/- to the east line of Washington Street to the point of beginning, A L. Williams Addition to the Village (now City) of Owosso. 
(20)  All street right-of-way within the area described as beginning at the northeast corner of the intersection of Hickory Street right-of-way and the Jerome Street right-of-way, proceeding easterly to the east line of Oakwood Street, thence southerly to the south bank of the water's edge of the Shiawassee River, thence easterly along said water's edge to the west line of Oakwood Street. 
(21)  That portion of land south of Jerome Street and north of the Shiawassee River, East of the extended Park Street and west of the west line of Stafford, Gardner, & Trankles Addition to the City of Owosso, Shiawassee County, Michigan, except that section west of the intersection of the east line of Hickory Street extended south to the south bank at the water's edge of the Shiawassee River. 
(22)  Lot 74 of Stafford, Gardner and Trankles Central Addition to the City of Owosso, Shiawassee County, Michigan 
And that the remainder of the DDA boundaries remain unchanged. 
(Code 1977, § 5.293; Ord. No. 418, § 1, 12-5-83; Ord. No. 460, § 1, 10-16-89; Ord. No. 682, § 1, 11-20-06) 
Secs. 11-17-11-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions generally, § 2-216 et seq. 

Sec. 11-31. - Created. 
    Pursuant to the authority of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq., MSA 5.3010(1) et seq.), as amended, the Owosso Downtown Development Authority shall be and hereby is created. 
(Code 1977, § 5.291) 
Sec. 11-32. - Powers and duties. 
    The Owosso Downtown Development Authority shall exercise such powers and duties as provided and in accordance with the terms of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq., MSA 5.3010(1) et seq.), as amended, including but not limited to the definition of a development area; the origination of a development plan, and the implementation of a development program as provided in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 5.292) 
Secs. 11-33-11-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT PLAN 

Sec. 11-46. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Base year assessment roll means the base year assessment roll prepared by the city assessor in accordance with section 11-49. 
    Captured assessed value means the amount in any one (1) year by which the current assessed value as finally equalized of all taxable property in the development area exceeds the initial assessed value. 
    Development area means the area legally described in Exhibit G of the development plan dated September, 1984, as amended on April 15, 2002, December 15, 2003, and November 20, 2006 and which is hereby made a part of this division. 
    Development fund means the downtown development authority development fund established pursuant to section 11-51. 
    Development plan means the tax increment financing and development plan for the city dated September, 1984, as amended, and as transmitted to the council by the downtown development authority for public hearing, copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
    Downtown development authority means the city downtown development authority. 
    Initial assessed value means the most recently assessed value as finally equalized of all the taxable property within the boundaries of the development area on November 5, 1984. 
    Taxing jurisdiction shall mean each unit of government levying an ad valorem property tax on property in the development area. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 1, 11-5-84; Ord. No. 455, 11-21-88; Ord. No. 654, § 1, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 683, § 1, 11-20-06) 
Sec. 11-47. - Approval and adoption. 
    Based on the following determinations, the development plan is hereby adopted and approved: 
(1)  The development plan and all expenditures therefor constitute a public purpose. 
(2)  The development plan meets the requirement of Section 17(2) of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1667(2), MSA 5.3010(17)(2)), as amended. 
(3)  The proposed method of financing the development is feasible and the downtown development authority has demonstrated the ability to arrange the necessary financing. 
(4)  The proposed development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(5)  The development plan is in reasonable accord with the master plan of the city. 
(6)  Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections and utilities are reasonably necessary for the development and for the city. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 2, 11-5-84) 
Sec. 11-48. - Boundaries of development area. 
    The boundaries of the development area as set forth in the development plan are hereby adopted and confirmed. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 3, 11-5-84) 
Cross reference- Boundaries designated, § 11-16. 
Sec. 11-49. - Preparation of base year assessment roll. 
(a)  The city assessor shall prepare the initial base year assessment roll. The initial base year assessment roll shall list each taxing jurisdiction in which the development area is located, the initial assessed value of the development area on the effective date of this ordinance and the amount of tax revenue derived by each taxing jurisdiction from ad valorem taxes on the property in the development area. 
(b)  The assessor shall transmit copies of the initial base year assessment roll to the city treasurer, county treasurer, downtown development authority and each taxing jurisdiction, together with a notice that the assessment roll has been prepared in accordance with this division and the tax increment financing plan contained in the development plan approved by this division. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 4, 11-5-84) 
Sec. 11-50. - Preparation of annual captured assessment value assessment roll. 
    Each year within fifteen (15) days following the final equalization of property in the development area, the assessor shall prepare an assessed captured value assessment roll. The updated captured assessed value assessment roll shall show the information required in the initial year assessment roll and, in addition, the captured assessed value assessment roll shall be transmitted by the assessor to the same persons as the initial base year assessment roll, together with a notice that it has been prepared in accordance with this division and the development plan. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 5, 11-5-84) 
Sec. 11-51. - Establishment of fund; approval of depository. 
    The treasurer of the downtown development authority shall establish a separate fund which shall be kept in a depository bank account or accounts in a bank or banks approved by the city treasurer to be designated as the downtown development authority development fund. All moneys received by the downtown development authority pursuant to the development plan shall be deposited in the development fund. All moneys in that fund and earnings thereon shall be used only in accordance with the development plan and this division. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 6, 11-5-84) 
Sec. 11-52. - Payment of tax increments. 
    The city and county treasurers shall, as ad valorem taxes are collected on the property in the development area, pay that proportion of the taxes, except for penalties and collection fees, that constitutes the captured assessed value to the treasurer of the downtown development authority for deposit in the development fund. The payments shall be made on the date or dates on which the city and county treasurers are required to remit taxes to each of the taxing jurisdictions. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 7, 11-5-84) 
Sec. 11-53. - Use of moneys in fund. 
    The money credited to the development fund and on hand therein from time to time shall annually be used in the following manner and following order of priority: 
(1)  To pay the cost of the public improvements provided in the development plan; 
(2)  To pay administrative and operating costs of the downtown development authority to the extent provided in the annual budget of the downtown development authority; 
(3)  To reimburse the city for funds advanced to acquire property, clear land, make preliminary plans and improvements necessary for the development of the development area in accordance with the development plan; 
(4)  Any tax increment receipts in excess of those needed under the preceding paragraphs shall revert proportionately to the taxing jurisdictions. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 8, 11-5-84) 
Sec. 11-54. - Annual report. 
    Within ninety (90) days after the end of each fiscal year, the downtown development authority shall submit to the council, with copies to each taxing jurisdiction, a report on the status of the development fund. The report shall include the amount and source of revenue in the account, the amount and purpose of expenditures from the account, the initial assessed value of the development area, the captured assessed value of the development area, the tax increments received and the amount of any surplus from the prior year, and any additional information requested by the council or deemed appropriate by the downtown development authority. The secretary of the downtown development authority shall cause a copy of the report to be published once in full in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 9, 11-5-84) 
ARTICLE III. - CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 11-55. - Purpose and intent. 
    The city council (the "council") of the city is strongly committed to the revitalization and redevelopment of commercial properties that have historically developed along the city's major arterial roadways ("commercial corridors"). The council believes that revitalization and redevelopment of existing commercial corridors in maturing communities is preferable to the negative effects associated with the continual consumption of vacant land for commercial purposes in growth communities. 
    There presently exist within the city a number of commercial corridors which could greatly benefit from the new Corridor Improvement Authority Act, Act 280 of PA 2005 (the "act"), through analysis, short and long-term planning, construction, renovation, repair, remodeling, rehabilitation, restoration, preservation and reconstruction of buildings and facilities. Tax incremental financing is one of many tools available to finance these activities under the act. 
    The council, having heard and considered testimony regarding the public need and potential benefits that are to be realized through the act; and, having determined that it is necessary for the best interests of the public to redevelop and promote economic growth within commercial corridors; resolves to proceed with the creation and provide for the operation of a corridor improvement authority ("authority") within the city pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of the act. 
(Ord. No. 686, § 1, 7-16-07) 
Sec. 11-56. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as "The City of Owosso Corridor Improvement Authority Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 686, § 1, 7-16-07) 
Sec. 11-57. - Creation of authority. 
    There is created pursuant to the act a corridor improvement authority for the city. The authority shall be known and exercise its powers under the name "Corridor Improvement Authority of the City of Owosso." The authority shall posses all of the powers provided within this article and the act. The enumeration of a power in this article or in the act shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the authority. 
(Ord. No. 686, § 1, 7-16-07) 
Sec. 11-58. - Board. 
    Except as otherwise provided in the act, the authority shall be under the supervision and control of a seven-member board consisting of the mayor or his or her designee and six (6) members appointed by the mayor, subject to approval by the council. Not less than a majority of the members shall be persons having an ownership or business interest in property located in the development area. At least one (1) of the members shall be a resident of the development area or of an area within one-half (1/2) mile of any part of the development area. The board shall elect a chairperson from among its members. 
    Of the members first appointed, two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, two (2) members for a term of two (2) years, one (1) member for a term of three (3) years, and one (1) member for a term of four (4) years. After the initial appointment, each member shall serve for a term of four (4) years. Before assuming the duties of office, a member shall qualify by taking and subscribing to the constitutional oath of office. A member shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the mayor for the unexpired term only. After having been given notice and an opportunity to be heard, a member of the board may be removed for cause by the council. 
    Members of the board shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses. 
(Ord. No. 686, § 1, 7-16-07) 
Sec. 11-59. - Designation of development area. 
    The authority shall exercise its powers within the development area, designated as the real property particularly described in exhibit A and as depicted in the map on exhibit B attached to the City of Owosso Corridor Improvement Authority Ordinance and made a part hereof, subject to such amendments as may be made in accordance with this division and the act. 
(Ord. No. 686, § 1, 7-16-07) 
Sec. 11-60. - Open meetings act. 
    The proceedings and rules of procedure of the Board are subject to the open meetings act, Act 267 of PA 1976, MCL 15.261 to 15.275, as amended. The board shall adopt rules governing its procedure and the holding of regular meetings, subject to the approval of the council. Special meetings may be held if called in the manner provided in the approved rules of procedure. 
(Ord. No. 686, § 1, 7-16-07) 
Sec. 11-61. - Freedom of information act. 
    A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the board in the performance of an official function is subject to the freedom of information act, Act 442 of PA 1976, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, as amended. All expense items of the authority shall be publicized monthly and the financial records shall always be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 686, § 1, 7-16-07) 
Sec. 11-62. - Director's bond. 
    In the event the board elects to employ a director as authorized by section 9(1) of the Act, the director, before entering upon the duties of office, shall, in addition to any other requirements of law, post a bond in the penal sum of $10,000.00, payable to the authority for the use and benefit of the authority, which shall be approved by the board and filed with the city clerk. The premium on the bond furnished by the director shall be considered an operating expense of the authority, payable from funds available to the authority for expenses of operation. 
(Ord. No. 686, § 1, 7-16-07) 
Sec. 11-63. - Filing ordinance with secretary of state. 
    The city of Owosso Corridor Improvement Authority Ordinance and any amendments shall be filed with the secretary of state promptly after adoption. 
(Ord. No. 686, § 1, 7-16-07) 
Sec. 11-64. - Approval of budget. 
    The board shall prepare annually a budget and shall submit it to the council for approval. The board shall not adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the council has approved the budget. 
(Ord. No. 686, § 1, 7-16-07) 
Sec. 11-65. - Termination. 
    Upon completion of its purposes for which it was organized, the authority shall be dissolved by ordinance of the council. The property and assets of the authority remaining after the satisfaction of the obligations of the authority shall revert to the city. 
(Ord. No. 686, § 1, 7-16-07) 
EXHIBIT A 
WESTOWN CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT 
Roll # Legal Description Address 050-537-000-044 SEC 14 COM ON NE COR MAIN & ELLIOTT STS N 132' E 66' S 132' W TO BEG 1318 W. MAIN 050-537-000-043 SEC 14 COM 66' E OF NE COR MAIN & ELLIOTT STS N 132' E TO AARR R/W SE'LY TO N LN OF MAIN ST W TO BEG (EX E 170' BEING 170' ON MAIN ST) 1314 W MAIN 050-537-000-042 SEC 14 COM ON N LN OF MAIN ST ON W LN OF AARR R/W W 170' N 141' E 45' SE'LY ALG RR 189'4" TO BEG 1302 W MAIN 050-537-000-041 SEC 14 COM 340' W & 112' N OF SE COR OF SEC TH W 226' TO AARR N W'LY ALG RR 231' E PAR WITH MAIN ST 405' S'LY 175' TO BEG W. MAIN 050-537-000-040 PRT OF SEC 14 T7N R2E DESCR AS BEG ON N LN MAIN ST 322' W OF SE COR OF SD SEC, N 106' M/L, W 245' TO AARR, S 41*E TO N LN MAIN ST, E ALNG MAIN ST R/W TO POB 1232 W MAIN 050-537-000-038 COMM ON THE N LN OF MAIN ST 178' W OF E LN SEC 14 TH N 11' TO POB TH CONT N'LY 273' TH W'LY 136' TH S'LY ALG CENTER LN CHIPMAN CRK SEWER 174.5' TO A PT 106' N & PAR W/N LN MAIN STREET TH E'LY ALG SD LN 18.80' TH S 106' TH E'LY TO POB 1216 W MAIN 050-537-000-037 COMM 21' W OF SE COR SEC 14 TH N 03*08' 32" E 20.17' TO POB TH N'LY 266.83' TH W 157' TH S'LY 273' TH E'LY 150' TH NE'LY 12.84' TO POB 1200 W MAIN 050-113-015-002 LOT 1 (EX S 36') BLK 15 CITY ASSESSORS PLAT 3 1301 W MAIN 050-113-014-004 LOTS 7 & 12 & 13 (EXC S 15' OF LOT 13), ALSO EXC COM AT SW COR OF SD LOT 13,N'LY 15' ALONG W LN OF SD LOT- E'LY 60' PARALLEL WITH S LN OF SD LOT 13 TO POB; N'LY 9.5', E'LY 105' M/L TO E LN SD LOT 13', S'LY 14' M/L ALNG E LN OF SD LOT 13 TO A PT WHICH IS 15' N'LY OF THE SE COR OF SD LOT 13, W'LY 105' M/L TO POB. ALSO EXC, BEG AT A POINT THAT IS S01*27'20"W, ON W LN OF BLK 14. 303.10' FROM NW COR OF SAID BLK 14, TH S89*54'00"E, 49.26', TH S01*29'18"W, 23.09', TH S89*17'03"E, 1.60', TH S01*29'18"W, 60.99', TH N88*42'05"W, 50.81' TO W LN OF BLK 14, TH N01*27'20"E, 84.75' TO POB. ASSESSOR'S PLAT NO. 3. 1231 W MAIN 050-113-014-014 A PART OF LOTS 12 & 13, BLK 14, CITY ASSESSOR'S PLAT NO. 3; BEG AT A POINT THAT IS S01*27'20"W, ON W LN OF BLK 14. 303.10' FROM NW COR OF SAID BLK 14, TH S89*54'00"E, 49.26', TH S01*29'18"W, 23.09', TH S89*17'03"E, 1.60', TH S01*29'18"W, 60.99', TH N88*42'05"W, 50.81' TO W LN OF BLK 14, TH N01*27'20"E, 84.75' TO POB. .098 ACRES M/L. SUBJUCT TO ESMT FOR INGRESS AND EGRESS. 201 ROBBINS 050-113-014-003 LOT 6 & W 6' OF LOT 5 ALSO LOT 8 (EX E 238' THEREOF) & N 16' LOT 9 (EX E 238' THEREOF) CITY ASSESSORS PLAT 3 BLK 14 1221 W MAIN 050-113-014-002 W 4' LOT 3, LOT 4 & E 9' LOT 5 BLK 14 CITY ASSESSORS PLAT 3 1217 W MAIN 050-113-014-001 LOT 1 2 & E 57' LOT 3 BLK 14 CITY ASSESSORS PLAT NO 3 EXC BEG AT PT ON N LN LOT 1 WHICH IS 10' W OF NE COR SD LOT TH E 10' TH S 90' TH NWSTLY TO POB ALSO EXC PT OF LOT 1 BEG AT A PT N LOT LN 20' W OF NE LOT CORNER TH E 20' TH S ALG E LOT LN 20' TH NWSTLY TO POB 1203 W. MAIN 050-113-014-005 E 238' OF LOT 8 & N 16' OF E 238' OF LOT 9 BLK 14 114 S. CHIPMAN 050-113-014-013 RR R-O-W MAIN ST TO CHIPMAN ST IN BLK 14 CITY ASSESSOR'S PLAT NO. 3 RR 050-660-017-001 LOTS 1 2 3 16 17 & 18 OF BLK 17 ALSO LOT 2 & 3 OF BLK 16 & THE VACATED PORTION OF STATE ST N OF MAIN ST PART OF A L & B O WILLAMS ADD EXC COM AT SW COR LOT 2 TH N 154' TH E 11' TH SW'LY TO POB WHICH IS 2.44' N OF SW COR SD LOT INCL 1/2 CLSD ALLEY 100-128 N. CHIPMAN 050-660-017-005 LOTS 11 12 13 14 & 15 (EX W'LY 10' OF LOT 15 & THE S 11' OF LOTS 11 12 13 & 14 ALSO EX BEG AT A PT ON W LINE OF LOT 15 WHICH IS 30' N OF SW COR OF SD LOT 15 SELY TO A POINT ON S LINE OF SD LOT 14 WHICH IS 7' E OF THE SW COR OF SD LOT 14 THE POB) BLK 17 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD INCL 1/2 CLSD ALLEY 6' 1120 W. MAIN 050-660-017-004 LOTS 9 10 BLK 17 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD INCL 1/2 CLSD ALLEY 6' EXC THE S 11' THEREOF 1110 W MAIN 050-660-017-003 LOTS 6 7 8 BLK 17 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD INCL 1/2 CLSD ALLEY 6' (EXC THE S 11' THEREOF) 1108 W MAIN 050-660-016-001 LOT 1 BLK 16 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD EXC BEG AT SW COR SD LOT TH E ALG LOT LN 44' TH NW'LY TO A PT 2.44' N OF SW COR TH S TO POB 1008 W. MAIN 050-100-001-003 LOTS 2 3 & 6 BLK A MARY A CHIPMANS ADD EXC AT A PT ON N LN LOT 2 WHICH IS 10' FROM NW COR LOT 2 TH W 10' TH S ON W LN 10' TH NE'LY TO POB 1119 W. MAIN 050-100-001-001 LOT 1 & N 16' OF E 82.5' & W 49.5' OF LOT 4 BLK A MARY A CHIPMANS ADD 1107 W MAIN 050-100-001-002 S 50' OF E 82.5' LOT 4 BLK A MARY A CHIPMANS ADD 108 STATE 050-050-000-021 W 1/3 LOT 11 ERASTUS BARNES ADD 1017 W MAIN 050-050-000-020 W 22' OF E 44' LOT 11 ERASTUS BARNES ADD 1015 W MAIN 050-050-000-019 E 1/3 LOT 11 ERASTUS BARNES ADD 1013 W MAIN 050-050-000-018 W 1/3 OF LOT 10 ERASTUS BARNES ADD 1011 W MAIN 050-050-000-017 E 1/2 OF W 2/3 OF LOT 10 ERASTUS BARNES ADD 1009 W MAIN 050-050-000-048 LOTS 8, 9, 14, 15, 16, E 1/3 LOT 10, E 22' OF N 1/2 LOT 13, E 4' LOT 17, & OUTLOT 1, ERASTUS BARNES' ADD; ALSO, E 172', BLK 1, GEORGE THOMAS ADD; ALSO, PART OF NW 1/4, SEC 24, T7N, R2E, CITY OF OWOSSO, ALSO PART OF LOT 3, BLK 13, CITY ASSESSORS PLAT NO. 3, BEG S89*42'09"E, 204.64' FROM NW COR LOT 11, ERASTUS BARNES' ADD; TH CON S89*42'09"E, 32.12', TH ON A CURVE TO RIGHT HAVING RADIUS OF 2080.00', A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 12*02'38" & CHORD BEARING S14*46'44"E, 436.42', TH S11*41'48"E, 118.76', TH S09*39'38"E, 101.54', TH S27*59'16"E, 158.33', TH S32*47'59"E, 92.63', TH ON A CURVE TO LEFT HAVING RADIUS OF 503.51', A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 34*21'11" AND A CHORD BEARING S50*29'23"E, 297.39', TH S82*41'11"W, 123.95', TH ON A CURVE TO RIGHT HAVING RADIUS OF 2948.54', A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 08*04'02" AND A CHORD BEARING S86*43'12"W, 414.81' TO WESTERLY ROW OF TSBY RAILROAD, TH ON SAID ROW LN ON CURVE TO THE LEFT HAVING RADIUS OF 1382.90', A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 46*11'30" & A CHORD BEARING N00*04'28"W, 1084.94' TO POB. 1005 W MAIN 050-050-000-013 W 86 1/2' OF LOT 7 (EX S 12') ERASTUS BARNES ADD 919 W MAIN 050-050-000-012 E 2' OF LOT 7 & W 36' LOT 6 INCL VACATED ALLEY IN S 12' THEREOF OF ERASTUS BARNES ADD 911 W MAIN 050-050-000-011 E 30' LOT 6 ERASTUS BARNES ADD 907 W MAIN 050-050-000-010 W 1/3 LOT 5 ERASTUS BARNES ADD 905 W MAIN 050-050-000-009 E 2/3 LOT 5 ERASTUS BARNES ADD 901 W MAIN 050-660-015-009 LOT 14 (EX E 4') & S 1/2 OF VAC ALLEY A L & BO WILLIAMS ADD BLK 15 916 W. MAIN 050-660-015-008 LOTS 9 10 & E 4' LOT 14 BLK 15 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 912-14 W. MAIN 050-660-015-007 LOT 8 BLK 15 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 910 W. MAIN 050-660-015-006 LOT 7 BLK 15 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 908 W. MAIN 050-660-015-005 LOT 5 & 6 BLK 15 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 904 W. MAIN 050-660-015-004 LOT 4 BLK 15 AL & BO WILLIAMS ADD 902 W. MAIN 050-660-015-003 LOT 3 BLK 15 AL & BO WILLIAMS ADD 900 W. MAIN 050-050-000-046 PENN CENTRAL RR R/W THRU ERASTUS BARNES ADD FR LYNN TO W MAIN ST; EXCEPT, PART OF LOT 3, BLK 13, CITY ASSESSORS PLAT NO. 3, BEG S89*42'09"E, 204.64' FROM NW COR LOT 11, ERASTUS BARNES' ADD; TH CON S89*42'09"E, 32.12', TH ON A CURVE TO RIGHT HAVING RADIUS OF 2080.00', A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 12*02'38" & CHORD BEARING S14*46'44"E, 436.42', TH S11*41'48"E, 118.76', TH S09*39'38"E, 101.54', TH S27*59'16"E, 158.33', TH S32*47'59"E, 92.63', TH ON A CURVE TO LEFT HAVING RADIUS OF 503.51', A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 34*21'11" AND A CHORD BEARING S50*29'23"E, 297.39', TH S82*41'11"W, 123.95', TH ON A CURVE TO RIGHT HAVING RADIUS OF 2948.54', A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 08*04'02" AND A CHORD BEARING S86*43'12"W, 414.81' TO WESTERLY ROW OF TSBY RAILROAD, TH ON SAID ROW LN ON CURVE TO THE LEFT HAVING RADIUS OF 1382.90', A CENTRAL ANGLE OF 46*11'30" & A CHORD BEARING N00*04'28"W, 1084.94' TO POB. RR 050-660-014-004 LOT 3 BLK 14 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 800 W. MAIN 050-660-014-005 LOTS 4 5 6 7 BLK 14 AL & BO WILLIAMS ADD 802-806 W. MAIN 050-660-014-006 LOTS 8 & 9 BLK 14 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 810 W. MAIN 050-660-014-007 LOT 10 BLK 14 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 814 W. MAIN 050-660-014-008 LOT 11 BLK 14 AL & BO WILLIAMS ADD 816 W. MAIN 050-660-014-009 LOT 12 BLK 14 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 818 W. MAIN 050-660-014-010 LOT 13 BLK 14 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 820 W. MAIN 050-660-014-011 S 1/2 LOT 14 BLK 14 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 822 W. MAIN 050-660-014-012 N 1/2 LOT 14 BLK 14 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 104 N. LANSING 050-050-000-008 LOT 4 ERASTUS BARNES ADD (EXC S 16' THEREOF) 819 W. MAIN 050-050-000-007 W 22' LOT 3 ERASTUS BARNES ADD (EXC S 16' THEREOF) 817 W. MAIN 050-050-000-006 W 22' OF E 44' LOT 3 ERASTUS BARNES ADD (EXC S 16' THEREOF) 815 W. MAIN 050-050-000-005 E 22' LOT 3 ERASTUS BARNES ADDN EXC S 16' THEREOF ALSO E 24' LOT 30 ERASTUS BARNES ADDN 813 W. MAIN 050-050-000-004 W 1/3 LOT 2 ERASTUS BARNES ADD (EXC S 16' THEREOF 811 W. MAIN 050-050-000-003 W 22' OF E 44' OF LOT 2 ERASTUS BARNES ADD (EXC S 16' THEREOF) 809 W. MAIN 050-050-000-002 E 22' OF LOT 2 ERASTUS BARNES ADD (EXC S 16' THEREOF) 807 W. MAIN 050-050-000-047 W 1/2 LOT 31 ERASTUS BARNES ADD S. CEDAR STREET 050-050-000-001 LOT 1 (EX S 11.3' THEREOF) ERASTUS BARNES ADD 801 W. MAIN 050-050-000-038 E 1/2 LOT 31 ERASTUS BARNES ADD INCLUDING 1/2 CLOSED ALLEY 114 S. CEDAR 050-660-018-017 N 148.5' LOT 5 BLK 18 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 737 W. MAIN 050-660-018-014 COM AT NW COR LOT 4 BLK 18 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD TH S 150' E 65' N 150' W 65' ALSO BEG AT NE COR SD DESC S 121' E 10' N 121' W 10' TO POB FOR USE AS ALLEY (JOINT OWNERSHIP ON SD 10') 731 W. MAIN 050-660-018-012 PRT OF LOT 4 BLK 18 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD DESCR AS COM AT NE COR LOT 4, S 156' W 43', N 156', E TO POB (EXC BEG AT THE NW COR LOT 4, S 150', E 65', N 150', W 65' TO POB) 727 W. MAIN 050-660-018-009 N 170' OF LOT 3 BLK 18 OF A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 723 W. MAIN 050-660-018-005 N 148' OF E 66' LOT 1, N 132' OF W 66' LOT 1, N 1/2 LOT 2 AND N 16.50' OF E 33' OF S 1/2 LOT 2 ALL IN BLK 18 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD TO CITY 705-707 W. MAIN 050-660-013-004 LOT 12 BLK 13 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADDN 114 N. CEDAR 050-660-013-007 LOTS 13 & 14 BLK 13 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 738 W. MAIN 050-660-013-002 LOT 9 BLK 13 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 728 W. MAIN 050-660-013-001 LOTS 1 THRU 8 BLK 13 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 702 W. MAIN 050-660-013-003 LOTS 10 & 11, BLK 13 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADDN BRADLEY ST 050-120-007-004 S 72' OF LOT 3 BLK 7 LUCY L COMSTOCKS ADD 616 W. MAIN 050-120-007-006 LOT 4 BLK 7 LUCY L COMSTOCKS ADD 612 W. MAIN 050-120-007-009 LOT 7 BLK 7 LUCY L COMSTOCKS ADD 606 W. MAIN 050-120-007-010 LOT 8 BLK 7 LUCY L COMSTOCKS ADD 602 W. MAIN 050-660-019-008 BLK 19 AL & BO WILLIAMS ADD EXC SW COR 66' E & W BY 132' N & S ALSO SE COR 132' W & E BY 66' N & S 601 W. MAIN 050-660-019-011 W 49.5' OF S 1/2 OF S E 1/4 BLK 19 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 610 CLINTON 050-660-020-008 LOTS 4, 5, 6, 7 AND N 9' OF W 11' LOT 3 BLK 20 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 513 W. MAIN 050-660-020-001 LOTS 1 2 & 3 EXC N 91' OF W 42' OF LOT 2 BLK 20 AL & BO WILLIAMS ADD 501 W. MAIN 050-660-020-003 W 42' OF N 91' LOT 2 BLK 20 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 511 W. MAIN 050-660-021-002 W 41' OF LOT 1 BLK 21 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 511 CLINTON 050-660-021-001 E 91' LOT 1 BLK 21 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 202 S. SHIAWASSEE 050-660-021-003 LOT 2 BLK 21 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 206 S. SHIAWASSEE 050-660-021-004 N 23' LOT 3 BLK 21 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 210 S. SHIAWASSEE 050-660-021-005 LOT 3 (EX N 23') BLK 21 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 214 S. SHIAWASSEE 050-660-021-006 E 1/2 LOT 4 BLK 21 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 502 GENESEE 505-660-021-007 W 1/2 LOT 4 BLK 21 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 508 GENESEE 050-660-025-002 W 35' LOT 1 BLK 25 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 509 GENESEE 050-660-021-008 LOTS 5-10 BLK 21 & LOTS 6 7 10 BLK 25 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD & ABUTTING CLSD GENESEE ST 211 S. ELM 050-120-008-003 LOTS 2 3 7 8 9 & S 85' LOT 6 BLK 8 LUCY L COMSTOCKS ADD 520 W. MAIN 050-120-008-008 LOTS 5 & 10 BLK 8 LUCY L COMSTOCKS ADD 500 W. MAIN 050-120-008-004 LOT 4 BLK 8 LUCY COMSTOCKS ADD 507 BRADLEY 050-660-025-001 LOT 1 BLK 25 (EX W 35') A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD 302 S. SHIAWASSEE 050-660-025-003 LOT 2 BLK 25 A L & B O WILLIAMS AD 308-310 S. SHIAWASSEE 050-660-025-004 LOT 3 BLK 25 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD INCLUDING 1/2 CLOSED ALLEY 314 S. SHIAWASSEE 050-660-025-005 LOT 4 (EX COM S W COR LOT 4 TH E 40' N'WSTLY TO A PT 33' N OF SW COR LOT 4 S 33' TO BEG BLK 25 A L & B O WILLIAMS ADD INCLUDING 1/2 CLOSED ALLEY 318 S. SHIAWASSEE 050-660-024-002 LOTS 16 & 17 INCL W 1/2 ADJ VAC HOWELL ST EXC W 7' OF LOT 16 BLK 23 ALSO LOTS 1 THRU 8 INCL ADJ N 20' VAC CASS & W 1/2 ELM & E 1/2 HOWELL STS EXC PRT OF LOT 1 DESCR AS BEG 7.68' W OF NE COR OF SD LOT 1 - W 119.47' - S 2.8' - NE'LY 119.5' TO POB BLK 24 ALSO LOTS 5 8 & 9 INCL W 1/2 VAC ALLEY ADJ TO LOT 5 & PRT OF LOT 4 DESCR AS BEG AT SW COR LOT 4 - E 40' - NW'LY TO A PT 33' N OF SW COR LOT 4 - S TO BEG INCL E 1/2 VAC ALLEY ADJ TO THIS PRT OF LOT 4 ALSO INCL N 20' ADJ VAC CASS ST & E 1/2 VAC ADJ S ELM ST ALL ON A L & B O WILLIAMS ADDN 317 S. ELM  
Note: Exhibit B is available in the clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 686, § 1, 7-16-07) 
Chapter 12 - EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 13. 
State Law reference- Emergency preparedness act, MCL 30.401 et seq., MSA 4.824(11) et seq.; governor's emergency powers, MCL 10.31 et seq., MSA 3.4(1) et seq. 

Sec. 12-1. - Intent. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish an organization that will insure the complete and efficient utilization of all municipal resources during periods of emergency. 
(Code 1977, § 1.281; Ord. No. 432, § 1(1.281), 2-4-85) 
Sec. 12-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Coordinator shall mean the responsible head of the city department of emergency services, appointed as prescribed in this chapter. 
    Disaster means an occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from a natural or man-made cause, including fire, flood, snow, ice, windstorm, wave action, oil spill, water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation accident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, or hostile military or paramilitary action. Riots and other civil disorders are not within the meaning of this term unless they directly result from and are an aggravating element of the disaster. 
    Emergency proclamation means a proclamation issued by the governor that a state of emergency exists under the provisions of Act No. 390 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq., MSA 4.824(11) et seq.), as amended. 
    Emergency services shall have a broad meaning to include preparations for, and relief from, the effects of natural and manmade disasters as defined herein, and to include civil defense. 
    Emergency services forces shall mean the employees, equipment and facilities of all municipal departments, boards, institutions and commissions suitable for, or adaptable to, participation in emergency services activities as designated by the mayor, with the approval of the council; and, in addition, it shall include all volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by, or obtained from, volunteer persons and agencies. 
    Emergency services volunteer shall mean any person fully registered and appointed by the coordinator and assigned to participate in the emergency services activity. 
    Emergency situation means any situation confronting a community requiring emergency actions of a lesser nature than a disaster, as defined above, to include, but not limited to, civil disturbances, labor strikes, visits by national or international dignitaries, and build-up activities prior to an actual disaster. 
(Code 1977, § 1.285; Ord. No. 432, § 1(1.285), 2-4-85) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-3. - Coordinating agency. 
    The city office of emergency services will be the coordinating agency responsible for city-wide emergency preparedness; it will provide the means through which the council and the mayor may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in them by this chapter, and Act No. 390 of the Public Acts of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq., MSA 4.824(11) et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1977, § 1.282; Ord. No. 432, § 1(1.282), 2-4-85) 
Sec. 12-4. - Continuation of existing authority. 
    This chapter will not relieve any elected officials or municipal departments of the normal responsibilities or authority given by general law or local ordinance, nor will it affect the work of the American Red Cross or other volunteer agencies organized for relief in a natural disaster. 
(Ord. No. 432, § 1(1.285), 2-4-85) 
Sec. 12-5. - Organization generally. 
(a)  Creation of emergency services forces. The mayor, with the approval of the council, is hereby authorized and directed to create an organization to prepare for community disasters utilizing to the fullest extent existing agencies within the city. The mayor, as executive head of the city government, shall be the director of the emergency services forces of the city and shall be responsible for their organization, administration and operation, working through the coordinator. 
(b)  Members. The organization for providing emergency services shall consist of the following: 
(1)  An office of emergency services shall be established with the city government. It shall have an administrative head appointed who shall be known as the coordinator of emergency services. Such assistants and other employees as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the organization will be employed. 
(2)  The employees, equipment and facilities of all municipal departments, boards, institutions and commissions suitable for, or adaptable to emergency services activities may be designated as part of the total emergency services forces. Such designations shall be by the mayor with the approval of the council. 
(c)  Cooperation of city government. All officers and employees of departments, commissions, boards, institutions and other agencies of the city government designated by the mayor, with the approval of the council, as emergency services forces shall cooperate with the coordinator of emergency services in the formulation of the emergency services plan and they shall assist the coordinator in all matters pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, §§ 1.290-1.292; Ord. No. 432, § 1(1.240-1.292), 2-4-85) 
Sec. 12-6. - Coordinator-Generally, assistants. 
(a)  Appointment. The mayor, with the approval of the council, shall appoint an emergency services coordinator who shall be a person with personal attributes, experience and training needed to coordinate the activities of the agencies, departments and individuals within the city to protect the public health, safety and welfare during emergency situations and disasters. 
(b)  Assistants. Assistant coordinators shall be designated to work with the coordinator on emergency planning matters. Assistant coordinators shall be selected and shall serve as follows: 
(1)  There shall be one such assistant coordinator appointed from each city department designated by the department head, with the approval of the mayor, as part of the emergency services forces. 
(2)  Assistant coordinators shall assume the duties of the coordinator whenever he or she is unavailable during disasters or emergency situations in the order of designation by the mayor, acting upon the recommendation of the coordinator. 
(Code 1977, §§ 1.295, 1.296; Ord. No. 432, § 1(1.295, 1.296), 2-4-85) 
Sec. 12-7. - Same-Powers and duties. 
(a)  Powers. The coordinator of emergency services shall be responsible for the administration, planning, coordination and operation of all emergency preparedness activities in the city. He or she shall maintain liaison with the county, state, and federal authorities, and the authorities of adjacent and nearby political subdivisions so as to insure the most effective emergency operations. 
(b)  Duties. The coordinator's duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Development of plans for the immediate use of all of the facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources of the city for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons or property; and protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary for the public health, safety and general welfare; 
(2)  Coordinating the recruitment and training of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the city for emergency purposes; 
(3)  Through public information programs, educating the civilian population as to actions necessary and required for the protection of persons and property in case of a disaster; 
(4)  Conducting practice alerts and exercises to insure the efficient operation of the city's emergency organization and to familiarize residents of the city with emergency regulations, procedures and operations; 
(5)  Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any emergency or disaster relief programs; 
(6)  Negotiating with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of each building or property for emergency or disaster relief purposes, and designating suitable buildings as public shelters; 
(7)  Establishing and maintaining administrative control over a local radiological defense program, to include emergency preparations for both peacetime radiation incidents and international wartime disasters; 
(8)  Establishing property accountability procedures for federal surplus property acquired by the city, federal excess property on loan to the city, or any other property or equipment loaned to the city for use in disaster or emergency situations; 
(9)  Coordinating municipal emergency preparedness activities with those at county level and adjacent municipalities. 
(Code 1977, §§ 1.310, 1.311; Ord. No. 432, § 1(1.310, 1.311), 2-4-85) 
Sec. 12-8. - Emergency powers, authority; reciprocal aid. 
(a)  Authority of mayor. The mayor may exercise the emergency power and authority as specified herein. Whenever a situation requires, or is likely to require, that the mayor invoke such power and authority, he or she shall, as soon as reasonable, expedient, convene the council to perform its legislative and administrative duties as the situation demands, and shall report to that body relative to emergency activities. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers of the council unless specifically provided herein. 
(b)  Use of emergency services forces. Under the following circumstances, the mayor may assemble and utilize the emergency services forces, and he or she may prescribe the manner and conditions of their use: 
(1)  Whenever, on the basis of information received from authoritative sources, he or she feels that a large scale disaster or emergency situation in the city or state is imminent; 
(2)  During any period of disaster in the city or state and thereafter as long as he or she shall deem it necessary. 
(c)  Reciprocal aid agreements. Whenever the mayor finds that any condition in the city has attained, or threatens to attain, the proportions of a major disaster, he or she may assemble and utilize emergency services forces and he or she may prescribe the manner and condition of their use. The mayor, with the approval of the council, is hereby empowered to enter into mutual aid agreements with other public and private agencies for reciprocal aid and assistance during disasters which are beyond local capabilities and resources. He or she may, when he or she deems it in the public interest, send emergency services forces of the city to the aid of other communities stricken by disaster as provided by mutual aid agreements; provided, that after the council convenes, the future continuance of any such disaster relief and the period thereof shall be subject to action of the council. 
(d)  Authority of coordinator. The mayor, with the approval of the council, may make regulations permitting the coordinator to assemble and utilize the emergency services forces and provide disaster relief aid as prescribed in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  Emergency waiver. When obtaining formal approvals would result in delay of relief activity, the mayor may, until the council convenes, waive procedures and formalities otherwise required pertaining to the performance of public works, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution of supplies, materials and facilities and expenditure of existing funds, and the council is also empowered to waive any such procedures and formalities. 
(f)  Succession of government during emergencies. The mayor, with the approval of the council, shall establish procedures for the succession of government during emergencies when officials are unavailable for exercising the powers and discharging the duties of their respective offices, under the provisions of Act No. 390 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq., MSA 4.824(11) et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1977, §§ 1.300-1.305; Ord. No. 432, § 1(1.300-1.305), 2-4-85) 
Sec. 12-9. - Volunteers. 
(a)  Appointment. Each department, commission, board or other agency of city government may at any time appoint or authorize the appointment of volunteer citizens to augment the personnel of such city department, commission, board or agency in time of emergency. Such individuals shall be enrolled as emergency services volunteers and shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth by the respective department, commission, board or agency head for such volunteers. 
(b)  Records. The coordinator may enlist volunteer citizens to form the personnel of an emergency services force for the city or to temporarily augment personnel of the city engaged in emergency activities. The coordinator shall maintain formal records of all such volunteers for worker's compensation purposes. 
(Code 1977, §§ 1.315, 1.316; Ord. No. 432, § 1(1.315, 1.316), 2-4-85) 
Sec. 12-10. - City employee rights. 
    City employees assigned to duty as a part of the emergency services forces pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall retain all of the rights, privileges and immunities of city employees, and shall receive the compensation incident to their employment. 
(Code 1977, § 1.320; Ord. No. 432, § 1(1.320), 2-4-85) 
Sec. 12-11. - Liability. 
(a)  Government liability. This chapter is an exercise by the city of governmental functions for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare. As such, neither the city nor agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, nor trustee, nor any of the agents thereof acting in good faith carrying out, complying with, or attempting to comply with this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as a result of such activity. 
(b)  Private liability. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants the city the right to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during a disaster or during an authorized practice disaster exercise, shall not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about, such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Code 1977, §§ 1.325, 1.326; Ord. No. 432, § 1(1.325, 1.326), 2-4-85) 
Sec. 12-12. - Federal surplus property. 
(a)  Authority to accept. The coordinator of emergency services is hereby designated as the person responsible for accepting federal surplus property with the power and full authority to sign for such surplus property. The mayor shall provide a written statement to federal officials designating the current name of the coordinator as responsible for complying with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Property records. The coordinator is responsible for the accountability and will maintain the necessary records for all surplus property obtained for emergency purposes until relieved from accountability by state and federal authorities. 
(c)  Payment of service charges. The coordinator is further authorized to direct payment of service charges for surplus property to complete all transactions. 
(d)  Misuse of public property. Misappropriation or unauthorized private use of such public property while still accountable is subject to prosecution under federal and state statute. 
(Code 1977, §§ 1.330-1.333; Ord. No. 432, § 1(1.330-1.333), 2-4-85) 
Sec. 12-13. - Suspension of laws. 
    At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede all other existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations, insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Code 1977, § 1.335; Ord. No. 432, § 1(1.335), 2-4-85) 
Sec. 12-14. - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any emergency services forces in the enforcement or accomplishment of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or other means of identification as a member of the emergency services forces of the city unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by proper officials. 
(Code 1977, § 1.340; Ord. No. 432, § 1(1.340), 2-4-85) 
Chapter 13 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire department, § 2-116 et seq.; emergency preparedness, Ch. 12; fire chief's certification for business licensing, § 16-10; fireworks prohibited, § 19-127; fire protection for outdoor assemblies, § 20-29(16); utilities and services, Ch. 34. 
State Law reference- Fire prevention act, MCL 29.1 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq.; crimes related to explosives and banks, MCL 750.200 et seq.; explosives act, MCL 29.41 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - False alarm of fire. 
    Any person who shall knowingly and wilfully commit any one (1) or more of the following actions shall be guilty of a misdemeanor: 
(1)  Raise a false alarm of fire at any gathering or in any public place; 
(2)  Ring any bell or operate any mechanical apparatus, electrical apparatus or combination thereof, for the purpose of creating a false alarm of fire; 
(3)  Raise a false alarm of fire orally, by telephone or in person. 
(Code 1977, § 9.211) 
Cross reference- Offenses affecting governmental functions, § 19-26 et seq. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.240. 
Sec. 13-2. - Injury to fire equipment. 
    No person shall wilfully molest, take for his or her own private use, or damage in any manner, any fire fighting equipment or apparatus or anything pertaining to the fire fighting system, or drive any vehicle upon or against any hose or equipment of the fire department. 
(Code 1977, § 9.212) 
Cross reference- Offenses against property, § 19-61 et seq. 
State Law reference- Maliciously destroying or injuring personal property of fire department, MCL 750.377b. 
Sec. 13-3. - Obstruction of fire hydrants. 
    No person shall place any obstruction whatever, nor shall any person responsible for such obstruction permit it to remain, within fifteen (15) feet of any fire hydrant. 
(Code 1977, § 9.213) 
Cross reference- Offenses affecting governmental functions, § 19-26 et seq. 
Sec. 13-4. - Open fires. 
(a)  Open fires are prohibited in the city except in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  The following are definitions for the words and phrases used in this section: 
    Approved container is defined as: a container constructed of metal or masonry with a metal covering device with openings no larger than three-quarters (3/4) inch with draft holes near the bottom no larger than three-quarters (3/4) inch. 
    Bonfire is defined as: an outdoor fire exceeding the size of a recreational fire and used for ceremonial purposes. 
    Open fire means any fire outside of a building or structure involving any type of combustible material, whether for cooking, pleasure or any other purpose, located anywhere within the city, on public or private property. 
    Outdoor cooking apparatus means a charcoal grill, camping stove or similar apparatus designed exclusively for cooking food. 
    Recreational fire means any fire such as a campfire contained in a fire pit or portable manufactured fire container for the purpose of recreational and personal enjoyment. 
    Fire pit means a structure with the following components: 
a.  The diameter of the pit shall not exceed three (3) feet; 
b.  The depth of the pit shall be one (1) to two (2) feet deep; and 
c.  The rim of the pit shall be lined with rock, concrete, brick or steel that is six (6) inches wide all around the perimeter. 
    Waste material is defined as: paper and paper products excluding diapers; clean clear unpainted unfinished untreated wood and wood products excluding particle board and similar products; and yard waste. 
(b)  Incineration of waste material, outside of one- or two-family dwellings in the city, shall be permitted if done in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  No such burning may be within twenty-five (25) feet of an existing structure or property line, nor upon the paved portion of any street. Provided, however, in the case of a lot wherein the above dimensions cannot be met because of the small size of the lot, then the said containers shall be located in the center of the rear of the property an equal distance from the property line and any structure located thereon. 
(2)  No such burning shall be done prior to 7:00 a.m., and must not be continued after 7:00 p.m. on any day. No burning shall be done in the city except on Tuesdays and Thursdays. Burning of waste material is prohibited on Monday, Wednesday, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday of each week. 
(3)  No such burning shall be done unless under the supervision of a person of mature years and discretion and no burning shall be done where its maximum size is not controllable by such person. 
(4)  Incineration of all waste material except yard waste shall occur in an approved container. 
(c)  Recreational fires outside of one or two family dwellings in the city shall be permitted if done in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  No recreational fire may be within twenty-five (25) feet of an existing structure or property line. Provided, however, in the case of a lot wherein the above dimensions cannot be met because of the small size of the lot, then the said pits or containers shall be located in the center of the rear of the property an equal distance from the property line and any structure located thereon. 
(2)  No such burning shall be done prior to 12:00 noon, and must not be continued after 10:00 p.m. Sunday through Thursday and after 12:00 midnight Friday and Saturday. 
(3)  No recreational fires shall occur unless under the supervision of a person of mature years and discretion. 
(4)  Material that is acceptable to burn in a recreational fire shall be limited to clean clear unpainted unfinished and untreated wood and wood products excluding particle board and similar products, split firewood, tree limbs and charcoal. No accelerant such as gasoline and kerosene may be used except charcoal lighter fluid. 
(5)  A fire extinguisher or water hose shall be connected and available at all times when a recreational fire is active. 
(6)  No recreational fire shall exceed three (3) feet in diameter and two (2) feet in height. 
(d)  Bonfires shall only be allowed by permit issued by the fire chief or his designee pursuant to rules promulgated by the fire chief. 
(e)  Fires in an outdoor cooking apparatus are permitted in accordance with the provisions of the International Fire Code. 
(f)  Any person, firm or corporation who violates this section shall be given a written warning and a $50.00 fine for the first offense if there have been no prior incidents. If, in the judgment of the authorized city official responding to a first offense, a person has displayed gross flaunting of the law, that person shall be fined as a second offense. On the second offense the person, firm, or corporation shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction with a fine of $250.00, plus costs. On the third offense, or any further offense, the person, firm or corporation shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction with a fine of $500.00 plus costs and any applicable fee from the fire department. The building inspector, building official, code enforcement officer, all members of the fire department, and all members of the police department are hereby designated as the authorized city officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations and municipal civil infraction violation notices pursuant to this section. 
(g)  The responding city official shall make an actual visual inspection of the burn site when feasible. If illegal waste materials are in the burning site, this will be considered an offense. 
(Code 1977, § 9.218; Ord. No. 397, § 1, 9-20-82; Ord. No. 551, § 1, 2-20-96; Ord. No. 580, § 1, 5-3-99; Ord. No. 629, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 652, § 1, 12-1-03; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 5-3-04; Ord. No. 701, § 1, 8-4-08) 
Sec. 13-5. - Obnoxious odors; wind, sparks and embers. 
(a)  It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to burn or allow to be burned, at any time or place any materials of any kind which exude obnoxious odors, or when such fire emits excessive smoke, sparks or burning embers upon adjoining, adjacent, neighboring or nearby premises. 
(b)  No such burning shall be done at any time or place when wind conditions will create or be apt to create a nuisance to anyone or the property of anyone in the vicinity thereof, or be a danger to the property of any person in the vicinity thereof. 
(c)  Any person, firm or corporation who violates this section shall be given a written warning and a $50.00 fine for the first offense if there have been no prior incidents. If, in the judgment of the authorized city official responding to a first offense, a person has displayed gross flaunting of the law, that person shall be fined as a second offense. On the second offense the person, firm, or corporation shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction with a fine of $250.00, plus costs. On the third offense, or any further offense, the person, firm or corporation shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction with a fine of $500.00 plus costs and any applicable fee from the fire department. The building inspector, building official, code enforcement officer, all members of the fire department, and all members of the police department are hereby designated as the authorized city officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations and municipal civil infraction violation notices pursuant to this section. 
(d)  The responding city official shall make an actual visual inspection of the burn site when feasible. If illegal waste materials are in the burning site, this will be considered an offense. 
(Code 1977, § 9.219; Ord. No. 552, § 1, 2-20-96; Ord. No. 581, § 1, 5-3-99; Ord. No. 629, § 1, 6-2-03; Ord. No. 652, § 1, 12-1-03; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 5-3-04; Ord. No. 701, § 1, 8-4-08) 
Sec. 13-6. - Starting fires by smoking. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in smoking or attempting to light or to smoke a cigarette, cigar or pipe, to set fire to any bed, bedding, furniture, curtains or draperies in any hotel, motels, lodging house or tourist home in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 9.220) 
Sec. 13-7. - Flammable liquids regulations. 
    The use, storage and processing of flammable liquids shall conform to the flammable liquids regulations of the state fire marshal, and the current rules and regulations issued by the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs. Any person violating any of said regulations or failing to comply therewith, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 9.221; Ord. No. 791, § 1, 1-16-18) 
Sec. 13-8. - Outdoor wood-fired boilers. 
    No person or business shall install an outdoor wood-fired boiler within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 714, § 1, 10-19-09) 
Secs. 13-9-13-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 603, § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 2000 repealed §§ 13-36, 13-37 in their entirety and added §§ 13-20-13-24. Former §§ 13-36, 13-37 pertained to the adoption of the Uniform Fire Code and changes to the code, respectively, and derived from the Code of 1977, § 9.223; Ord. No. 405, § 1, adopted Feb. 21, 1983; and Ord. No. 469, §§ 1-3, adopted Dec. 18, 1989. The editor has determined that the new provisions of said ordinance belong in art. III, and has redesignated the provisions as new §§ 13-36, 13-37. 

Sec. 13-36. - Code adopted. 
    The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, is adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 603, § 1, 11-20-00; Ord. No. 791, § 2, 1-16-18) 
Sec. 13-37. - Revisions to International Fire Code. 
    The following sections of the International Fire Code shall contain the following insertions: 
Section 101.1: The City of Owosso, Michigan. 
Section 109.3: $500.00 and 90 days 
Section 111.4: $500.00 
(Ord. No. 603, § 1, 11-20-00) 
Chapter 14 - FLOOD PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 723, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 19, 2011, repealed the former ch. 14, arts. I-III, §§ 14-1-14-10, 14-26-14-34, 14-48-14-50, and enacted a new ch. 14 as set out herein. The former ch. 14 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 659, § 1, adopted Aug. 16, 2004; Ord. No. 623, § 1, adopted Jan. 6, 2003; and Ord. No. 387, §§ 1.2-5.3, adopted Jan. 18, 1982. 
Cross reference- Mobile homes and recreational vehicles, Ch. 17; planning, Ch. 23; soil erosion control, Ch. 27; subdivision regulations, Ch. 30; utilities and services, Ch. 34; waterways, Ch. 37; zoning, Ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Soil conservation districts law, MCL 282.1 et seq.; soil erosion and sedimentation control act, MCL 282.101 et seq. 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Flood or flooding means: 
(1)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: a. the overflow of inland or tidal waters, b. the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, c. mudflows; and 
(2)  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding, as defined in paragraph (1)a. of this definition. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map, which the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has delineated both the risk premium zones applicable to the community and the special flood hazards areas designated as zone A, AE, AH, AO, AR, A99, V or VE. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances, such as a floodplain ordinance, and other applications of police power that provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, gas or liquid storage facility, as well as a mobile home or manufactured unit. 
(Ord. No. 723, §§ 1, 2, 9-19-11) 
Sec. 14-2. - Enforcement. 
    The City of Owosso directs its designated enforcing agent for the construction code act, the code enforcement official, to administer, apply, and enforce the floodplain management regulations as contained in the Michigan Building Code, including Appendix G, and to be consistent with those regulations by: 
(1)  Obtaining, reviewing, and reasonably utilizing flood elevation data available from federal, state, or other sources pending receipt of data from the FEMA to identify the flood hazard area and areas with potential flooding. 
(2)  Ensuring that all permits necessary for development in floodplain areas have been issued, including a floodplain permit, approval, or letter of no authority from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment under the floodplain regulatory provisions of Part 31, "Water Resources Protection," of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended. 
(3)  Reviewing all permit applications to determine whether the proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. Where it is determined that a proposed building will be located in a flood hazard area or special flood hazard area, the construction code act enforcing agent shall implement the following applicable codes according to their terms: 
a.  Floodplain management regulation portions and referenced codes and standards of the current Michigan Residential Code. 
b.  Floodplain management regulation portions and referenced codes and standards of the current Michigan Building Code. 
c.  Appendix G of the current Michigan Building Code. 
(4)  Reviewing all proposed subdivisions to determine whether such proposals are reasonably safe from flooding and to ensure compliance with all applicable floodplain management regulations. 
(5)  Assisting in the delineation of flood hazard areas, providing information concerning uses and occupancy of the floodplain or flood-related erosion areas, maintaining floodproofing and lowest floor construction records, and cooperating with other officials, agencies, and persons for floodplain management. 
(6)  Advising FEMA of any changes in community boundaries, including appropriate maps. 
(7)  Maintaining records of new structures and substantially improved structures concerning any certificates of floodproofing, lowest floor elevation, basements, floodproofing, and elevations, to which structures have been floodproofed. 
(Ord. No. 723, §§ 1, 2, 9-19-11) 
Sec. 14-3. - Flood insurance rate maps. 
    The City of Owosso assures the federal insurance administrator that it intends to review, on an ongoing basis, all amended and revised flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and related supporting data and revisions thereof and revisions of 44 CFR, Part 60, Criteria for Land Management and Use, and to make such revisions in its floodplain management regulations as may be necessary to continue to participate in the program. 
(Ord. No. 723, §§ 1, 2, 9-19-11) 
Sec. 14-4. - Flood insurance studies. 
    The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) entitled "Flood Insurance Study-City of Owosso, Michigan, Shiawassee County," dated January 16, 2003, with accompanying "Flood Insurance Rate Map" dated January 16, 2003, and "Hydrologic & Hydraulic Analysis of Owosso Drain" dated March, 2011, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter for the purposes of administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared to be a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content of the "Flood Hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code, and also adopts the base flood elevation that the Federal Emergency Management Agency has declared for the Shiawassee River, which is indicated on said flood insurance rate maps. Where applicable the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) entitled "Shiawassee County, Michigan (All Jurisdictions)" and dated 9/29/11, and the flood insurance rate map(s) (FIRMS) panel number(s) of 26155C; 0139C, 0143C, 0145C, 0227C, 0231C, and 0232C dated 9/19/11 are adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 723, §§ 1, 2, 9-19-11) 
Chapter 15 - LIBRARY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- City library, § 7.13. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 29. 
State Law reference- Libraries generally, MCL 397.201 et seq., MSA 15.1661 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Failure to return books. 
    Whoever wilfully or negligently detains or fails to return to the city's public library any book, magazine, pamphlet, map, manuscript, picture, microfilm, phonograph record, clipping or other property belonging to such library, or pay the reasonable value thereof, within thirty (30) days from the date of the posting by registered mail of a notice addressed to such person at the last address furnished the public library, and which notice may be given at any time after the date on which such person, under the rules of the library, should have returned the loaned property, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1977, § 1.204) 
Cross reference- Offenses against property, § 19-61 et seq. 
State Law reference- Larceny from libraries, MCL 750.364, MSA 28.596. 
Sec. 15-2. - Deceptive practices. 
    Whoever shall give a fictitious or incorrect name or address at the city's public library in order to obtain possession or use of any book, magazine, pamphlet, map, manuscript, picture, microfilm, phonograph record, or clipping, the property of such library, or shall practice any deceit of any kind whatsoever to conceal or mislead in respect to identity or address or place of employment, of such person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1977, § 1.205) 
Cross reference- Offenses against property generally, § 19-61 et seq. 
Secs. 15-3-15-15. - Reserved. 
Chapter 16 - LICENSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- License for adult entertainment enterprises and establishments, § 4-191 et seq.; license for auctions, § 6-21 et seq.; license for bed and breakfast operations, § 7-31 et seq.; licensing of electricians, § 8-86 et seq.; license for outdoor assemblies, § 20-21 et seq. 

Sec. 16-1. - Definition. 
    The term "cause" as used in this chapter, shall include the doing or omitting of any act, or permitting any condition to exist in connection with any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license or permit is granted under the provisions of this Code, or upon any premises or facilities used in connection therewith, which act, omission or condition is: 
(1)  Contrary to the health, safety or welfare of the public; 
(2)  Unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature; 
(3)  Unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license or permit granted; 
(4)  Forbidden by the provisions of this Code or any duly established rule or regulation of the city applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license or permit has been granted. 
(Code 1977, § 7.18) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-2. - Licenses required. 
    No person shall engage, or be engaged, in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which any license is required by any provision of this Code without first obtaining a license from the city in the manner provided for in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 7.1) 
Sec. 16-3. - Multiple businesses. 
    The granting of a license or permit to any person operating, conducting or carrying on any trade, profession, business or privilege which contains within itself, or is composed of, trades, professions, businesses or privileges which are required by this Code to be licensed, shall not relieve the person to whom such license or permit is granted from the necessity of securing individual licenses or permits for each such trade, profession, business or privilege, except as specifically provided elsewhere in this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 7.2) 
Sec. 16-4. - State licensed businesses. 
    The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by the state to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege shall not exempt such person from the necessity of securing a license or permit from the city if such license or permit is required by this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 7.3) 
Sec. 16-5. - License application. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, every person required to obtain a license from the city to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege shall make application for such license to the city clerk upon forms provided by the city clerk and shall state under oath or affirmation such facts, as may be required for, or applicable to, the granting of such license. No person shall make any false statement or representation in connection with any application for a license under this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 7.4) 
Sec. 16-6. - License year. 
    Except as otherwise herein provided as to certain licenses, the license year shall begin July first of each year and shall terminate at midnight on June thirtieth of the following year. Original licenses shall be issued for the balance of the license year at the full license fee. License applications for license renewals shall be accepted and licenses issued for a period of fifteen (15) days prior to the annual expiration date. In all cases where the provisions of this Code permit the issuance of licenses for periods of less than one (1) year, the effective date of such licenses shall commence with the date of issuance thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 7.5) 
Sec. 16-7. - Payment of fee, bond. 
    No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he or she first pays to the city clerk the fee and posts a bond in the amount required for the type of license desired. Fees for licenses shall be as prescribed by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1977, §§ 7.31, 7.32) 
Sec. 16-8. - Conditions for issuance. 
    No license or permit required by this Code shall be issued to any person who is required to have a license or permit from the state, until such person shall submit evidence of such state license or permit and proof that all fees appertaining thereto have been paid. No license shall be granted to any applicant therefor until such applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this Code applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which application for license is made, nor unless the applicant agrees in writing to permit inspection of the licensed premises at reasonable hours by authorized officers of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 7.6) 
Sec. 16-9. - Where certification required. 
    No license shall be granted where the certification of any officer of the city is required prior to the issuance thereof until such certification is made. 
(Code 1977, § 7.7) 
Sec. 16-10. - Fire chief's certification. 
    In all cases where the certification of the fire chief is required prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk, such certification shall be based upon an actual inspection and a finding that the premises in which the person making application for such license proposes to conduct or is conducting the trade, profession, business or privilege comply with all the fire regulations of the state and of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 7.9) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection generally, Ch. 13. 
Sec. 16-11. - Police chief's certification. 
    In all cases where the certification of the police chief is required prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk, such certification shall be based upon an investigation of the person's background and a finding that the person is of good moral character. 
(Code 1977, § 7.10) 
Cross reference- Certification of license for auctions, § 6-23; offenses generally, Ch. 19; certification of police chief for license for peddlers and solicitors, § 22-39; certification of license for transient merchants, § 22-77. 
Sec. 16-12. - Licensing standards for good moral character. 
(a)  The phrase "good moral character," when used in this Code for the purpose of licensing, shall be construed to mean the propensity on the part of the person to serve the public in the licensed area in a fair, honest and open manner. 
(b)  A judgment of guilt in a criminal prosecution or a judgment in a civil action shall not be used, in and of itself, as proof of a person's lack of good moral character. It may be used as evidence in the determination, and when so used the person shall be notified and shall be permitted to rebut the evidence by showing that at the current time he or she has the ability to, and is likely to serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner, that he or she is rehabilitated, or that the substance of the former offense is not reasonably related to the occupation or profession for which he or she seeks to be licensed. 
(c)  The following criminal records shall not be used, examined or requested by the city in a determination of good moral character: 
(1)  Records of an arrest not followed by a conviction; 
(2)  Records of a conviction which has been reversed or vacated, including the arrest records relevant to that conviction; 
(3)  Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor or a felony unrelated to the person's likelihood to serve the public in a fair, honest and open manner; 
(4)  Records of an arrest or conviction for a misdemeanor for the conviction of which a person may not be incarcerated in a jail or prison. 
(d)  When a person is found to be unqualified for a license because of a lack of good moral character, or similar criteria, the person shall be furnished by the city clerk with a statement to this effect. The statement shall contain a complete record of the evidence upon which the determination was based. The person shall be entitled, as of right, to a rehearing on the issue before the council if he or she has relevant evidence not previously considered regarding his or her qualifications. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 338.41 et seq., MSA 18.1208(1) et seq. 
Sec. 16-13. - Building inspector's certification. 
    In all cases where the carrying on of the trade, profession, business or privilege involves the use of any structure or land, a license therefor shall not be issued until the building inspector shall certify that the proposed use is not prohibited by chapter 38, or other zoning regulations of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 7.11) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8. 
Sec. 16-14. - Bonds. 
    Where the provisions of this Code require that the applicant for any license or permit furnish a bond, such bond shall be furnished in an amount deemed adequate by the proper city officer, or, where the amount thereof is specified in this Code, in the amount so required; the form of such bond shall be acceptable to the city attorney. In lieu of a bond, an applicant for a license or permit may furnish one (1) or more policies of insurance in the same amounts and providing the same protection as called for in any such bond; any such policies of insurance shall be approved as to substance by the city official issuing the license or permit and as to form by the city attorney. 
(Code 1977, § 7.12) 
Sec. 16-15. - Late renewals. 
    All fees for the renewal of any license which are not paid at the time said fees shall be due, shall be paid as "late fees" with an additional twenty-five (25) percent of the license fee required for such license for the first fifteen (15) days that such license fee remains unpaid and thereafter the license fee shall be that stipulated for such licenses, plus fifty (50) percent of such fee. 
(Code 1977, § 7.13) 
Sec. 16-16. - Right to issuance. 
    If the application for any license is approved by the proper officers of the city, as provided in this Code, the license shall be granted and shall serve as a receipt for payment of the fee prescribed for such license. 
(Code 1977, § 7.14) 
Sec. 16-17. - When fees paid. 
    The fees required by this Code for any license or permit shall be paid at the office of the city treasurer upon or before the granting of the license or permit. 
(Code 1977, § 7.15) 
Sec. 16-18. - Exempt persons. 
    No license fee shall be required from any person exempt from such fee by state or federal law. Such persons shall comply with all other provisions of this chapter. The city clerk shall, in all such cases, issue to such persons licenses which are clearly marked as to the exemption and the reason therefor. 
(Code 1977, § 7.16) 
Sec. 16-19. - Suspension or revocation. 
    Any license issued by the city may be suspended by the mayor for cause, and any permit issued by the city may be suspended or revoked by the issuing authority for cause. The licensee shall have the right to a hearing before the council on any such action of the mayor, provided a written request therefor is filed with the city clerk within five (5) days after receipt of said notice of such suspension. The council may confirm such suspension or revoke or reinstate any such license. The action taken by the council shall be final. Upon suspension or revocation of any license or permit, the fee therefor shall not be refunded. 
(Code 1977, § 7.17) 
Sec. 16-20. - License renewal. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, an application for renewal of a license shall be considered in the same manner as an original application. 
(Code 1977, § 7.19) 
Sec. 16-21. - Exhibition. 
    No licensee shall fail to carry any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter upon his or her person at all times when engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license was granted; except that where such trade, profession, business or privilege is operated, conducted or carried on at a fixed place or establishment, the license shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place in his or her place of business. Every licensee shall produce his or her license for examination when applying for a renewal thereof or when requested to do so by any city police officer or by any person representing the issuing authority. 
(Code 1977, § 7.20) 
Sec. 16-22. - Display on vehicle, machine. 
    No licensee shall fail to display conspicuously on each vehicle or mechanical device or machine required to be licensed by this Code such tags or stickers as are furnished by the city clerk. 
(Code 1977, § 7.21) 
Sec. 16-23. - Displaying invalid license. 
    No person shall display any expired license or any license for which a duplicate has been issued. 
(Code 1977, § 7.22) 
Sec. 16-24. - Transferability; improper use. 
    No license or permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall be transferable unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code. No licensee or permittee shall, unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code, transfer or attempt to transfer his or her license or permit to another nor shall he or she make any improper use of the same. 
(Code 1977, § 7.23) 
Sec. 16-25. - Misuse; automatic revocation. 
    In addition to the general penalty provision for violation thereof, any attempt by a licensee or permittee to transfer his or her license or permit to another, unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code, or to use the same improperly shall be void and result in the automatic revocation of such license or permit. 
(Code 1977, § 7.24) 
CHAPTER 16.5 - MEDICAL MARIHUANA FACILITIES LICENSING-POLICE POWER ORDINANCE 

Sec. 16.5-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  It is the intent of this chapter to authorize the establishment of certain types of medical marihuana facilities in the city of Owosso and provide for the adoption of reasonable restrictions to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community at large; retain the character of neighborhoods; and mitigate potential impacts on surrounding properties and persons. It is also the intent of this chapter to help defray administrative and enforcement costs associated with the operation of a marihuana facility in the city through imposition of an annual, nonrefundable fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) on each medical marihuana facility licensee. Authority for the enactment of these provisions is set forth in the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq. Further, the city does not intend that permitting and regulation under this chapter be construed as a finding that such facilities comply with any law. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter is intended to grant immunity from criminal or civil prosecution, penalty, or sanction for the cultivation, manufacture, possession, use, sale, or distribution of marihuana, in any form, that is not in compliance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2008, MCL 333.26421 et seq.; the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq.; the Marihuana Tracking Act, MCL 333.27901 et seq.; and all other applicable rules promulgated by the state. 
(c)  As of the effective date of this chapter, marihuana remains classified as a Schedule 1 controlled substance under the Federal Controlled Substances Act, 21 U.S.C. Sec. 801 et seq., which makes it unlawful to manufacture, distribute, or dispense marihuana, or possess marihuana with intent to manufacture, distribute, or dispense marihuana. Nothing in this chapter is intended to grant immunity from any criminal prosecution under federal laws. 
(d)  All medical marihuana facility license holders must comply with all state building codes, including but not limited to plumbing, mechanical, electrical, building energy and fire codes which includes the city zoning ordinance, as applicable under law. 
(Ord. No. 793, § 1, 7-2-18) 
Sec. 16.5-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter: 
(a)  Any term defined by the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq., shall have the definition given in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act. 
(b)  Any term defined by the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., shall have the definition given in the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act. 
(c)  Any term defined by the Marihuana Tracking Act, MCL 333.27901 et seq., shall have the definition given in the Marihuana Tracking Act. 
    Grower means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in this state that cultivates, dries, trims, or cures and packages marihuana for sale to a processor or provisioning center. 
    License means a permit authorized by the city conveying authority to an entity or person, to own and operate a business related to and regulated by the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act. 
    Licensee means a person holding a state operating license issued under the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq. 
    Marijuana or marihuana means that term as defined in the Public Health Code, MCL 333.1101 et seq.; the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq.; the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq.; and the Marihuana Tracking Act, MCL 333.27901 et seq. 
    Marihuana facility means an enterprise at a specific location at which a licensee is licensed to operate under the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., including a marihuana grower, marihuana processor, marihuana provisioning center, marihuana secure transporter, or marihuana safety compliance facility. The term does not include or apply to a "primary caregiver" or "caregiver" as that term is defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, limited liability limited partnership, trust, or other legal entity. 
    Processor means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in Michigan that purchases marihuana from a grower and that extracts resin from the marihuana or creates a marihuana-infused product for sale and transfer in packaged form to a provisioning center. 
    Provisional license means a document endorsed by the city which only recognizes that an entity or person has submitted a valid application to the city seeking to own and operate a business related to and regulated by the Michigan Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act. A provisional license grants no authority to possess, sell, market or deal marihuana in any fashion, whether for retail, trade, personal and/or patient medical use. 
    Provisioning center means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in the state that purchases marihuana from a grower or processor and sells, supplies, or provides marihuana to registered qualifying patients, directly or through the patients' registered primary caregivers. Provisioning center includes any commercial property where marihuana is sold at retail to registered qualifying patients or registered primary caregivers. A noncommercial location used by a primary caregiver to assist a qualifying patient connected to the caregiver in accordance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq., is not a provisioning center for purposes of this chapter. 
    Safety compliance facility means a licensee that is a commercial entity that receives marihuana from a marihuana facility or registered primary caregiver, tests it for contaminants and for tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids, returns the test results, and may return the marihuana to the marihuana facility. 
    Secure transporter means a licensee that is a commercial entity located in this state that stores marihuana and transports marihuana between marihuana facilities for a fee. 
(Ord. No. 793, § 1, 7-2-18) 
Sec. 16.5-3. - Authorization of facilities and fee. 
(a)  The maximum number of each type of marihuana facility allowed in the city shall be as follows: 
Facility Number Grower unlimited Processor unlimited Provisioning center #4 Safety compliance facility unlimited Secure transporter unlimited  
(b)  Planning commission shall review the number of facilities allowed at the one (1) year mark of implementation to re-evaluate and determine if the number allowed needs to be adjusted. From that point on, every three (3) years, city council shall review the maximum number of each type of marihuana facility allowed and determine whether this maximum number should be changed. The review and its findings shall be recorded in the minutes of the relevant meeting of the city council. 
(c)  A nonrefundable fee shall be paid by each marihuana facility licensed under this chapter in an annual amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) as set by resolution of the city council. 
(d)  The first four (4) provisioning center licenses shall be awarded via lottery. An application fee of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be paid in full at the time the application is submitted. The first round of applications shall be accepted for a 30-day calendar period, to be determined by city council. All names of applicants will be entered into a drawing the day set by council and shall be open to the public. Applicants who are not awarded a license shall receive a refund of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) within thirty (30) days of the drawing. If all licenses are not awarded in the first round, a second round of applications may be accepted at a later date as determined by city council. 
(e)  Should a provisioning center license be vacated or revoked, the city will hold a lottery to award the license to another applicant. The process shall mimic the steps outlined above but would be limited to the number of vacated or revoked license(s) available. 
(Ord. No. 793, § 1, 7-2-18) 
Sec. 16.5-4. - Requirements and procedure for issuing license. 
(a)  No person shall operate a marihuana facility in city of Owosso without a valid marihuana facility license issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and state law. 
(b)  The license requirement in this chapter applies to all facilities whether operated for profit or not for profit. 
(c)  Every applicant for a license to operate a marihuana facility shall file an application in the building department office upon a form provided by the city. 
(d)  Applications to operate any marihuana facility shall include a photocopy of the "State of Michigan Prequalification Status Letter." Any application delivered to the city without the aforementioned prequalification status letter will be deemed incomplete and shall be rejected. Any delay due to the filing of an incomplete application shall be deemed the fault of the applicant and not the city. 
(e)  Upon an applicant's completion of said form and furnishing of all required information and documentation, city staff shall accept the application and assign it a sequential application number by facility type based on the date and time of acceptance. The city staff shall act to approve or deny an application not later than twenty (20) days from the date the application was accepted. If approved, the building department shall issue the applicant a provisional license. 
(f)  Applicant's receipt of a provisional license from the city shall provide for reasonable time, but not more than eight (8) months, to secure any and all subsequent and/or collateral permits as required by the state and/or city. Any applicant with a provisional license that has not completed every task as required by the state and/or the city, within eight (8) months after receipt of the provisional license from the city will result in revocation of applicant's city issued provisional license and denial of license. 
(1)  An extension of time may be granted upon applicant's written request and showing of good cause for delay. A request for an extension of time shall also include the estimated time to remedy the delay. Any extension of time shall be at the sole discretion of the city. 
(g)  Within twenty (20) days from the applicant submitting proof of obtaining all other required permits and approvals and payment of the license fee, city staff shall approve or deny the marihuana facility license. The building department shall issue marihuana facility licenses in order of the sequential application number previously assigned. 
(h)  Maintaining a valid marihuana facility license issued by the state is a condition for the issuance and maintenance of a marihuana facility license under this chapter and continued operation of any marihuana facility. 
(i)  A marihuana facility license issued under this chapter is not transferable. 
(j)  If the application is for a grower's license, the maximum number of plants that the applicant intends to grow will be included with the application. 
(Ord. No. 793, § 1, 7-2-18) 
Sec. 16.5-5. - License renewal. 
(a)  A marihuana facility license shall be valid for one (1) year from the date of issuance, unless revoked as provided by law. 
(b)  A valid marihuana facility license may be renewed, on an annual basis, by submitting an application and payment of the annual license fee. Application to renew a marihuana facility license shall be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of its expiration. 
(c)  Applications for renewal or amendment of existing permits shall be reviewed and granted or denied before applications for new permits are considered. 
(Ord. No. 793, § 1, 7-2-18) 
Sec. 16.5-6. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and facilities described herein, whether the operations or activities associated with a marihuana facility were established without authorization before the effective date of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 793, § 1, 7-2-18) 
Sec. 16.5-7. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be responsible for a 90-day misdemeanor. Each day a violation of this chapter continues to exist constitutes a separate violation. A violator of this chapter shall also be subject to such additional sanctions, remedies and judicial orders as are authorized under Michigan law. 
(b)  A violation of this chapter is deemed to be a nuisance per se. In addition to any other remedy available by law, the city may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent, or abate any violation of this chapter. 
(c)  This chapter shall be enforced and administered by the city official as may be designated from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(d)  A license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for any of the following violations: 
(1)  Any person required to be named on the permit application is convicted of or found responsible for violating any provision of this chapter; 
(2)  A permit application contains any misrepresentation or omission of any material fact, or false or misleading information, or the applicant has provided the city with any other false or misleading information related to the facility; 
(3)  Any person required to be named on the permit application is convicted of a crime which, if it had occurred prior to submittal of the application, could have been cause for denial of the permit application; 
(4)  Marihuana is dispensed on the business premises in violation of this chapter or any other applicable state or local law, rule or regulation; 
(5)  The facility is operated or is operating in violation of the specifications of the permit application, any conditions of approval by the city or any other applicable state or local law, rule or regulation. 
(6)  The city, the county, or any other governmental entity with jurisdiction, has closed the facility temporarily or permanently or has issued any sanction for failure to comply with health and safety provisions of this chapter or other applicable state or local laws related to public health and safety. 
(7)  The facility is determined by the city to have become a public nuisance. 
(8)  The facility's state operating license has been suspended or revoked. 
(e)  Possession, sale or consumption of any form of alcohol is strictly prohibited in any licensed medical marihuana facilities. 
(Ord. No. 793, § 1, 7-2-18) 
Sec. 16.5-8. - Severability. 
    In the event that any one (1) or more sections, provisions, phrases or words of this chapter shall be found to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the validity or the enforceability of the remaining sections, provisions, phrases or words of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 793, § 1, 7-2-18) 
Chapter 17 - MOBILE HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Flood protection, Ch. 14; camping and trailer parking at outdoor assemblies, § 20-29(12); planning, Ch. 23; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 29; subdivision regulations, Ch. 30; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 33; zoning, Ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Mobile home conversion act, MCL 125.1101 et seq., MSA 19.855(1) et seq.; campgrounds, MCL 333.1201 et seq., MSA 14.15(12501) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 17-1-17-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 

Sec. 17-16. - Defined. 
    For the purpose of this article, "recreational vehicle" means a vehicle primarily designed and used as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, or travel purposes, including a vehicle having its own motor power or a vehicle mounted on or drawn by another vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 5.181) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, MCL 125.1102(k), MSA 19.855(2)(k). 
Sec. 17-18. - Overnight parking in public places. 
    No person shall park overnight or permit the parking overnight of any recreational vehicle upon any public highway, street, alley, park or other public place within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 5.181(1)) 
Cross reference- Parking, stopping and standing generally, § 33-36 et seq. 
Sec. 17-19. - Emergency parking. 
    Emergency or temporary parking or stopping is permitted on any street, alley or highway for not longer than one (1) hour subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulations for that street, alley or highway. 
(Code 1977, § 5.181(4)) 
Cross reference- Parking, stopping and standing generally, § 33-36 et seq. 
Sec. 17-20. - Parking for occupancy on private property restricted. 
    No person shall park or permit the parking of a recreational vehicle for occupancy on any private property within the city except in an authorized mobile home park or campground licensed by the state. 
(Code 1977, § 5.181(2)) 
Sec. 17-21. - Permissible parking. 
    No person shall park or permit the parking of any unoccupied recreational vehicle outside of a duly licensed mobile home park or campground; except the parking of unoccupied recreational vehicles in any accessory private garage building, or in any rear yard, is permitted provided no living quarters shall be maintained or any business practiced in recreational vehicles. Provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to hinder or prevent any person from engaging in the business of handling recreational vehicles for sale or resale or for storage, subject to such regulations as may be prescribed by this Code relative to zoning or regulation of such business. 
(Code 1977, § 5.181(3)) 
Sec. 17-22. - Permit for limited use. 
    Owners of recreational vehicles and members of their family may use and occupy not to exceed one (1) recreational vehicle on premises whereon there is located a dwelling occupied by such family for a period of not exceeding thirty (30) days. Provided, however, that a permit for said use shall be obtained from the building inspector within twenty-four (24) hours after the recreational vehicle is first located on the premises. 
(Code 1977, § 5.181(5)) 
Chapter 18 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Hazards and nuisances, § 10.7. 
Cross reference- Public nuisance violations for bed and breakfast operations, § 7-14; offenses, Ch. 19; utilities and services, Ch. 34. 
State Law reference- Air pollution act, MCL 336.11 et seq., MSA 14.58(1) et seq.; environmental protection act, MCL 691.1201 et seq., MSA 14.528(201) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - General definitions, prohibition. 
    Whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public; offends public decency; interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous any street, highway, navigable lake or stream; or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of this chapter. No person shall commit, create or maintain any nuisance. 
(Code 1977, § 9.1) 
Sec. 18-2. - Abatement generally. 
    Where no other procedure is made specifically applicable by another provision of this chapter, any structure, condition or activity prohibited by this chapter may be abated by the city manager in accordance with the following procedure. The city manager shall first investigate the existence of the alleged nuisance to determine whether or not a nuisance as defined in section 18-1 exists and to further determine the person who has created or is committing or maintaining such nuisance. He shall then give written notice to the person or persons responsible for the creation, commission or maintenance of such nuisance, specifying in particular the nature thereof, the corrective action to be taken to abate the same and the time limit for abatement of such nuisance, which shall be a reasonable time but not to exceed fifteen (15) days from the time the notice is served. Such notice shall be served in accordance with section 1-9 of this Code. If, at the expiration of the time limit in the notice, the person responsible for the commission, creation or maintenance of any nuisance shall not have complied with the requirements thereof, the city manager shall carry out the requirements of said notice. The cost of such abatement shall be a debt owed the city by the person responsible for the commission, creation or maintenance of such nuisance and if the nuisance is attributable to the use, occupancy or ownership of any land or premises within the city, shall be charged against such premises in accordance with the provisions of chapter 28. 
(Code 1977, § 9.2) 
Sec. 18-3. - Remedies severable. 
    Any action taken by the city to abate any nuisance under the provisions of section 18-2 or any other provision of this Code, shall not affect the right of the city to institute proceedings against the person committing, creating or maintaining any nuisance for violation of this Code nor affect the imposition of the penalty prescribed for such violation. As an additional remedy, upon application by the city to any court of competent, jurisdiction, the court may order the nuisance abated and/or the violation or threatened violation, restrained and enjoined. 
(Code 1977, § 9.3) 
Secs. 18-4-18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANGEROUS STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8. 

Sec. 18-26. - Prohibited. 
    No person shall maintain any structure which is unsafe or which is a menace to the health, safety or welfare of the public. 
(Code 1977, § 9.11) 
Sec. 18-27. - Notice and hearing. 
    The council may, after notice to the owner and after holding a public hearing thereon, condemn such structure by giving notice to the owner of the land upon which such structure is located, specifying in what respects the structure is a public nuisance and requiring the owner to alter, repair, tear down or remove the same within such reasonable time, not exceeding sixty (60) days, as may be necessary to do or have done the work required by said notice. The notice may also provide a reasonable time within which such work shall be commenced. 
(Code 1977, § 9.12) 
Sec. 18-28. - Abatement. 
    If, at the expiration of any time limit in a notice issued under the provisions of this article, the owner has not complied with the requirements thereof, the city manager shall carry out the requirements of such notice. The cost of such abatement shall be charged against the premises and the owner thereof in accordance with the provisions of section 10.7 of the Charter. 
(Code 1977, § 9.13) 
Sec. 18-29. - Emergency abatement. 
    The city manager may abate any such public nuisance, if the public safety requires immediate action, without preliminary order of the council. Thereafter the cost of abating such nuisance shall be charged against the premises and the owner thereof in accordance with the provisions of section 10.7 of the Charter. 
(Code 1977, § 9.14) 
Secs. 18-30-18-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTERING AND DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Waste materials and litter on premises having mechanical and electronic amusement devices, § 4-155; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 29; litter on streets, § 29-136 et seq.; garbage and rubbish generally, § 34-16 et seq. 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 752.901 et seq.; MSA 28.603(1) et seq. 

Sec. 18-46. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized private receptacle means a litter storage and collection receptacle as required and authorized in Chapter 21 of this Code. 
    Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original, or copies of any matter or literature. 
    Litter means "garbage," "refuse," and "rubbish" as defined herein and all other waste materials which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
    Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine published with not less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public. 
    Park means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
    Private premises is any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, or other structure. 
    Refuse is all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned vehicles, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
    Rubbish is nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and non-combustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. The general term "rubbish" shall also include the following: 
(1)  Wrecked, dismantled or unusable automobiles, or vehicles which shall remain unlicensed for any consecutive thirty (30) day period; 
(2)  Scrap building materials including, but not limited to, lumber, brick, cement or cinder blocks, plumbing material or fixtures, heating ducts or fixtures, shingles, nails, mortar, concrete, cement, screws and bolts, or any other materials used in constructing any structure, including electrical wiring and fixtures; 
(3)  Junk items including, but not limited to, parts of machinery, broken or unusable furniture, stoves, refrigerators, or other household appliances, remnants of wood, metal, or other cast-off materials, whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use. 
(4)  Household furniture, designed and customarily used as interior furnishings, when stored and/or used outdoors in yards or on open porches and decks. 
(Code 1977, § 9.31; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 6-20-88) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-47. - Litter in public places. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place within the city except in public receptacles for collection, or in official city dumps. 
(Code 1977, § 9.32) 
Sec. 18-48. - Placement of litter in receptacles. 
    Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles, shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 1977, § 9.33) 
Sec. 18-49. - Sweeping litter into gutters. 
    No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city, the accumulation of litter from any building or lot, or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(Code 1977, § 9.34) 
Sec. 18-50. - Merchants to keep sidewalks free of litter. 
    No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city, the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalks in front of their business premises free of litter. 
(Code 1977, § 9.35) 
Sec. 18-51. - Litter thrown by persons in vehicles. 
    No person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property. 
(Code 1977, § 9.36) 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 33. 
Sec. 18-52. - Truck loads causing litter. 
    No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck, within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Code 1977, § 9.37) 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 33. 
Sec. 18-53. - Litter in parks. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. 
(Code 1977, § 9.38) 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation generally, Ch. 21. 
Sec. 18-54. - Litter in lakes, streams and fountains. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 9.39) 
Cross reference- Waterways generally, Ch. 37. 
Sec. 18-55. - Distributing handbills. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 9.40) 
Sec. 18-56. - Placing handbills on vehicles. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 9.41) 
Sec. 18-57. - Handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(Code 1977, § 9.42) 
Sec. 18-58. - Distributing handbills at inhabited private premises. 
(a)  No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person present in or upon such private premises. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property. Nor shall the provisions of subsection (a) apply to the posting of notices by city personnel, contractors employed by the city, or employees of utility providers recognized by the city if said notices are for purposes other than solicitation. 
(c)  A non-profit organization may obtain a permit from the city clerk to distribute handbills at inhabited private premises without leaving such handbill with an owner, occupant or other person. The permit shall be valid for two (2) days and the non-profit organization may only apply for one (1) permit during an eleven-month period. Permits can only be issued for community service projects and cannot be issued for fundraising activities. The permit applicant shall fully describe activities and rationale for the permit. If the city receives complaints from residents that they do not want the handbills, the permit applicant shall retrieve the handbills from the resident in a timely fashion. The permit application shall provide contact information so that such complaints may be forwarded. The city clerk may reject a permit application if it does not meet the criteria in this subsection or upon evidence of past abuses of this policy. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9.43, 9.44; Ord. No. 692, § 1, 2-19-08; Ord. No. 784, § 1, 7-3-17) 
Sec. 18-59. - Dropping litter from aircraft. 
    No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city, any litter, handbill or any other object. 
(Code 1977, § 9.45) 
Sec. 18-60. - Bill posting in streets. 
    No person shall attach, place, paint, write, stamp or paste any sign, advertisement, or any other matter upon any lamp post, electric light, telegraph, or telephone pole, shade tree, fire hydrant; or on any thing within any park. Public officers posting any notice required or permitted by law shall be excepted from the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 9.46) 
Sec. 18-61. - Bill posting in private places. 
    No person shall attach, place, paint, write, stamp or paste any sign, advertisement, or other matter upon any house, wall, fence, gate, post or tree without first having obtained the written permission of the owner, or occupants of the premises and having complied with all provisions of this Code pertaining thereto. 
(Code 1977, § 9.47) 
Sec. 18-62. - Litter on occupied private property. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 1977, § 9.48) 
Sec. 18-63. - Owner to maintain premises free of litter. 
(a)  The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. Provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. The term "person in control" shall include owner, tenant, lessee, agent, servant, or employee, except that any lien imposed by the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be against the property owner. 
(b)  Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine as provided in section 1-8(c), plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fine and provided by Section 1-8(c)(2) of the Owosso City Code. The building inspector, building official, and code enforcement officer are hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations and municipal civil infraction violation notices pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1977, § 9.49; Ord. No. 531, § 1, 5-15-95) 
Sec. 18-64. - Litter on vacant lots. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter upon any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned by such person or not. 
(Code 1977, § 9.50) 
Sec. 18-65. - Clearing of litter from open private property by city. 
(a)  Notice to remove. The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant property within the city, or the agent of such owner, to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property, which is dangerous to public health, safety and welfare. Such notice shall be given in accordance with section 1-9. 
(b)  Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified, to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within thirty (30) days after receipt of written notice provided for in section (a) above, the city manager shall make a full and complete report thereof to the city council, which may then proceed to levy a special assessment against property involved in accordance with the provisions of section 10.7 of the Charter. 
(Code 1977, § 9.51) 
Sec. 18-66. - Storage of rubbish or scrap materials. 
(a)  No person shall store or permit the storage or accumulation of litter or rubbish on any private property within the city except within a completely enclosed building or upon the premises of a properly zoned, licensed, or approved junk dealer, junk buyer, secondhand store or dealer, or dealer in used auto parts. 
(b)  No person shall store or permit the storage or accumulation of scrap building materials on any private property, except within a completely enclosed building; or where such materials are a part of the stock in trade of business located on such property; or except when such materials are being used or discarded in connection with construction of a structure on such property in accordance with a valid building permit, or a structure is being razed, renovated or remodeled, providing the scrap materials are removed within a reasonable time after the completion of such construction, razing, renovation or remodeling. 
(c)  The council may, on proper application, grant an extension of time based on a reasonable request for violations of subsections (a) or (b). 
(Code 1977, §§ 9.52, 9.53) 
Sec. 18-67. - Auto repairs, maintenance. 
    No person shall engage in major mechanical overhaul, repair or body work on motor vehicles on any residential lot within the city, except in a completely enclosed building. Minor mechanical maintenance of motor vehicles owned by the resident in possession of the premises to the extent of tuneup, oil changes, and minor replacement of parts shall be permitted if completed within forty-eight (48) hours. 
(Ord. No. 392, § 1(9.54), 7-6-82) 
Sec. 18-68. - Authority to make rules for establishment and operation of impound lot. 
    The city council may create an impound lot to store abandoned, wrecked, dismantled and unusable vehicles. The location and operation of such an impound lot may be established by rules adopted by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 609, § 1, 8-20-01) 
Sec. 18-69. - Fees for towing and storage. 
    The fee charged for storage of a vehicle at a storage facility operated by the city shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) per day. Such storage fees may be charged to the vehicle owner or the owner of real property from which a vehicle was removed. The city may also charge a vehicle owner or owner of real property from which a vehicle is removed any expenses incurred in towing a vehicle plus an administrative fee of fifteen (15) percent of all towing and storage fees. The fees for storage and administration may be amended from time to time by the city council by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 609, § 1, 8-20-01) 
Section 18-70. - Lien. 
    The city shall have a lien against the owner of any real property from which an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or unusable vehicle has been removed for any unrecovered towing, storage and administration expenses and fees and such lien shall be charged against the premises pursuant to chapter 28 commencing with the procedure specified in Code section 28-12. 
(Ord. No. 609, § 1, 8-20-01) 
Secs. 18-71-18-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Noise restriction on dogs, § 5-28; sound equipment for outdoor assemblies, § 20-29(17); noise control at swimming pools, § 31-13. 

Sec. 18-86. - Prohibitions for peace and safety. 
(a)  In order to preserve and protect the public peace, health and safety, no person shall make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Among others, each of the provisions of this article is declared unlawful and is prohibited, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9.61, 9.62) 
Sec. 18-87. - Exceptions. 
    None of the terms or prohibitions of this article shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles. Any police or fire vehicle or any ambulance, while engaged upon emergency business. 
(2)  Highway maintenance and construction. Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets, or highways by or on behalf of the city, county, or the state, during the night, when the public safety, welfare, and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(Code 1977, § 9.63) 
Sec. 18-88. - Horns and signal devices. 
    The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, street car or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 9.62(1)) 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 33. 
Sec. 18-89. - Radio and musical instruments. 
    The playing of any television set, radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity, is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 9.62(2)) 
Sec. 18-90. - Shouting and whistling. 
    Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing or the making of any loud noise on the public streets, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or the making of any such noise at any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity, is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 9.62(3)) 
Sec. 18-91. - Hawking. 
    The hawking of goods, merchandise, or newspapers in a loud and boisterous manner is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 9.62(4)) 
Cross reference- Peddlers, solicitors and transient merchants generally, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 18-92. - Animal and bird noises. 
    The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall unreasonably disturb the comfort or repose of any person is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 9.62(5); Ord. No. 678, § 1, 9-5-06) 
Cross reference- Animals generally, Ch. 5. 
Sec. 18-93. - Whistle or siren. 
    The blowing of any whistles or siren, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 9.62(6)) 
Sec. 18-94. - Engine exhausts. 
    The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom, is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 9.62(7)) 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 33. 
State Law reference- Motor vehicle noise, MCL 257.707 et seq. 
Sec. 18-95. - Construction noises. 
    The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, or the excavation of streets and highways, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., unless a permit be first obtained from the department of public works, is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 9.62(8)) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 8. 
Sec. 18-96. - Handling merchandise. 
    The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates, and containers is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 9.62(9)) 
Sec. 18-97. - Devices to attract attention. 
    The use of any drum, loud speaker, amplifier, or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention for any purpose is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 9.62(10)) 
Cross reference- Use of devices to attract attentions prohibited by peddlers and solicitors, § 22-19. 
Secs. 18-98-18-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GRASS AND NOXIOUS WEEDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 741, adopted June 3, 2013, amended art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. V, §§ 18-121-18-126, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the 1977 Code, §§ 9.71-9.75. 
Cross reference- Vegetation generally, Ch. 35. 
State Law reference- Control and eradication of noxious weeds, MCL 247.61 et seq. 

Sec. 18-121. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, "noxious weeds" shall include Canada thistle (Circium arvense), dodders (any species of Cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), perennial sow-thistle (Sonchur arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa incana), ragweed (Ambrosia elatior) and poison ivy (rhus toxicondendron), poison sumac (toxicondendron vernix), and any species identified by the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (Act 451 of 1994) as prohibited or restricted including: African oxygen weed (Lagarosiphon major), Brazilian elodea (Egeria densa), Cylindro (Cylindrospermopsis raciborskii), European frogbit (Hydrocharis morsus-ranae), Fanwort (Cabomba caroliniana), Giant hogweed (Heracleum mantegazzianum), Giant salvinia (Salvinia molesta, auriculata, biloba, or herzogii), Hydrilla (Hydrilla verticillata), Japanese knotweed (Fallopia japonica), Parrot's feather (Myriophyllum aquaticum), Starry stonewort (Nitellopsis obtusa), Water chestnut (Trapa natans), Yellow floating heart (Nymphoides peltata), Curly leaf pondweed (Potamogeton crispus), Eurasian watermilfoil (Myriophyllum spicatum), Flowering rush (Butomus umbellatus), Phragmites or common reed (Phragmites australis). 
    Weeds, tall grass and rank vegetation shall not include ornamental plants, vegetable gardens, rain gardens, wildflower plantings, green roofs, backyard habitants, shade gardens, or agricultural plants cultivated in an orderly fashion. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 1, 6-3-13) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-122. - Prohibited conditions. 
    No person occupying any premises, nor any person owning any unoccupied premises, shall permit or maintain on any such premises: 
(1)  Any growth of noxious weeds; 
(2)  Any growth of grass or other rank vegetation to a greater height than eight (8) inches; or 
(3)  Any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 1, 6-3-13) 
Sec. 18-123. - Duty of occupant or owner. 
    It shall be the duty of the occupant of every premises and the owner of unoccupied premises within the city to cut and remove or destroy by lawful means all such noxious weeds and grass, at least once each year not later than the fifteenth day of May, and thereafter as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 1, 6-3-13) 
Sec. 18-124. - Cutting by city. 
    If any person shall fail to comply with the provisions of section 18-123 by the specified time, the city shall, cause all such grass and noxious weeds to be cut or destroyed upon lands of the person not complying with the provisions hereof. An accurate account of all expenses incurred with respect to each parcel of land entered upon in carrying out the provisions of this article shall be kept and and presented for invoicing. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 1, 6-3-13) 
Sec. 18-125. - Collection of unpaid charges. 
    A copy of the account of the costs incurred on each of the several descriptions or parcels of property, shall be transmitted to the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall add to all such accounts fifteen (15) percent of all such expenditures to cover the costs of publication, overhead and other expense, and collect the total amount as provided in section 10.7 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 1, 6-3-13) 
Sec. 18-126. - Notice of requirements. 
    The city clerk shall on or before the first day of May of each year give notice of the requirements and provisions of this article by publishing a notice thereof once a week for two (2) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 741, § 1, 6-3-13) 
Secs. 18-127-18-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FALSE ALARMS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 497, adopted Nov. 16, 1992, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as §§ 18-80-18-82, 18-84. In order to facilitate classification and ease of usage of the Code, said provisions have been redesignated as Art. VI, §§ 18-131-18-134 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 18-131. - Declared nuisance. 
    Any false alarm in excess of one (1) in any calendar year from the same location is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 497, 11-16-92) 
Sec. 18-132. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Alarm user shall mean any person or other entity on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the city except for alarm systems on motor vehicles. If, however, an alarm system on a motor vehicle is connected with an alarm system at a premises, the person using such system is an alarm user. Also excluded from this definition and from the coverage of this article are persons or entities who use alarm system to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm systems are located, of an attempted unauthorized intrusion, holdup attempt or fire hazard. If such a system, however, employs an audible signal emitting sounds or flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises, such system shall be within the definition of an alarm system and shall be subject to this article. 
    Alarm system shall mean any device or assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a condition requiring urgent attention and to which police officers or fire department personnel are expected to respond. In this article, the term "alarm system" shall include the terms "automatic hold-up alarm system", "burglar alarm system", "intrusion alarm system", "hold-up alarm system", "manual hold-up alarm system", "temperature fire alarm system", "manual fire alarm system", "fire alarm system", and "automatic sprinkler water-flow alarm system". 
    False alarm shall be defined as any alarm signal which is registered at the police department, any central dispatch center, or elsewhere not resulting from criminal activity for which the alarm was intended, or in the case of a fire alarm any alarm signal which is registered at the police department or elsewhere not resulting from a fire or potential fire condition or life threatening medical emergency. 
(Ord. No. 497, 11-16-92) 
Sec. 18-133. - False alarm fee. 
(a)  The alarm user shall be required to pay to the city the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) for a second false alarm, and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each additional false alarm in any given calendar year. No alarm user shall be required to pay said fee on the first occasion of a false alarm during any one (1) calendar year, but shall be advised in writing of said false alarm and of the existence of this article. 
(b)  Alarms caused by the following extenuating circumstances shall not constitute a false alarm and no false alarm fee shall be charged by the city: 
(1)  Alarm system malfunctions, if corrective measurers have been instituted within a seventy-two-hour period with notification to the police department, provided that the alarm user presents documentation of repair service having been performed by the alarm company to remedy a malfunction. 
(2)  Storm conditions. 
(3)  Alarms activated by persons working on the alarm system with prior notification to the police department. 
(4)  Alarms activated by disruption or disturbance of Michigan Bell or General Telephone Company facilities, or motor vehicle-utility pole accidents. 
(5)  When the alarm system is the responsibility of a lessee and the lessor provides the city the name of such lessee. 
(6)  In paragraphs (1), (2), (4) and (5) of this subsection (b), it shall be the responsibility of the alarm user to notify the police department by filling out the alarm card and returning it to the police department within five (5) working days. Failure to notify the police department will result in an automatic billing to the user. 
(c)  At the direction of the police chief, an "alarm notification card" shall be designed and used as required by this article. 
(d)  On the first business day following the response of police officers to an alarm call, a representative to the police chief shall mail an alarm notification card to the alarm user. 
(e)  Within ten (10) working days of the date of the mailing by the police department of the alarm notification card, the alarm user shall return the completed card to the police department explaining which exclusion applies. If the exclusion is not accepted, the alarm user shall be billed. Failure by the alarm user to return the card shall cause an automatic billing of the false alarm fee to be sent to the alarm user. 
(f)  If, upon receiving a false alarm fee notice, the alarm user wishes to request a waiver of the assessment of the fee due to extenuating circumstances, he may do so in writing within ten (10) working days of the assessment date. The notice to the police department shall contain documentation of the extenuating circumstances involved. Within ten (10) working days of the receipt of the waiver request by the police department, the police chief or his designee shall make a determination on the waiver request and shall notify the alarm user of the decision. 
(g)  In the event that the alarm user is not satisfied with the decision rendered by the police chief, an additional written request for waiver may be filed within ten (10) working days of the date of the decision by the police chief, with the city manager. Within ten (10) working days of the receipt of the waiver request and documentation of extenuating circumstances, the city manager or his designated representative shall review the request, make a determination on the waiver, and shall notify the alarm user of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 497, 11-16-92) 
Sec. 18-134. - Assessment of fees. 
    Any billing to an alarm user for a false alarm fee which remains unpaid for a period in excess of ten (10) days shall be assessed a later charge of ten (10) percent and shall bear interest at the rate of six (6) percent until paid, and shall be certified to the city assessor who shall place the same on the next tax roll and assess the fees, penalties and interest against the real or personal property assessment of the user to be collected in the same manner as general city taxes pursuant to Chapter 9 of the City of Owosso Charter. 
(Ord. No. 497, 11-16-92) 
Chapter 19 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Police chief's certification for business licensing, § 16-11; nuisances, Ch. 18; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 33. 
State Law reference- Crimes, MSA Title 28. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Definitions. 
    The term "public place," as used in this chapter, shall mean any street, alley, park, public building, any place of business or assembly open to or frequented by the public, and any other place which is open to the public view, or to which the public has access. 
(Code 1977, § 9.161) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 19-2. - Abolition of distinction between accessory and principal. 
    Every person concerned in the commission of an offense, whether he or she directly commits the act constituting the offense or procures, counsels, aids or abets in its commission may hereafter be prosecuted, indicted, tried and on conviction shall be punished as if he or she had directly committed such offense. 
(Code 1977, § 1.7) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 767.39, MSA 28.979. 
Sec. 19-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 747, adopted Dec. 2, 2013, repealed § 19-3 which pertained to begging and derived from the 1977 Code, § 9-162(7). 
Sec. 19-4. - Fortune telling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to pretend for money or gain, to predict future events by cards, tokens, trances, the inspection of the hands or the conformation of the skull of any person, mind reading so-called, or by consulting the movements of the heavenly bodies. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(10)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.267. 
Sec. 19-5. - Spitting in public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to spit on any sidewalk or on the floor or seat of any public carrier, or on any floor, wall, seat or equipment of any place of public assemblage. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(27)) 
Sec. 19-6. - Selling, giving, or furnishing tobacco products to a minor. 
    A person shall not sell, give, or furnish any cigarette, cigar, chewing tobacco, tobacco snuff, or tobacco in any other form to a person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 561, § 1, 2-3-97) 
Sec. 19-7. - Possessing or using tobacco products in public by a minor. 
    A person under eighteen (18) years of age shall not possess or smoke cigarettes or cigars; or possess or chew, suck, or inhale chewing tobacco or tobacco snuff; or possess or use tobacco in any other form, on a public highway, street, alley, park, or other lands used for public purposes, or in a public place of business or amusement. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 561, § 1, 2-3-97) 
Secs. 19-8-19-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AFFECTING GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; false alarm of fire, § 13-1; obstruction of fire hydrants, § 13-3. 

Sec. 19-26. - Destruction of official notices. 
    No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal, or tear down any official notice or placard posted by any city officer, unless permission is given by an officer to remove such notice. 
(Code 1977, § 1.11) 
Cross reference- Signs generally, Ch. 26. 
Sec. 19-27. - Obstruction of officers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, resist, hinder or oppose any member of the police force, or any peace officer in the discharge of his or her duties as such. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(23)) 
State Law reference- Obstruction of police officer, MCL 750.479, MSA 28.747. 
Secs. 19-28-19-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

Sec. 19-46. - Assault and battery. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault, or an assault and battery on any other person. 
(b)  A person who commits an assault or assault and battery on an individual is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(1); Ord. No. 666, § 1, 5-16-05) 
State Law reference- Assaults, MCL 750.81 et seq. 
Secs. 19-47-19-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Injury to fire equipment, § 13-2; failure to return books at public library, § 15-1; deceptive practices to obtain material from public library, § 15-2; damage or obstruction of school property, § 19-148; injury to park property, § 21-6. 

Sec. 19-61. - Malicious mischief generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully destroy, remove, damage, alter or in any manner deface any property not his or her own, or any public school building, or any public building, bridge, fire hydrant, alarm box, street light, street sign, traffic control device, railroad sign or signal, parking meter, or shade tree belonging to the city or located in the public places of the city, or mark or post hand bills on, or in any manner mar the walls of, any public building, or fence, tree, or pole within the city, or destroy, take, or meddle with any property belonging to the city, or remove the same from the building or place where it may be kept, placed, or stored, without proper authority; or disturb, tamper with, disconnect or damage any city water meter without proper authority. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(13)) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq. 
Sec. 19-62. - Pollution, damage to drinking fountains. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, injure or in any manner deface any drinking fountain located in the city, or throw or deposit any substance therein, or in any manner pollute the water in the basin of any fountain or detach the cups or other parts of such drinking fountains. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(14)) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq. 
Sec. 19-63. - Prowling in alleys, on private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to prowl about any alley or the private premises of any other person in the nighttime, without authority or the permission of the owner of such premises. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(25)) 
Sec. 19-64. - Trespass upon lands or premises of another. 
    Any person who shall willfully enter upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden so to do by the owner or occupant, agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or after such lands or premises have been previously posted by the owner or occupant, agent or servant of the owner or occupant, with a conspicuous notice forbidding any trespass thereon, or any person being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, the agent or servant of either, who without lawful authority neglects or refuses to depart therefrom, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.552. 
Sec. 19-65. - Unlawful presence. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to lurk, lie in wait or be concealed in any building or any yard or premises within the city, with intent to do any mischief or to pilfer or to commit any crime or offense whatever. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(26)) 
Sec. 19-66. - Window peeping. 
    No person shall be found looking into the windows or doors of any house, apartment or other residence in the city, in such a manner as would be likely to interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy and without the occupant's express or implied consent. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(6)) 
State Law reference- Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(c), MSA 28.364(1)(c). 
Sec. 19-67. - Breaking and entering of a motor vehicle. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter a motor vehicle unless the person: 
(1)  Is the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or has some other contractual interest in the vehicle that would entitle the person to enter the vehicle; 
(2)  Is the owner or lessee of the real property upon which the vehicle is located; or 
(3)  Has permission to enter from an owner, a lessee, or an authorized operator of the motor vehicle, or the owner or lessee of the real property upon which the vehicle is located. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  A law enforcement officer acting within the scope of the officer's duties. 
(2)  A motor vehicle that is lawfully being moved because it is abandoned, inoperable, or improperly parked. 
(3)  An employee or agent of an entity that possesses a valid lien on a motor vehicle and who is expressly authorized by the lienholder to repossess the motor vehicle based upon the failure of the owner or lessee of the motor vehicle to abide by the terms and conditions of the loan or lease agreement. 
(c)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Enter" includes, but is not limited to, opening a door, trunk or hood of a vehicle, or inserting any part of one's body, or any object connected with the body, into a vehicle, which act shall include breaking the plane of the opened door, window, trunk or engine area. 
(2)  Any vehicle that falls within the definition of "motor vehicle" in the state's Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. No. 755, § 1, 8-18-14) 
Secs. 19-68-19-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- School disturbances, § 19-147. 

Sec. 19-81. - Disturbing the peace generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the public peace and quiet by loud, boisterous, or vulgar conduct. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(21)) 
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170, MSA 28.367. 
Sec. 19-82. - Language or gestures causing public disorder. 
    A person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor if, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, or if his or her conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, such person willfully uses abusive or obscene language or makes an obscene gesture to any other person when such words by their very utterance inflict injury or tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(15)) 
State Law reference- Indecent language in presence of women or child, MCL 750.337, MSA 28.569; disorderly persons, MCL 750.167, MSA 28.364; cursing and swearing, MCL 750.103, MSA 28.298. 
Sec. 19-83. - Obstruction of public passages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct himself or herself in any public place so as to obstruct, hinder or interfere with the free and uninterrupted passage of the public after being told to move on by a police officer. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(19)) 
State Law reference- Certain loiterers deemed disorderly persons, MCL 750.167(i-k), MSA 28.364(i-k). 
Sec. 19-84. - Playing in streets, sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to play any ball game in any public street or sidewalk or otherwise obstruct traffic on any street or sidewalk by collecting in groups thereon, for any purpose. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(20)) 
Sec. 19-85. - Jostling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to jostle or roughly crowd persons in any street, alley, park, or public building. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(18)) 
State Law reference- Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 760.167(1)(l), MSA 28.364(1)(l). 
Sec. 19-86. - Fighting in public. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any disturbance, fight, or quarrel in a public place. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(16)) 
Sec. 19-87. - Unlawful assemblies. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to collect or stand in crowds, or arrange, encourage, or abet the collection of persons in crowds for illegal or mischievous purposes in any public place. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(17)) 
State Law reference- Riots and unlawful assemblies, MCL 752.541 et seq., MSA 28.790(1) et seq. 
Sec. 19-88. - Disorderly place. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or suffer any place occupied or controlled by him or her to be a resort of noisy, boisterous, or disorderly persons. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(22)) 
Sec. 19-89. - Curfews for minors. 
(a)  No minor, the age of twelve (12) years or under, shall loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public area, street, highway, alley or park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless the minor child is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the child. 
(b)  No minor, sixteen (16) years of age or under, shall loiter, idle or congregate on any public area, street, highway, alley or park between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. immediately following, except where the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or an adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the minor, or where the minor is upon an errand or other legitimate business directed by his parent or guardian. 
(c)  No parent, guardian, or other person of the age of eighteen (18) years or older shall permit, assist, aid, abet, allow or encourage any minor to violate section 19-89(a) and (b). 
(d)  Violation of section 19-89(c) is punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 525, § 1, 4-17-95; Ord. No. 751, § 1, 6-16-14) 
Secs. 19-90-19-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 

Sec. 19-106. - Gambling, prostitution and similar offenses. 
    it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Engage in any act of prostitution; 
(2)  Attend, frequent, operate or be an occupant or inmate of any place where prostitution, gambling, the illegal sale of alcoholic liquor, or where any other illegal business or occupation is permitted or conducted; 
(3)  Engage in prostitution, gambling, the illegal sale of alcoholic liquor, or any other illegal business or occupation; 
(4)  Solicit or accost any person for the purpose of inducing the commission of any illegal act; 
(5)  Knowingly transport any person to a place where prostitution or gambling is practiced, encouraged or allowed for the purpose of enabling such person to engage in gambling or in any illegal act; 
(6)  Keep or maintain a gaming room, gaming tables, or any policy of pool tickets, used for gaming; or knowingly suffer a gaming room, gaming tables, or any policy or pool tickets to be kept, maintained, played or sold on any premises occupied or controlled by him or her. 
(Code 1977, § 9.163) 
Sec. 19-107. - Indecent or obscene conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any indecent or obscene conduct in any public place. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(3)) 
State Law reference- Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(f), MSA 28.364(1)(f). 
Sec. 19-108. - Open or indecent exposure. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any open or indecent exposure of his or her person or of the person of another. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(11)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.335a, MSA 28.567(1). 
Sec. 19-109. - Disorderly intoxication. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be intoxicated or under the influence of any controlled substance in a public place and 
(1)  Endanger directly the safety of another person or of property; or 
(2)  Act in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(2)) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic liquor generally, Ch. 3. 
Sec. 19-110. - Drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section, shall, for the purpose of this section, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  Cocaine spoon: A spoon with a bowl so small that the primary use for which it is reasonably adopted or designed, is to hold or administer cocaine, and which is so small as to be unsuited for the typical lawful uses of a spoon. 
(2)  Controlled substance: Any drug, substance, or immediate precursor designated as a schedule 1-5 substance in Article 7, Controlled Substances, Act 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.7101 et seq., MSA 14.15 (7101) et seq.), as amended, (commonly known as the Public Health Code). 
(3)  Drug paraphernalia: All equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, adapted for use, or designed for use, in planting, manufacturing, compounding, producing, testing, containing, concealing, injecting, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the public health code of the state. 
(4)  Marijuana or hashish pipe: A pipe characterized by a bowl which is so small that the primary use for which it is reasonably adapted or designed is the smoking of marijuana or hashish, rather than lawful smoking tobacco, and which may or may not be equipped with a screen. 
(b)  Sale, display, possession prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, display, furnish, supply, possess, give away or advertise any drug paraphernalia which is primarily adapted or designed for the administration or use of any controlled substance. 
(c)  Licensed persons; exemptions. This section shall not apply to a person licensed by the state board of pharmacy (administrator) pursuant to the public health code. Such person may possess, manufacture, distribute, prescribe, dispense, or conduct research with controlled substances to the extent authorized by its license. The following persons need not be licensed and may lawfully possess controlled substances under this section: 
(1)  An agent or employee of a licensed manufacturer while acting in the ordinary course of employment. 
(2)  Common or contract carrier or warehousemen, or employee thereof while possessing in ordinary course of employment. 
(3)  Persons suffering from diabetes, asthma, or any other medical condition requiring self injection or pursuant to a lawful order of a practitioner. 
(4)  An officer or employee of a federal, state, political subdivision or agency of this state who is engaged in the enforcement of state or local laws relating to controlled substances and who is authorized to possess controlled substances in the course of that person's official duties. 
(Ord. No. 373, §§ 9.401, 9.402, 4-6-81; Ord. No. 375, 5-18-81) 
Sec. 19-111. - Possession and use of marijuana. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, "marijuana" means all parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa L., growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound manufacture, sale, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom, fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. 
(b)  Possession or control. No person shall possess or control marijuana within the city unless such possession or control is pursuant to a license or prescription, or otherwise allowed under Act 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended. 
(c)  Use of marijuana. No person shall use marijuana within the city unless such use is pursuant to a license or prescription, or otherwise allowed under Act 368 of the Public Acts of 1978, as amended. 
(d)  Penalties. Anyone violating this section or any subsection, paragraph, clause or part hereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No 567, § 1, 4-26-98) 
Sec. 19-112. - Transportation or possession of usable marijuana. 
    Pursuant to Act 1909 PA 279; Section 474 of the Michigan Penal Code, 2012 PA 460, MCL 750.474, is hereby adopted as follows: 
(a)  A person shall not transport or possess usable marijuana as defined in section 26423 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.26423, in or upon a motor vehicle or any self-propelled vehicle designed for land travel unless the usable marijuana is one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Enclosed in a case that is carried in the trunk of the vehicle. 
(2)  Enclosed in a case that is not readily accessible from the interior of the vehicle, if the vehicle in which the person is traveling does not have a trunk. 
(b)  Violation of this article is punishable by one (1) or more of the following: 
(1)  Community service for not more than three hundred sixty (360) hours; 
(2)  Imprisonment for not more than ninety-three (93) days; 
(3)  A fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 749, § 1, 2-3-14) 
Secs. 19-113-19-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 

Sec. 19-126. - Abandoned refrigerators. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or container having air-tight doors. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9.91, 9.92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.493d. 
Sec. 19-127. - Discharge of fireworks or explosives. 
(a)  Definitions. In this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  APA standard 87-1 means the 2001 APA standard 87-1 standard for construction and approval for transportation of fireworks, novelties, and theatrical pyrotechnics, and theatrical pyrotechnics, published by the American Pyrotechnics Association of Bethesda, Maryland. 
(2)  Display fireworks means large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in firework displays and designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA standard 87-1, 4.1. 
(3)  Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR part 1500 and 1507, and are listed in APA standard 87-1.3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5 consumer fireworks do not include low-impact fireworks. 
(4)  Fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed for producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation to include display, consumer and low-impact fireworks as defined under Act 256 of 2011. 
(5)  Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5 
(6)  Minor means an individual who is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(7)  National holiday means the following legal public holidays: New Year's day (January 1), Martin Luther King, Jr. birthday (third Monday in January), Presidents' Day (third Monday in February), Memorial Day (last Monday in May), Independence Day (July 4), Labor Day (first Monday in September), Columbus Day (second Monday in October),Veteran's Day, (November 11), Thanksgiving day (fourth Thursday in November), Christmas day (December 25). 
(8)  Novelties means that term as defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.2 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all of the following: 
- Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in this section that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in-place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated to form a missile by the explosion. 
- Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch in diameter. 
- Toy snakes and toy smoke devices not containing mercury, if packed in boxes with not more than twelve (12) pieces per box for retail sale and if the manufacturer's name and the quantity contained in each box are printed on the box. 
(9)  Public land means all property owned, leased or otherwise in the possession of the city or another governmental entity and shall include all parks, recreational fields, playgrounds, streets, alleys, trails and school grounds. 
(b)  Ignition, discharge and use of fireworks. 
(1)  Display fireworks on public and private lands. No person(s) shall ignite, discharge or use display fireworks on any lands within the city without authorization and approval by the city council and subject to any fees, insurance coverage, licenses, forms, or applications required. 
(2)  Consumer fireworks on public lands. No person(s) shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks on public lands within the city limits without authorization by the governing body of such public lands and subject to any fees, insurance coverage, licenses, forms, or applications required. 
(3)  Consumer fireworks on private property. No person(s) shall ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks on private property in the city except on the day preceding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday as so defined under [subsection] (a)(7) of this section and subject to the approval of property owner and may be ignited only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. and shall be prohibited between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(4)  Low-impact fireworks on private property. Under Public Act 256 of 2011, all person(s) shall have the right to ignite, discharge or use low-impact fireworks subject to approval by the property owner and not in violation of other city ordinances including nuisance and noise provisions. 
(5)  Low-impact fireworks on public property. All person(s) shall have the right to ignite, discharge or use low-impact fireworks on public lands within the city upon approval of the city council and subject to any other ordinances in the city such as nuisance, or noise restrictions. 
(6)  Novelties under Public Act 256, subsection 28.453. The local unit of government has no authority to enact or enforce an ordinance, code, or regulation pertaining to, or in any manner regulating, the sale, storage, display for sale, transportation, use, or distribution of novelties. 
(c)  Possession of consumer or display fireworks by a minor. A minor shall not possess consumer or display fireworks. 
(d)  Determination of violation; seizure. If a police officer determines that a violation of this section has occurred, the officer may seize the fireworks as evidence of the violation. 
(e)  Penalty. A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. Following final disposition of a finding of responsibility for violating this article, the city may dispose of or destroy any consumer fireworks retained as evidence in that prosecution. In addition to any other penalty, a person who is found responsible for a violation of this article shall be required to reimburse the city for the costs of storing, disposing of, or destroying fireworks confiscated for a violation of this ordinance. 
(Code 1977, §§ 9.162(5), 9.224; Ord. No. 735, §§ 1, 2, 7-16-12; Ord. No. 743, § 1, 7-1-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 735, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 16, 2012, changed the title of § 19-127 from "fireworks prohibited" to "Discharge of fireworks or explosives." 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection generally, Ch. 13. 
Sec. 19-128. - Carrying dangerous weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on his or her person or in the passenger compartment of any motor vehicle any dangerous weapon, including but not limited to, segments of chain, hunting knives, jackknives having one (1) or more blades which exceed three (3) inches in length, club, metal pipe, or any other dangerous weapon, unless carried in the normal course of a business or profession, excluding firearms. 
(Code 1977, § 9.164) 
State Law reference- Dangerous weapons, MCL 750.224 et seq. 
Sec. 19-129. - Discharge of weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, air rifle, air pistol, bow and arrow, sling shot or wrist rocket within the city unless part of an exposition, tournament or range under adult supervision after issuance of a permit by the police department. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(4); Ord. No. 720, §§ 1, 2, 3-21-11) 
Sec. 19-130. - Throwing objects from vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object from any moving automobile. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(28)) 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicle vehicles generally, Ch. 33. See § 33-18(5.55(a)). 
Sec. 19-131. - Throwing objects toward vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object toward any person or automobile. 
(Code 1977, § 9.162(29)) 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 33. 
Secs. 19-132-19-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES ON SCHOOL GROUNDS 

Sec. 19-146. - Dropouts and suspended students. 
    No former student who has dropped out or quit school, or who has been suspended from school, shall enter upon or into any school property within the city without first having received authorization from the school authorities to so enter. 
(Code 1977, § 9.165-1) 
Sec. 19-147. - School disturbances. 
    No person who is not a member of the student body or who has been suspended, or who has dropped out of school, shall disturb or disrupt the normal school instructional program by creating or causing to be created any disturbance or loud noises or commotions of any kind upon any school property, or in any street, alley, park or other public place in close proximity to the school. 
(Code 1977, § 9.165-3) 
Cross reference- Offenses against public peace generally, § 19-81 et seq. 
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170. 
Sec. 19-148. - Damage or destruction of property. 
    No person shall intentionally or willfully or maliciously do any act which damages or destroys any school property or the personal property of any other person, which personal property is authorized to be on school property. 
(Code 1977, § 9.165-5) 
Cross reference- Offenses against property generally, § 19-61 et seq. 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq. 
Sec. 19-149. - Joint liability and penalty. 
    Should any damage be done to school property or other personal property by persons not authorized to be on school property during the course of or as a result of any disturbance or commotion on school property or in the streets, alleys, parks or other public places which adjoin school property, then all persons who are not authorized to be on school property at that time, who take part in the disturbance or commotion, shall be guilty of violating section 19-148 and shall be punishable as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, § 9.165-8) 
Chapter 21 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Litter in parks, § 18-53; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 29; waterways, Ch. 37. 
State Law reference- Authority to operate recreation and playgrounds, MCL 123.51 et seq., MSA 5.2421 et seq. 

Sec. 21-1. - Rules, regulations generally. 
    The city manager is hereby empowered to make such rules and regulations subject to the approval of the council, pertaining to the conduct and use of parks and public grounds as are necessary to administer the same and to protect public property and the safety, health, and welfare of the public, and no person shall fail to comply with such rules and regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 3.5) 
Sec. 21-2. - Possession, consumption of alcoholic liquor. 
    No person shall bring into or drink in any city park any alcoholic liquor. 
(Code 1977, § 3.2) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic liquor generally, Ch. 3. 
State Law reference- Liquor control act, MCL 436.1 et seq., MSA 18.971 et seq. 
Sec. 21-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 759, adopted Jan. 5, 2015, repealed § 21-3 which pertained to certain games restricted, and derived from the 1977 Code, § 3.4. 
Sec. 21-4. - Motorboats on Hopkins Lake. 
    No person shall operate a motorboat on Hopkins Lake in the city. "Motorboat" is defined to mean any vessel propelled by any machinery other than an electric trolling motor, whether or not the machinery is the principal source of propulsion. 
(Code 1977, § 3.6; Ord. No. 481, § 1, 4-1-91) 
Cross reference- Waterways generally, Ch. 37. 
Sec. 21-5. - Obstruction of ways. 
    No person shall obstruct any walk or drive in any public park or playground in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 3.1) 
Sec. 21-6. - Injury to park property. 
    No person shall injure, mar or damage in any manner, any monument, ornament, fence, bridge, seat, tree, fountain, shrub, flower, playground equipment, fireplaces, or other public property within or pertaining to the public parks or playgrounds. 
(Code 1977, § 3.1) 
Cross reference- Offenses against property generally, § 19-61 et seq. 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq., MSA 28.609 et seq. 
Sec. 21-7. - Reimbursement for damage. 
(a)  Required. Pursuant to Act No. 280 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1969 (MCL 318.251 et seq., MSA 13.1064(1) et seq.), as amended, in addition to the penalties provided in this Code for violating its provisions with respect to damage or injury to public property, any person convicted of such damage or injury to public property shall reimburse the city for up to three (3) times the amount of the damage as determined by the court. 
(b)  Judgment. In every case of conviction for such offenses, the court before whom such conviction is obtained shall enter judgment in favor of the city and against the defendant for liquidated damages as determined under subsection (a). The city, with the assistance of the city attorney, shall collect the award by execution or otherwise. If two (2) or more defendants are convicted, the judgment shall be entered against them jointly. If the defendant is a minor, such judgment shall be entered against his or her parents. 
(c)  Use of proceeds. Upon collection, the sums shall be credited to the general fund of the city and used for repairs or improvements to parks. 
(Code 1977, §§ 3.7-3.9) 
Sec. 21-8. - Park hours. 
(a)  All parks of the city shall be open from 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. daily, unless otherwise posted. Hopkins Lake shall remain open for nighttime fishing. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or use a park other than during park hours. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of section 21-8 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and costs of prosecution, by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or by both fine and costs and imprisonment at the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 759, § 2, 1-5-15) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 759, adopted Jan. 5, 2015, enacted provisions designated as §§ 21-7 and 21-8. Inasmuch as § 21-7 already exists, said provisions have been redesignated as §§ 21-8 and 21-9. 
Sec. 21-9. - Failure to leave when ordered to do so. 
    Any person who willfully disobeys an order by a police officer to leave a public park or recreation area shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 759, § 2, 1-5-15) 
Editor's note- See editor's note to § 21-8. 
Chapter 22 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Unlawful noise from hawking, § 18-91. 
State Law reference- Charitable solicitations, MCL 400.271 et seq., MSA 3.240(1) et seq.; transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq., MSA 19.691 et seq.; home solicitations sales, MCL 445.111 et seq., MSA 19.416(201) et seq.; exception for a veteran's license, MCL 35.441, MSA 4.1241. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 665, §§ 1, 2, adopted March 7, 2005, amended the Code by repealing former art. II, §§ 22-16-22-20 and 22-36-22-40, in its entirety, and adding a new art. II. Former art. II pertained to peddlers and solicitors, and derived from the Code of 1977, §§ 7.71-7.77 and 7.81-7.85. 

Sec. 22-16. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Peddler, peddling and peddle mean the practice by any person of traveling to a residence or from residence-to-residence carrying or offering for sale merchandise of any kind or a service of any kind, or taking, or attempting to take, orders for merchandise of any kind or for a service to be performed. Such term shall not include or apply to persons engaged in solicitation, as defined by, and in accordance with, the terms of this chapter, or to persons engaging in the sale of merchandise or services to a particular residence after having previously been invited or requested to do so by the occupant of such residence. 
    Person means any individual over the age of nineteen (19) years, or any partnership, corporation or other entity, including any religious group, political group or organization of any kind. 
    Solicit and solicitation mean the practice by any person of traveling to a residence or from residence-to-residence requesting donations of money, property or other thing of value, or the selling, or offering to sell, any article, publication or other thing, whether of value or not, where the money, property or thing of value to be donated, or the net proceeds of any such sale, will be used for a nonprofit charitable, religious, patriotic, civic, educational, political, philanthropic or other nonprofit purpose, and will not inure to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
(Ord. No. 665, § 2, 3-7-05) 
Sec. 22-17. - Registration. 
    No person shall solicit or peddle within the city unless such person has filed with the department of public safety, a registration statement containing the information required in section 22-18, and obtained a registration acknowledgement issued in accordance with section 22-20. 
(Ord. No. 665, § 2, 3-7-05) 
Sec. 22-18. - Solicitation and peddling registration statement. 
    The solicitation and peddling registration statement to be prepared and filed under this chapter shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person registering to solicit or peddle. 
(2)  If the registration is intended to cover more than one (1) individual, the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the registering organization and the individuals who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitations and peddling. 
(3)  The purposes, products, and services for which the solicitations and peddling are to be made and a description of the use or disposition to be made of any receipts or proceeds of the solicitations and peddling. 
(4)  A description of the methods to be used in conducting the solicitations and peddling. 
(5)  The time when such solicitations or peddling shall occur, including the dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitations and the hours of the day during which solicitations and peddling shall occur. 
(Ord. No. 665, § 2, 3-7-05) 
Sec. 22-19. - Filing false registration statement. 
    It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to knowingly file, or cause to be filed, a registration statement containing one (1) or more false statements. 
(Ord. No. 665, § 2, 3-7-05) 
Sec. 22-20. - Registration acknowledgment issuance; possession and display while soliciting. 
(a)  Upon the filing of a registration statement containing the information required in section 22-18 and with approval of the director of public safety or his designate a solicitation and peddling registration acknowledgment form shall be issued to the registered person within three (3) business days. 
(b)  The individual(s) conducting the soliciting or peddling shall carry the original or a copy of the registration acknowledge form while soliciting or peddling and shall display the form upon request. 
(c)  The solicitation and peddling registration acknowledgment shall be valid for one (1) year from issuance unless revoked or suspended earlier. 
(Ord. No. 665, § 2, 3-7-05) 
Sec. 22-21. - Hours of solicitation. 
    No solicitation or peddling may be conducted in residential areas before 9:00 a.m. and after sunset in the evening. For purposes of this section, the term "sunset" means the official time published by the United States Weather Service and applicable to the city, except that sunset shall never be deemed to occur prior to 6:00 p.m. or subsequent to 9:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 665, § 2, 3-7-05) 
Sec. 22-22. - Soliciting and peddling where prohibited. 
    No solicitor shall enter onto property upon which a "no solicitation" or "no peddlers" sign, or their equivalent, are posted and visible. 
(Ord. No. 665, § 2, 3-7-05) 
Sec. 22-23. - Use of devices to attract attention. 
    No peddler or solicitor shall shout or cry out his or her goods or merchandise, nor blow any horns, ring any bell or use any other similar device to attract the attention of the public. 
(Ord. No. 665, § 2, 3-7-05) 
Sec. 22-24. - Suspension and revocation. 
    The registration acknowledgment issued pursuant to section 22-20 may be suspended or revoked by the director of public safety or his designate if the registrant violates any sections of this chapter or any statute, ordinance or regulation while conducting the activities regulated by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 665, § 2, 3-7-05) 
Chapter 23 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- City planning, § 7.14. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; community development, Ch. 11; flood protection, Ch. 14; mobile homes and recreational vehicles, Ch. 17; signs, Ch. 26; soil erosion and control, Ch. 27; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 29; subdivision regulations, Ch. 30; utilities and services, Ch. 34; waterways, Ch. 37; zoning, Ch. 28. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate land use, MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2931 et seq.; municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq., MSA 5.2991 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 23-1-23-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions generally, § 2-216 et seq.; planning commission duties re zoning, § 38-526 et seq. 

Sec. 23-16. - Continued. 
    The city planning commission heretofore created pursuant to Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq., MSA 5.2991 et seq.), as amended, is hereby continued. 
(Code 1977, § 5.201) 
Sec. 23-17. - Membership, terms. 
(a)  In accordance with Act 285 of the Public Acts of 1931, as amended, of the state, there is hereby established a planning commission consisting of nine (9) members. One (1) of whom shall be a member of the legislative body to be selected by resolution of the legislative body to serve as a member ex officio, and eight (8) of whom shall be appointed by the mayor as provided in this subsection. An appointment by the mayor shall be subject to approval of the legislative body by majority vote. An appointed member shall not hold another municipal office, except that one (1) appointed member may be a member of the zoning board of appeals. The term of the ex officio member shall be determined by the legislative body and shall be stated in the resolution selecting the ex officio member, but the terms shall not exceed the member's term of office as a member of the legislative body. The term of each appointed member shall be three (3) years or until his or her successor takes office, except that the respective terms of two (2) of the members first appointed shall be for one (1) year and three (3) for two (2) years. After a public hearing, a member other than the member selected by the legislative body may be removed by the mayor for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office. The legislative body may for like cause remove the member selected by the legislative body. All ex officio members appointed under this subsection shall have full voting rights. 
(b)  There shall be no compensation for a member of the planning commission, except that reasonable expenses may be allowed in case of necessity with prior approval of the city council. 
(c)  The rules, regulations, duties and authority of the planning commission, as outlined by Act 285 of the Public Acts of 1931, as amended or provided for in its successor legislation, of the state, shall apply in all cases. 
(Code 1977, § 5.202; Ord. No. 693, § 1, 3-3-08) 
Chapter 25 - SECONDHAND GOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 539, § 1, adopted August 7, 1995 repealed Art. II of Ch. 25 in its entirety. Former Art. II, §§ 25-16-25-48, pertained to secondhand and junk dealers, and derived from the Code of 1977, §§ 7.111 and 7.112. Ord. No. 540, § 1, adopted August 7, 1995, repealed Arts. III and IV of Ch. 25 in their entirety. Former Art. III, §§ 25-66-25-77, and 25-91-25-97, pertained to pawnbrokers, and derived from the Code of 1977, § 7.121. Former Art. IV, §§ 25-98-25-102, pertained to garage sales, and derived from Ord. No. 471, adopted April 2, 1990. Ord. No. 556, § 1, adopted June 17, 1996, added new provisions designated as Art. II, §§ 25-21-25-25. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 25-1-25-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GARAGE SALES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 556, § 1, adopted June 17, 1996, amended the Code by adding a new chapter 25 entitled "Garage Sales", in order to preserve the alphabetical organization of the Code, and to facilitate the future supplementation of the Code, the editor has redesignated said provisions as Art. II, §§ 25-21-25-25. 

Sec. 25-21. - Purpose and intent. 
    The city council finds that repeated sales of various types of personal property made from residential premises, wherein newspaper advertisements, signs or other means of notification invite the general public to shop at such residential premises, where the property is displayed for sale in the garage, an outbuilding, in the yard area, in the dwelling, or all or a combination of such locations, have become a nuisance to the community. The council finds that locations where successive sales occur create vehicular traffic problems and detract from the tranquility and privacy of neighborhoods. The council finds that two (2) sales periods of not more than three (3) days each from any single residential premises do not have an adverse effect on the community. The council further finds that this article offers the minimum regulation necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of this community in such regard. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 582, § 1, 5-3-99) 
Sec. 25-22. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, the term "occasional sale" shall mean and include "garage sale," "basement sale" and "rummage sale" and any similar terms such as "attic sale," "lawn sale," "flea market sale," or any similar "casual sale," etc., shall mean sale of tangible personal property, whether used, secondhand, damaged or discarded, not otherwise regulated in this Code, advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be aware of such sale. 
(b)  For the purpose of this article, the term "person" shall mean and include individuals, groups, organizations, partnerships, voluntary associations and corporations. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 582, § 1, 5-3-99) 
Sec. 25-23. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply: 
(1)  To occasional sales by persons selling five (5) or less of household or personal items belonging to them or to any sale regulated under any other provisions of ordinances of the city. Home occupations regulated under Chapter 38 of this Code are specifically distinguished from this exemption through: The prohibition of yard or window displays for home occupations; the size restrictions of the occasional sale; the limitation of occasional sale items to used, secondhand, damaged or discarded materials; and the restrictions against persons seeking on-site services or products from home occupations. 
(2)  At a sale specifically authorized by statute or judicial order and conducted strictly in conformity with such statute or order or conducted under judicial supervision, such as an estate sale. 
(3)  For the personal property exposed for sale, offered for sale or displayed upon land which is exempt from taxation under 1893 PA 203, as amended, and the proceeds of the sale are applied to a charitable, religious or governmental purpose. 
(4)  For auctions by lawfully qualified auctioneers. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 582, § 1, 5-3-99) 
Sec. 25-24. - Conditions. 
    An occasional sale shall be authorized only in the following manner and under the conditions stated: 
(1)  Two (2) occasional sales may be conducted from any lot occupied for residential purposes within a calendar year with no sale to last more than three (3) consecutive days in duration. 
(2)  No sale shall begin prior to 8:00 a.m. or extend beyond 7:00 p.m. 
(3)  During the day and hours of the sale only, a person may place not more than three (3) signs, not in excess of four (4) square feet each, upon private property only, advertising the location, dates and time of the garage sale. 
(4)  The existence of signs in violation of the provisions of subsection (3) above shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter by the occupants of the premises whose location is indicated by said signs. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 582, § 1, 5-3-99) 
Sec. 25-25. - Enforcement. 
    Any police officer of the city and/or the building inspector shall enforce this article by confiscating any signs erected in violation of section 25-24(3), ordering the cessation of any sale being conducted in violation of this article or directing any other necessary corrective action. Any police officer or the building inspection is authorized to issue an appearance ticket for violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 582, § 1, 5-3-99) 
Sec. 25-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 713, adopted Oct. 5, 2009, repealed § 25-26 in its entirety. Former § 25-26 pertained to sunset provisions and derived from Ord. No. 582, adopted May 3, 1999; Ord. No. 630, adopted June 16, 2003; and Ord. No. 650, adopted Nov. 3, 2003. 
Chapter 26 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 783, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 19, 2017, repealed Ch. 26 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 26 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 26, §§ 26-1, 26-2, 26-5-26-7, 26-9, 26-11-26-21, 26-23, 26-24, 26-26-26-33, 26-35-26-38, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 500, 2-16-93; Ord. No. 571, § 1, 9-6-98; Ord. No. 578, § 1, 5-3-99; Ord. No. 579, § 1, 5-3-99; Ord. No. 627, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 628, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 661, §§ 1, 3, 10-18-04; Ord. No. 673, § 1, 6-19-06; Ord. No. 760, § 1, 2-2-15. 
Cross reference- Signs for bed and breakfast operations, § 7-7; destruction of official notices, § 19-26; planning, Ch. 23; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 29; subdivision regulations, Ch. 30; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 33; zoning, Ch. 38; zoning regulations of signs, § 38-385. 
State Law reference- Highway advertising act, MCL 252.301 et seq., MSA 9.391(101) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - MICHIGAN BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 26-1. - Adoption of Michigan Building Code. 
    The current edition of the Michigan Building Code shall be in full force and effect in the city as if set out fully herein. Complete printed copies of the code are available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Secs. 26-2-26-4. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-5. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the City of Owosso Sign Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 26-6. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate signs and to minimize outdoor advertising within the city so as to protect public safety, health and welfare; minimize abundance and size of signs to reduce visual clutter, motorist distraction, and loss of sight distance; promote public convenience; preserve property values; support and complement land use objectives as set forth in the City of Owosso Master Plan and this chapter; and enhance the aesthetic appearance and quality of life within the city. The standards contained herein are intended to be content neutral. 
    These objectives are accomplished by establishing the minimum amount of regulations necessary concerning the size, placement, construction, illumination, and other aspects of signs in the city so as to: 
(1)  Recognize that the proliferation of signs is unduly distracting to motorists and non-motorized travelers, reduces the effectiveness of signs directing and warning the public, causes confusion, reduces desired uniform traffic flow, and creates potential for accidents. 
(2)  Prevent signs that are potentially dangerous to the public due to structural deficiencies or disrepair. 
(3)  Reduce visual pollution and physical obstructions caused by a proliferation of signs which would diminish the city's image, property values and quality of life. 
(4)  Recognize that the principal intent of commercial signs, to meet the purpose of these standards and serve the public interest, should be for identification of an establishment on the premises, and not for advertising special events, brand names, or off-premises activities; alternative channels of advertising communication and media are available for advertising which do not create visual blight and compromise traffic safety. 
(5)  Enable the public to locate goods, services and facilities without excessive difficulty and confusion by restricting the number and placement of signs. 
(6)  Prevent placement of signs which will conceal or obscure signs of adjacent uses. 
(7)  Protect the public right to receive messages, especially noncommercial messages such as religious, political, economic, social, philosophical and other types of information protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. 
(8)  The regulations and standards of this chapter are considered the minimum necessary to achieve a substantial government interest for public safety, aesthetics, protection of property values, and are intended to be content neutral. 
(9)  Prevent off-premises signs from conflicting with other allowed land uses. 
(10)  Maintain and improve the image of the city by encouraging signs of consistent size which are compatible with and complementary to related buildings and uses, and harmonious with their surroundings. 
(11)  Prohibit portable commercial signs in recognition of their significant negative impact on traffic safety and aesthetics. 
(12)  Preserve and enhance the image of the city's central business district. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 26-7. - Applicability; effect and scope. 
    A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created, or maintained in the city only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this chapter. 
    The effect of the chapter as more specifically set forth herein, is: 
(1)  To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in commercial and industrial zones, and a limited variety of signs in other zones, subject to the standards and the permit procedures of this chapter. 
(2)  To allow signs that are small unobtrusive, and incidental to the principal use of the respective lots on which they are located, subject to the substantive requirements of this chapter, but without a requirement for permits. 
(3)  To provide for temporary signs without commercial messages in limited circumstances in the public right-of-way. 
(4)  To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this chapter. 
(5)  To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 26-8. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 26-9. - Sign definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Abandoned sign: Any sign which is still on the premises six (6) months after a business ceases to operate or moves from the location. 
    Administrator: The building official or his designated representative within the building department. 
    Alteration: Any construction or repair which significantly changes a sign, including additions or deletions to the sign structure. 
    Accessory sign: A sign which pertains to the use of the premises on which it is located. 
    Animated sign: A sign which uses lights, moving parts, or other means to depict action, create an image of a living creature or person, or create a special effect or scene. 
    Awning or canopy sign: A non-rigid fabric marquee or awning-type structure which is attached to the building by supporting framework, which includes a business identification message, symbol and/or logo. See "wall sign." 
    Banner: A fabric, plastic or other sign made of non-rigid material without enclosing structural framework. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banner signs. 
    Billboard: A sign separate from a premises erected for the purpose of advertising a product, event, person, or subject not related to the premises on which the sign is located. Permitted off-premises directional signs shall not be considered billboards for the purpose of this chapter. 
    Building marker: Any sign indicating the name of a building and date and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material. 
    Business center: A grouping of two (2) or more business establishments on one (1) or more parcels of property which may share parking and access and are linked architecturally or otherwise present the appearance of a unified grouping of businesses. A business center shall be considered one (1) use for the purposes of determining the maximum number of ground signs. An automobile or vehicle dealership shall be considered a business center regardless of the number or type of models or makes available, however, used vehicle sales shall be considered a separate use in determining the maximum number of signs, provided that the used vehicle sales section of the lot includes at least twenty-five (25) percent of the available sales area. 
    Changeable message sign: A sign on which the message is changed mechanically, electronically or manually, including time/temperature signs; also called menu board, reader board or bulletin board. 
    Combination sign: Any sign which combines the characteristics of two (2) or more signs. 
    Community special event sign: Signs and banners, including decorations and displays celebrating a traditionally accepted patriotic or religious holiday, or special municipal, school or other non-profit activities. 
    Construction sign: A temporary sign identifying the name(s) of project owners, contractors, developers, realtors representing developers, architects, designers, engineers, landscape architects, and financiers of a project being constructed or improved; and not including any advertising of any product or announcement of availability of leasing space. 
    Directional sign: A sign which assists motorists in determining or confirming a correct route such as, enter, exit and parking signs. Business identification or logo on such a sign is considered and calculated as part of the allowable square footage for a ground sign. 
    Festoon: A string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, pinwheels or lights, typically strung overhead in loops. 
    Flag: Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity. 
    Flashing sign: A sign which contains an intermittent or sequential flashing light source. 
    Freestanding sign: A sign which is erected upon or supported by the ground, including "pole or pylon signs" and "ground signs." 
    Gasoline price sign: A sign which is used to advertise the price of gasoline. In the event that the brand identification sign is attached to or is a part of the sign advertising price, that portion of the sign used for advertising price shall be considered the gasoline price sign. 
    Ground or monument sign: A three-dimensional, self-supporting, base-mounted freestanding identification sign, consisting of two (2) or more sides extending up from the base, and upon which a message, business, group of businesses or center name is affixed. 
    Identification sign: Also a "nameplate" sign or "information" sign with only name and address of occupant on the sign bearing no advertising message or logo. 
    Illegal sign: A sign which does not meet the requirements of this chapter and does not have legal nonconforming status. 
    Illuminated sign: Any sign that provides artificial light directly on or through any transparent or translucent material, from a source of light connected with such sign, or a sign illuminated by a light with a source so obscured and shielded that no direct rays from it are visible from a public right-of-way or from an abutting property. 
    Incidental sign: A small sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises. Examples of incidental signs include credit card signs, signs indicating the hours of business, no smoking signs, signs used to designate bathrooms, and signs providing information on credit cards and business affiliations. 
    Integral sign: A memorial sign or commemorative tablet which contains names of buildings, dates of erection, and monumental citations. 
    Luminous tube: See "neon" and "outline tubing sign." 
    Mansard: A sloped roof or roof-like facade. Signs mounted on the face of a mansard roof shall be considered wall signs. 
    Maintenance: For the purposes of this chapter, the cleaning, painting, repair or replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic copy, design, or structure of the sign. 
    Marquee: A permanent roof-like structure or canopy supported by and extending from the face of the building. A marquee sign is a sign attached to or supported by a marquee structure. 
    Menu board, reader board, or bulletin board: See "changeable message sign." 
    Moving sign: A sign in which the sign itself, or any portion of the sign, moves or revolves. A "rotating sign" is a type of moving sign. This definition does not include "changeable message signs." 
    Mural: A design or representation which is painted or drawn on the exterior surface of a structure and which does not advertise a business, product, service, or activity. 
    Nameplate: A nonelectric, on-premises identification sign giving only the name, address, and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants. 
    Neon sign: See "outline tubing sign." 
    Nonconforming sign: A sign that does not comply with the size, placement, construction or other standards or regulations of this chapter, but were lawfully established prior to its adoption. Signs for which the zoning board of appeals has granted a variance are exempt and shall not be defined as nonconforming. 
    Obsolete sign: A sign that advertises a product that is no longer made or that advertises a business that has closed. 
    Off-premises sign: A sign which identifies a use or advertises products and services not available on the site or parcel on which the sign is located; a sign which directs travelers or provides a message unrelated to the site on which the sign is located, e.g., billboards. 
    On-premises sign: A sign providing the address and name of owner of a parcel of land; a sign advertising a business, service or product sold or produced on the same site or parcel. 
    Outline tubing sign: A sign consisting of glass tubing, filled with a gas such as neon, which glows when electric current is sent through it. See "neon" and "luminous tube". 
    Owner: A person regarded as such on city tax records, or a tenant of the premises so designated by the administrator. 
    Parapet: The extension of a false front or wall above a roof line. Signs mounted on the face of a parapet shall be considered wall signs. 
    Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
    Permanent sign: A sign designed to be installed permanently in the ground a minimum of forty-two (42) inches deep by use of a steel post, wood post or other appropriate materials. 
    Political sign: A temporary sign used in connection with local, state, or national elections or referendums. 
    Portable sign: A sign designed to be moved from place to place, whether or not it is permanently attached to the ground or structure. This includes hot-air and gas-filled balloons, banners, pennants, streamers, festoons, ribbons, tinsel, pinwheels, non-government flags, and searchlights; but excludes political signs, real estate signs, construction signs, permanent changeable message signs, and regulatory/government signs. 
    Poster panel sign: A type of temporary sign that is used to draw attention to matters that are temporary in nature, such as price changes or sales. "A" frame or sandwich signs are types of poster panel signs. 
    Premises: The contiguous land in the same ownership or control which is not divided by a public street. 
    Principal building: The building in which is conducted the principal use of the zone lot on which it is located. Zone lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings. 
    Programmable display sign: An animated sign, including LEDs, made up of a field of individual electronic elements or mechanical grids that, when programmed and activated, create still or moving images or words. The elements may be internally illuminated or may be illuminated by reflected light. The sign may be framed by permanent, nonmoving signage. 
    Projecting sign: A sign, other than a wall sign, that is affixed to any building or wall and whose leading edge extends more than twelve (12) inches beyond such building or wall. 
    Public sign: A sign erected in the public interest by or upon orders from a city, state, or federal public official. Examples of public signs include: legal notices, safety signs, traffic signs, memorial plaques, signs of historical interest, and similar signs. 
    Pylon or pole sign: A sign supported on the ground by a pole, braces, or monument, and not attached to any building or other structure. 
    Real estate development sign: A sign that is designed to promote the sale or rental of lots, homes, or building space in a real estate development (such as a subdivision or shopping center) which is under construction on the parcel on which the sign is located. 
    Real estate open house sign: Temporary signs which advertise and direct the public to an open house for a building which is available for sale or lease, with the event held on a specific day. 
    Real estate sign: An on-premises temporary sign advertising the property or structure's availability for sale or lease. 
    Regulatory sign: A sign installed by a public agency to direct traffic flow, regulate traffic operations and provide information in conformance with the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
    Residential entranceway sign: A sign which marks the entrance to a subdivision, apartment complex, condominium development, or other residential development. 
    Roof line: The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher, excluding cupolas, pylons, chimneys, or similar minor projections. 
    Roof sign: Any sign that extends above the roofline or is erected over the surface of the roof. 
    Rotating sign: See "moving sign." 
    Sign: Any device, structure, fixture, figure, symbol, banner, pennant, flag, balloon, logo, or placard consisting of written copy, symbols, logos and/or graphics, designed for the purpose of bringing attention to, identifying or advertising an establishment, product, goods, services, or other message to the general public. Unless otherwise indicated, the definition of "sign" includes interior and exterior signs which are visible from any public street, sidewalk, alley, park, or public property, but not signs which are primarily visible to and directed at persons within the premises upon which the sign is located. 
    Temporary sign: A sign not constructed or intended for long-term use. Examples of temporary signs include signs which announce a coming attraction, a new building under construction, a community or civic project, or other special events that occur for a limited period of time such as a garage or estate sale. 
    Time and temperature sign: Signs which display the current time and/or temperature. 
    Vehicle sign: Signs affixed to a parked vehicle or truck trailer which is being used principally for advertising purposes rather than for transportation purposes. 
    Wall sign: A sign attached parallel to and extending not more than twelve (12) inches from the wall of a building. Painted signs, signs which consist of individual letters, cabinet signs, and signs mounted on the face of a mansard roof shall be considered wall signs. Permanent signs, which are not affixed directly to a window or are positioned next to a window so that they are visible from the outside, shall also be considered wall signs. 
    Window sign: A sign located in or on a window which is intended to be viewed from the outside. Permanent window signs which are not affixed directly to a window or are positioned next to a window so that they are visible from the outside shall be considered wall signs. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 26-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 26-11. - Permits required and fees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, re-erect, make an alteration, or relocate any sign unless a permit shall have been first obtained from the administrator, and a permit fee paid in accordance with the schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. Electrical signs shall, in addition, require an electrical permit. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 26-12. - Sign erector qualifications. 
    The administrator shall evaluate, authorize or deny as a part of the permit the person assigned to the installing of, erecting, maintaining, repairing or altering a sign. The authorization of the erector shall be based on the administrator's evaluation of the direct experience of the person specified for the sign work. Notwithstanding the previous sentences, a person does not undergo evaluation to install a nonelectrical sign, provided the sign does not exceed an area of thirty-two (32) feet, a height of seven (7) feet above grade, has no illumination, and no remuneration, monetary or otherwise, is involved. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 26-13. - Application. 
    Applications for sign permits and the appropriate nonrefundable fee shall be made upon forms provided by the building department for this purpose and in accordance with application specifications published by the administrator. These specifications shall be as complete in form as necessary for evaluation of the sign in relationship to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 26-14. - Completeness. 
    Within ten (10) days of receiving an application for a sign permit, the administrator shall review it for completeness. If the administrator finds that it is complete, the application shall then be processed. If the administrator finds that it is incomplete, the administrator shall, within such ten-day period, send to the applicant a notice of the specific ways in which the application is deficient, with appropriate references to the applicable sections of this chapter. If it is discovered that the sign permit application contains any false information, the administrator may revoke the permit or deny the application, whichever is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 26-15. - Issuance and denial. 
    The administrator shall issue a permit and permit sticker or tag for the erection, structural alteration, or relocation of a sign within ten (10) days of receipt of a valid application, provided that the sign complies with all applicable laws and regulations of the city. In all applications, where a matter of interpretation arises, the more specific definition or higher standard shall prevail. 
    When a permit is denied, the administrator shall within ten (10) days, give a written notice to the applicant along with a brief statement of the reasons for denial, citing Code sections and interpretation of possible nonconformity. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 26-16. - Inspection. 
    A person conducting or performing work covered by a permit required by this chapter shall notify the administrator when such work has commenced. Unless otherwise indicated, no person shall conceal any portion of such work until it has been inspected and approved by the administrator. The administrator shall cause an inspection of the zone lot for which each permit for a new sign or for modification of an existing sign is issued during the sixth month or at such earlier date as the owner may request. If the construction is not substantially complete at the time of a six-month inspection, the permit shall lapse and become void. If the construction is complete, the administrator shall issue a certificate of completion to the owner and the erector. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 26-17. - Signs exempt from regulation. 
    The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under this chapter: 
(1)  Any sign of a governmental unit required by a valid and applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation, or ordinance. 
(2)  Holiday lights and decorations on residential zone lots with no commercial message. 
(3)  Works of art of a noncommercial nature. 
(4)  Flags of any country, state, or unit of local government not causing a vision obstruction at intersections or flown at the top of a pole over thirty-five (35) feet in height. Any flag not meeting these conditions shall be subject to regulation as such. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 26-18. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs are prohibited in all districts: 
(1)  Signs which obstruct free access or egress from any building, including those that obstruct any fire escape, required exit way, window, or door opening or that prevent free access to the roof by firefighters. 
(2)  Moving signs and signs having moving members or parts, excluding barber poles, and electronic poles. 
(3)  Signs using high intensity or flashing lights, festoons, spinners or other animated devices. 
(4)  Signs which in any way simulate or could be confused with the lighting of emergency vehicles or traffic signals; there shall be no flashing, oscillating or intermittent, or red, yellow, or green illumination on any sign located in the same line of vision as a traffic control system, nor interference with vision clearance along any highway, street, or road or at any intersection of two (2) or more streets. 
(5)  Signs which obstruct or impair the vision of motorists or non-motorized travelers at any intersection, driveway, within a parking lot or loading area. 
(6)  Non-regulatory signs placed in any public right-of-way; attached to a utility pole; or affixed to a tree, street furniture, or waste receptacles. 
(7)  Roof signs unless specifically permitted elsewhere in this article. 
(8)  Portable signs, as defined, not provided for in this chapter. 
(9)  Pylon or pole signs not provided for in this chapter. 
(10)  Any sign or sign structure which: 
a.  Is structurally unsafe. 
b.  Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment. 
c.  Is capable of causing electric shock to person who come in contact with it. 
d.  Is not kept in good repair, such that it has broken parts, missing letters, or nonoperational lights. 
(11)  Any sign which makes use of the words "stop", "look", or "danger", or any other words, phrases, symbols, or characters, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 26-19. - General standards for permitted signs. 
    Signs which are permitted as accessory uses serving a commercial or informational purpose may be permitted subject to the requirements of this chapter; provided, that no such sign shall be erected or altered until approved by the building official/zoning administrator and until a sign permit has been issued pursuant to chapter 26 of the City of Owosso Code of Ordinances. 
(1)  Sign setbacks. 
a.  All signs, unless otherwise provided for, shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from any public or private street right-of-way line or access drive in all districts. This distance shall be measured from the nearest edge of the sign, measured at a vertical line perpendicular to the ground to the right-of-way. 
b.  Side yard setbacks for signs shall be the same as that required for the main structure or building, provided that all nonresidential signs shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from any residential district. 
(2)  Location. Sign location to assure adequate sight distance. In order to ensure adequate sight distance for motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians, a minimum clear vision area shall be maintained between a height of twenty-four (24) inches and six (6) feet within a triangular area measured twenty-five (25) feet back from intersection of public right-of-way lines. Furthermore, signs shall not be permitted where they obstruct motorist vision of regulatory signs, traffic-control devices or street signs. 
(3)  Design and construction. Signs, as permitted in the various zoning districts, shall be designed to be compatible with the character of building materials and landscaping to promote an overall unified and aesthetic effect in accordance with the standards set forth herein. Signs shall not be constructed from materials that are remnants or manufactured for a different purpose. New box sign panels with a white or tan background must be blackened internally so only the letters show when illuminated. 
(4)  Illumination. 
a.  Signs may be illuminated, but only by steady, stationary, shielded light sources directed solely at the sign or internal to it. 
b.  Use of glaring undiffused lights, bare bulbs, or flames is prohibited. 
c.  Lighting shall be shielded and/or pointed downward so as not to project onto adjoining properties or thoroughfares. 
d.  Underground wiring shall be required for all illuminated signs not attached to a building. 
(5)  Maintenance and construction. 
a.  Every sign shall be constructed and maintained in a manner consistent with the Michigan Building Code provisions and maintained in good structural condition at all times. All signs shall be kept neatly painted, stained, sealed or preserved including all metal, wood or other materials used for parts and supports. 
b.  All signs erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or moved shall be constructed in such a manner and of such materials so that they shall be able to withstand wind pressure of at least twenty (20) pounds per square foot or seventy-five (75) miles per hour. 
c.  All signs, including any cables, guy wires, or supports shall have a minimum clearance of four (4) feet from any electric fixture, street light, or other public utility pole or standard. 
(6)  Measurement. Measurement of allowable sign area (see Figure 26.1 Guidelines for Measuring Sign Face Square Footage below). 
a.  The allowable area for signs shall be measured by calculating the square footage of the sign face and any frame or base of other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate it from the background against which it is placed as measured by enclosing the most protruding points or edges of a sign within a parallelogram or rectangle. 
b.  When a sign has two (2) or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in calculating the area of the sign except that where two (2) such faces are placed back to back, only larger face shall be considered, provided that both faces are part of the same structure, contain the same message and are separated by no more than two (2) feet. 
c.  For purposes of calculating sign area allowed as a wall sign, the wall sign square footage shall be determined by measuring a parallelogram (box) which includes the portion of the canopy which contains a message, symbol and/or logo (examples are shown on the attached figures). 
d.  When a sign consists solely of lettering or other sign elements printed, painted or mounted on a wall of a building without any distinguishing border, panel or background, the calculation for sign area shall be measured by enclosing the most protruding edges of the sign elements within a parallelogram or rectangle. 
Guidelines for Measuring Sign Face Square Footage 
Figure 26.1 

(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17; Ord. No. 792, § 1, 5-7-18) 
Sec. 26-20. - Off-premises signs. 
(a)  Off-premises advertising. The regulation of off-premises signs is intended to enhance and protect community character and image by minimizing visual blight and pollution, and to minimize traffic safety hazards due to diversion of the driver's attention and blockage of sight distances. Off-premises sign regulations address the location, size, height and related characteristics of such signs. 
(1)  Area and height limitations. No off-premises sign may be erected or maintained of a greater surface area than three hundred (300) square feet for each side of such sign. The top of the sign shall be no more than twenty-five (25) feet above the ground and the bottom of the sign shall be at least ten (10) feet above the ground. Double-faced off-premises sign structures (i.e., structures having back-to-back faces) and V-type structures having only one (1) face visible to traffic proceeding from any given direction on a street or highway shall be considered as one (1) off-premises sign. 
(2)  Location. Static and digital off-premises signs may be erected only in the industrial district. No off-premises sign may be erected or maintained within fifty (50) feet of street lines at any street intersection and shall have a minimum setback from the front property line of twenty-five (25) feet. No off-premises sign shall be installed or placed on top of, cantilevered or otherwise suspended above the roof of any building. 
(3)  Spacing. Off-premises signs shall be located no closer to one another than five hundred (500) feet. 
(4)  Illumination. An off-premises sign may be illuminated, provided such illumination is concentrated on the surface of the sign and is so located as to avoid glare or reflection onto any portion of an adjacent street or highway, into the path of oncoming vehicles, or on any adjacent premises. In no event shall any off-premises sign have flashing or intermittent lights, nor shall the lights be permitted to rotate or oscillate. 
(5)  Digital off-premises signs. 
a.  Rate of change. The rate of change between static messages or images shall not exceed more than one (1) change per six (6) seconds. Each change shall be complete in one (1) second or less. 
b.  Luminance. The maximum daylight sign luminance level shall not exceed sixty-two thousand (62,000) candelas per meter squared at forty thousand (40,000) lux illumination beginning one-half (1/2) hour after sunrise and continuing until one-half (1/2) hour before sunset and does not exceed three hundred seventy-five (375) candelas per meter squared at four (4) lux illumination at all other times. 
c.  [Digital off-premises signs.] Digital off-premises signs shall be configured to default to a static display in the event of mechanical failure. 
(6)  [Construction.] An off-premises sign must be constructed in such a fashion that it will withstand all wind and vibration forces which can normally be expected to occur in the vicinity. An off-premises sign must be maintained so as to assure proper alignment of structure, continued structural soundness, and continued readability of the message(s). 
(7)  [Industrial areas.] An off-premises sign established within an industrial area, as defined in the Highway Advertising Act of 1972 (1972 PA 106, as amended), bordering interstate highways, freeways or primary highways as defined in said Act shall, in addition to complying with the above conditions, also comply with all applicable provisions of said Act and the regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(b)  Combination off-premises and on-premises electronic message boards. Digital signs which are used to advertise both on-premises and off-premises establishments shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  A permanent, static on-premises primary sign must be in existence totaling at least twenty-five (25) percent of the allowable sign size in the district. The balance of the total allowable sign area may consist of the combination off-premises/on-premises sign. 
(2)  The combination off-premises/on-premises sign shall adhere to the regulations contained in. 
(3)  Digital messages may advertise the on-premises establishment. The balance of the messages may advertise off-premises establishments under the same ownership and/or public service announcements. 
(4)  Each message shall remain readable for at least six (6) seconds. 
(5)  Combination off-premises and on-premises digital signs shall be spaced at least five hundred (500) feet apart in all districts. 
(6)  Combination off-premises and on-premises digital signs shall be allowed in the B-2, B-3, B-4, I-1 and I-2 districts. 
(7)  Combination off-premises/on-premises signs shall count toward the total sign area allowed for the property. 
(c)  Off-premises directional signs. 
(1)  Private off-premise directional signs. Private off-premises directional signs which provide directions to a commercial or industrial establishment which is not located on a primary street within the city shall be allowed on private property provided there exists a written agreement between the property owner and the business/industry. Said agreement shall be filed with the City of Owosso. 
a.  Off-premises directional signs shall be no greater than twelve (12) square feet. 
b.  Sign lettering may display the off-premises business name, address, and an arrow indicating direction. 
c.  Off-premises directional signs shall only be located on B-2, B-3, B-4, I-1, and I-2 districts. 
d.  One (1) off-premises direction sign is permitted per industrial zoning lot. 
(2)  Public off-premises directional signs. Public off-premises directional signs erected by the city, State of Michigan, or the downtown development authority shall be permitted in the street right-of-way. 
(d)  Off-premises private signs in the public right-of-way. Private A-frame signs may be allowed in the public right-of-way. The following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Signs shall be approved by the city council. 
(2)  Signs shall be removed each night. 
(3)  Maximum size two (2) feet wide by four (4) feet in total height for each panel with a maximum of two (2) panels per sign. Maximum spread between the two (2) panels at the base shall be two (2) feet six (6) inches. 
(4)  The owner of the property abutting the right-of-way on which the sign is placed shall be notified, prior to city council approval, that the sign is being requested. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 26-21. - Specific sign standards. 
    The number, display area, and height of signs within the various zoning districts are provided in the sign dimensional standards and regulations table and its accompanying footnotes. Additional standards for specific types of signs are given below: 
SIGN DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS Wall, Canopy or 
Projecting Sign (c) Ground Sign (c) Temporary Signs (d) District Number Allowed Max. Size Number (b) Max. Size Per Sign Face Max. Height Max. Size Per Sign Total Area Per Parcel Max. Height R-1, R-2, RM-1, RM-2, R-T - 10% of front facade for all uses other than single family homes, duplexes, and attached condominiums 1 24 square feet 6 feet 6 square feet 14 square feet 4 feet Home Occupations as allowed and defined in Sec. 38-394 1 Not to exceed a size of 2' x 3' mounted flush to the building* - - - - - - B1, B-2, B-3, B-4 PUD 1 per business (a) 10% of front facade or 100 square feet, whichever is less (a) 1 72 square feet 6 feet 24 square feet 48 square feet 6 square feet I-1 and I-2 1 per business (a) 20% of front facade or 200 square feet, whichever is less (a) 1 72 square feet 6 feet 24 square feet 48 square feet 6 square feet  
* Illumination: home occupation sign may be illuminated, provided such illumination is concentrated on the surface of the sign and is so located as to avoid glare or reflection onto any portion of an adjacent street or highway, into the path of oncoming vehicles, or on any adjacent premises. In no event shall any home occupation sign have flashing or intermittent lights, nor shall the lights be permitted to rotate or oscillate. 
    Footnotes to the Sign Dimensional Standards and Regulations Table 
(a)  One (1) wall sign shall be allowed per business, in addition to any other allowed ground signs. Businesses located on a corner lot shall be allowed up to two (2) wall signs, one (1) for each front facade. The maximum wall sign area shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the front facade of the building (any facade which faces a public or approved private street), per use or business establishment. However, for a commercial structure containing one (1) use or business establishment, as determined by the planning commission, the size of the wall sign may be increased up to the maximum square footage as follows: 
201-400 linear feet of building frontage facing a public street and having a public entrance 150 square feet Greater than 400 linear feet of building frontage facing a public street and having a public entrance 200 square feet  
(b)  Only one (1) ground sign is permitted per use, including uses which occupy more than one (1) parcel and business centers containing more than one (1) business or use, with additional signs permitted according to the following table, however, no site shall have more than two (2) ground signs, regardless of the number of street frontages or the amount of frontage. Single uses on a single parcel do not qualify for this consideration: 
Frontage along 2 or more rights-of-way 1 sign up to the maximum sign face area shall be allowed along 2 frontages 300 feet of frontage along 1 right-of-way 1 ground sign along that frontage Greater than 300 feet of frontage along 1 right-of-way 2 ground signs  
(c)  Changeable message signs and gasoline price signs may be permitted as part of a monument sign in the business districts and industrial districts, and when associated with a commercial in accordance with the following: 
(1)  One (1) changeable message sign or one (1) gasoline price sign shall be permitted per premises, but not both. 
(2)  Message or gasoline price changes may occur electronically or manually. 
(3)  The area of a changeable message sign or gasoline price sign shall not exceed one-third (?) the total area of the sign. 
(4)  Illumination shall be concentrated within the face of the sign to prevent glare upon adjoining properties and thoroughfares. 
(5)  Electronic messages or gasoline prices shall not flash, fade in or out, or scroll. 
(6)  Any voids or burned out bulb in an electronic display shall be replaced. 
(7)  Electronic changeable message signs and gasoline price signs shall be at least one hundred (100) feet from any residential district or use, except as modified in subsection (10) below. 
(8)  One (1) gasoline price sign is permitted for an overhead gas pump canopy with an area not to exceed ten (10) percent of the canopy facade and when this is the only changeable message sign on the property. 
(9)  One (1) electronic message sign, meeting the above requirements, may be approved by the planning commission for institutional uses, meaning a use by public or quasi-public institution such as a religious organization, church, nonprofit organization, academic institution, library or hospital, located in a residential district when meeting the following requirements: 
i.  The institutional use is located on a minor arterial or collector road, as designated in the City of Owosso Master Plan; 
ii.  That the sign will not create a nuisance for residential properties in the immediate vicinity of the sign, as determined by the planning commission and subject to any conditions; 
iii.  The appropriate size of the sign shall be determined by the planning commission but shall be no greater than fifty (50) square feet in area. 
(d)  Signs for temporary uses. 
(1)  Temporary signs include, but are not limited to the following: 
i.  For a single dwelling or building or vacant land: an on-site real estate sign, advertising the premises for sale, rent or lease. 
ii.  An on-site sign advertising an ongoing garage, estate or yard sale. 
iii.  Noncommercial signs which contain noncommercial information or directional messages. 
iv.  Political signs. 
v.  Holiday or other seasonal signs. 
vi.  Construction signs for buildings under construction. 
vii.  All temporary signs must comply with the sign size and height standards as specified in the sign dimensional standards and regulations table. 
(2)  Location of temporary signs shall comply with the following: 
i.  Temporary signs shall not be attached to any utility pole or be located within any public right-of-way. 
ii.  Temporary signs shall not be located closer than twenty (20) feet to the edge of the traveled portion of the roadway, nor shall they be located within any dedicated right-of-way. 
iii.  Temporary signs shall not be erected in such a manner than they will or may reasonably be expected to interfere with, obstruct, confuse or mislead traffic. 
iv.  Temporary signs cannot be placed or constructed so as to create a hazard of any kind. 
v.  Temporary signs may not be posted on private property without first obtaining the permission of the property owner. 
vi.  Signs shall not be located within any clear vision triangle, as described in section 38-388, corner clearance. 
(3)  Time limitations for temporary signs. Each temporary sign shall be removed within sixty (60) days of placement. Furthermore, no sign may be erected on a single parcel for more than sixty (60) calendar days out of every one hundred twenty (120) calendar days. 
(1)  Directional signs. No more than one (1) directional sign shall be permitted for each approved driveway, with a maximum sign area of four (4) square feet per sign, and a maximum height of four (4) feet. Any directional sign which includes a business name, symbol or logo shall be calculated as part of the allowable sign square footage, as specified in the sign dimensional standards and regulations table. 
(2)  Projecting and canopy signs. Projecting signs and canopy signs may be used as an alternative to wall signs listed in the sign dimensional standards and regulations table, provided that they meet the following standards: 
a.  Any sign area on a canopy shall be included in calculations of maximum wall sign square footage. 
b.  Projecting or canopy signs in the central business district shall be set back at least two (2) feet from any street curbline, shall not extend more than six (6) feet over the public right-of-way, and shall leave a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet above the ground. 
c.  Projecting or canopy signs in the B-1, B-2, B-4, I-1 and I-2 districts shall have a minimum ground clearance of ten (10) feet, shall be set back at least six (6) feet from any adjacent public right-of-way, and shall not project over an alley or private access lane. A projecting sign shall not extend for more than two (2) feet from the building to which it is attached. 
d.  No wall, canopy or projecting sign shall extend above the roof or parapet of the structure to which it is attached by more than one (1) foot. 
e.  Wood posts or supporting arms shall not be used in conjunction with any projecting sign. 
f.  Projecting signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area. 
g.  Canopy signs shall not be internally illuminated. 
(3)  Downtown historic district. Any signs within the downtown historic district shall meet all requirements of the Owosso Historic District Commission prior to installation of new signage or modification of existing signage. 
(4)  Entranceway signs. One (1) permanent sign per vehicular entrance identifying developments such as subdivisions, apartment complexes, condominium communities, senior housing complexes, manufactured housing communities, office and industrial parks and similar uses, provided that the sign is set back a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from any property line or public right-of-way is permitted. 
(5)  Portable A-frame signs. Portable A-frame or sandwich board signs are permitted in the B-1, B-2, B-3, and B-4 districts at the public building entrances to businesses subject to the following requirements: 
a.  One (1) sign per customer entrance shall be permitted regardless of the number of tenants on the premises. 
b.  The sign is permitted only during operating business hours and must be stored inside when the establishment is not open to the general public. 
c.  Each sign shall not exceed an overall height of forty-two (42) inches and an overall width of twenty-four (24) inches. 
d.  No sign shall be located in such a manner as to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow or visibility. 
e.  All signs must be constructed or weatherproof, durable material and kept in good repair. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 26-22. - Nonconforming signs. 
    Nonconforming signs are those signs that do not comply with the size, placement, construction or other standards or regulations of this chapter but were lawfully established prior to its adoption. Signs for which the board of appeals has granted a variance are exempt and shall not be defined as nonconforming. It is the intent of this chapter to encourage eventual elimination of nonconforming signs in a timely manner. This objective is considered as much a subject of public health, safety and welfare as the prohibition of new signs in violation of this chapter. Therefore, the purpose of this chapter is to remove illegal nonconforming signs while avoiding any unreasonable invasion of established private property rights. A nonconforming sign may be continued and shall be maintained in good condition as described elsewhere in this chapter, however, the following alterations are regulated: 
(1)  A nonconforming sign shall not be structurally altered or repaired so as to prolong its useful life or so as to change its shape, size, type or design unless such change shall make the sign conforming. 
(2)  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign. 
(3)  A nonconforming sign shall not be reestablished after abandonment as defined in section 26-23, dangerous, unsafe, abandoned, and illegally erected signs. 
(4)  A nonconforming sign must not be reestablished after damage or destruction if the estimated expense of reconstruction exceeds fifty (50) percent of the appraised replacement cost as determined by the building official/zoning administrator or if fifty (50) percent or more of the face of the sign is damaged or destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 26-23. - Dangerous, unsafe, abandoned, and illegally erected signs. 
(a)  Dangerous signs. Any sign constituting an immediate hazard to health or safety shall be deemed a nuisance and may be immediately removed by the city and the cost thereof charged against the owner of the property on which it was installed. 
(b)  Unsafe signs. Any sign that becomes insecure, in danger of falling, or otherwise unsafe but not considered an immediate danger by the building official/zoning administrator to the health or safety of the public shall be removed or repaired according to the process outline in subsection (e) below. 
(c)  Abandoned signs. Any sign that advertises a business that has been discontinued for at least ninety (90) days or that advertises a product or service that is no longer offered shall be deemed abandoned. Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended by a change in ownership or management shall not be deemed abandoned unless the structure remains vacant for at least six (6) months. An abandoned sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign, the building official/zoning administrator shall initiate the process noted in subsection (e) below. 
(d)  Illegally erected signs. The building official/zoning administrator shall order the removal of any sign erected illegally in violation of this chapter, according to the process outlined in subsection (e) below. 
(e)  Process for enforcing violations of section 26-7, dangerous, unsafe, abandoned, and illegally signs. For violations of sections 26-7(2) through (4), the building official/zoning administrator shall notify the owner of the property on which the sign is located. Verbal notices or those sent by first-class mail shall be sufficient notice. Where a sign erected in violation of this chapter is considered dangerous or unsafe, the notice shall inform the owner to remove said sign(s) immediately and property owners of other illegal signs on private property shall be granted a reasonable period of time within which to remove the sign, as determined by the building official/zoning administrator. Should the property owner fail to remove the sign(s) within the time specified, or if a sign is erected within any right-of-way or public property, the building official/zoning administrator, or their designee, shall have the authority to remove the sign, and the property owner shall be liable for the cost thereof. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 26-24. - Changes to permitted signs. 
    No physical, structural or electrical changes can be made to existing permitted signs without first obtaining a new sign permit. Individual sign panels can be replaced on existing box signs, but a permit must still be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 26-25. - Administration and appeals of sign ordinance standards. 
(a)  Generally. The regulations of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by building official/zoning administrator. 
(b)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, use or maintain any sign in the city, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the standards and regulations of this chapter. Any such violation, including the failure to remove a sign when directed under the authority of this chapter, shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with section 1-8 of the Owosso Code of Ordinances. 
SIGN DIAGRAMS 
Figure 26.2 

(Ord. No. 783, § 2, 6-19-17) 
Chapter 28 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Special assessments, Ch. 10. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-6(6); planning, Ch. 25; taxation, Ch. 32. 
State Law reference- Powers re special assessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5; MSA 5.2074, 5.2075, 5.2077, 5.2084. 

Sec. 28-1. - Definitions. 
    In the interpretation of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Cost, when referring to the cost of any public improvement, shall include the cost of services, plans, condemnation, spreading of rolls, notices, advertising, financing, construction, and legal fees and all other costs incident to the making of such improvement, the special assessments therefor and the financing thereof. 
    Public improvement shall mean any construction of or improvement which results in special benefit to the real property in the vicinity of such improvement. 
(Code 1977, § 1.221) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 28-2. - Authority to assess. 
    The entire cost or any part thereof of any public improvement may be defrayed by special assessment upon the lands specially benefited by the improvement in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1977, § 1.222) 
Sec. 28-3. - To initiate special assessment projects. 
(a)  Proceedings for the making of public improvements within the city may be commenced by resolution of the council, on its own initiative or by an initiatory petition signed by property owners whose aggregate property in the special assessment district was assessed for more than fifty (50) percent of the total assessed value of the privately owned real property located therein, in accordance with the last preceding general assessment roll; provided, however, that in the case of special assessments for paving or similar improvements which are normally assessed on a frontage basis against abutting property, such petitions shall be signed by the owners of more than fifty (50) percent of the frontage of property to be assessed. 
(b)  Such petitions shall contain in addition to the signatures of the owners, a brief description of the property owned by the respective signers thereof. 
(c)  Such petitions shall be verified by the affidavit of one (1) or more of the owners or by some person or persons with knowledge that the signers are such owners and that such signatures are genuine. 
(d)  Petitions shall be addressed to the council and filed with the city clerk. Petitions shall in no event be mandatory upon the council. 
(e)  All petitions shall be circulated and signed on blank forms furnished by the city. 
(f)  All petitions shall be referred by the city clerk to the city manager. The city manager shall check the petitions to determine whether they conform to the foregoing requirements and shall report his or her findings to the council. 
(Code 1977, § 1.223) 
Sec. 28-4. - Survey and report. 
    Before the council shall consider the making of any public improvement, the same shall be referred by resolution to the city manager directing him or her to prepare a report which shall include necessary plans and detailed estimates of cost, an estimate of the life of the improvement, a description of the assessment district or districts and such other pertinent information as will permit the council to decide the cost, extent, and necessity of the public improvement proposed and what part or proportion thereof should be paid by special assessments upon the property especially benefited and what part, if any, should be paid by the city at large. The council shall not finally determine to proceed with the making of any public improvement until such report of the city manager has been filed, nor until after a public hearing has been held by the council for the purpose of hearing objections to the making of such public improvement. 
(Code 1977, § 1.224) 
Sec. 28-5. - Determination on the project, notice. 
(a)  After the city manager has presented the report required in section 28-4 for making any public improvement as requested in the resolution of the council, and the council has reviewed the report, a resolution may be passed determining the necessity of the improvement; setting forth the nature thereof; prescribing what part or proportion of the cost of such improvement shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially benefited, determination of benefits received by affected properties and what part, if any, shall be paid by the city at large; designating the limits of the special assessment district to be affected; designating whether to be assessed according to frontage or other benefits; placing the complete information on file in the office of the clerk where the same may be found for examination; and directing the clerk to give notice of public hearing on the proposed public improvement at which time and place opportunity will be given interested persons to be heard. Such notice shall be given by one publication in a newspaper published or circulated within the city at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the hearing, and by first class mail addressed to each person having an interest in property to be assessed as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the city, the mailing to be made at least ten (10) full days prior to the date of hearing. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned, or special meeting of the council. 
(b)  Pursuant to the provisions of section 10.2(a)(3) of the Charter, no public hearing shall be required when a petition for a public improvement is signed by all of the owners of property to be assessed therefore and the council may adopt the resolution to proceed with the public improvement as provided in section 28-6 as though a public hearing had been held. 
(Code 1977, § 1.225; Ord. No. 624, § 1, 3-3-03) 
State Law reference- Special assessment notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq., MSA 5.3534(1) et seq. 
Sec. 28-6. - Hearing on necessity. 
    At the public hearing on the proposed improvement, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard, after which the council may modify the scope of the public improvement in such a manner as they shall deem in the best interest of the city as a whole; provided, that if the amount of work is increased or additions are made to the district, then another hearing shall be held pursuant to notice prescribed in section 28-5. If the determination of the council shall be to proceed, it shall adopt a resolution to proceed with the public improvement, approving the necessary plans and estimate of cost, finally filing the assessment districts, determining the probable life of the public improvement, and directing the assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the council's determination and report the same to the council for confirmation. 
(Code 1977, § 1.226) 
State Law reference- Special assessment notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq., MSA 5.3534(1) et seq. 
Sec. 28-7. - Objections to improvement. 
    If prior to adoption of the resolution to proceed with the making of the public improvement as provided in section 28-6, written objections to the public improvement have been filed by the owners of property in the district which according to the city manager's report will be required to bear more than fifty (50) percent of the cost thereof or by majority of the owners of property to be assessed, no resolution determining to proceed with the public improvement shall be adopted while such objections remain except by the affirmative vote of five (5) members of the council. 
(Code 1977, § 1.227) 
Sec. 28-8. - Deviation from plans and specifications. 
    No derivation from original plans or specifications as adopted shall be permitted by any officer or employee of the city without authority of the council by resolution. A copy of the resolution authorizing such changes or deviation shall be certified by the clerk and attached to the original plans and specifications on file in his or her office. 
(Code 1977, § 1.228) 
Sec. 28-9. - Limitations on preliminary expenses. 
    The council shall specify the provisions and procedures for financing a public improvement. No contract or expenditure, except for the cost of preparing necessary profiles, plans, specifications, and estimates of cost and cost of the special assessment proceedings shall be made for the improvement until special assessments to defray the costs of the same shall have been levied. 
(Code 1977, § 1.229) 
Sec. 28-10. - Special assessment roll. 
    The assessor shall make a special assessment roll of all lots and parcels of land within the designated district benefited by the proposed improvement and assess to each lot or parcel of land the amount benefited thereby. The amount spread in each case shall be based upon the detailed estimate of the city manager as approved by council. 
(Code 1977, § 1.230) 
Sec. 28-10.5 - Special assessment roll-Hazards and nuisances. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of section 10.7 of the Charter, the assessor shall make a special assessment roll of all lots and parcels of land within the city upon which hazards and nuisances were found to have existed and for which the city incurred costs associated with altering, repairing, tearing down, abating or removing the hazards and nuisances. The assessment roll shall be prepared at least annually and shall list for each lot and parcel the amount of such cost that has remained unpaid for at least thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 625, § 1, 3-3-03; Ord. No. 726, § 1, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 28-11. - Assessor to file assessment roll. 
    When the assessor shall have completed such assessment roll, he or she shall file the same with the clerk for presentation to the council for review and certification by it. 
(Code 1977, § 1.231) 
Sec. 28-12. - Meeting to review special assessment roll; objections. 
    Upon receipt of the special assessment roll, the council, by resolution, shall accept such assessment roll and order it to be filed in the office of the clerk for public examination; shall fix the time and place the council will meet to review such special assessment roll, and direct the clerk to give notice of a public hearing for the purpose of affording an opportunity for interested persons to be heard. Such notice shall be given by one (1) publication in a newspaper published or circulated within the city and by first class mail addressed to each person having an interest in property to be assessed as shown by the last general tax assessment roll of the city, the publication and mailing to be made at least ten (10) full days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned, or special meeting of the council. At the meeting, all interested persons or parties shall present in writing their objections if any, to the assessments against them. The assessor shall be present at every meeting of the council at which a special assessment is to be reviewed. 
(Code 1977, § 1.232) 
State Law reference- Special assessment notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq. 
Sec. 28-13. - Changes and corrections in assessment roll. 
    The council shall meet at the time and place designated for the review of the special assessment roll and, at such meeting, or a proper adjournment thereof, shall consider all objections thereto submitted in writing. The council may correct the roll as to any special assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein; or it may, by resolution annul such assessment roll and direct that new proceedings be instituted. The same proceedings shall be followed in making a new roll as in the making of the original roll. If, after hearing all objections and making a record of such changes as the council deems justified, the council determines that it is satisfied with the special assessment roll, and that assessments are in proportion to benefits received, it shall thereupon pass a resolution reciting such determinations, confirming such roll, placing it on file in the office of the clerk and directing the clerk to attach his or her warrant to a certified copy thereof within ten (10) days, therein commanding the assessor to spread the various sums and amounts appearing thereon on a special assessment roll for the full amounts or in annual installments as directed by the council. Such roll shall have the date of confirmation endorsed thereon and shall from that date be final and conclusive for the purpose of the public improvement to which it applies, subject only to adjustment to conform to the actual cost of the improvement, as provided in section 28-17. 
(Code 1977, § 1.233) 
Sec. 28-14. - When special assessment due. 
    All special assessments, except such installments thereof as the council shall make payable at a future time as provided in this chapter, shall be due and payable upon confirmation of the special assessment roll. 
(Code 1977, § 1.234) 
Sec. 28-15. - Partial payments. 
    The council may provide for the payment of special assessments in annual installments. Such annual installments shall not exceed twenty (20) in number. The first and subsequent installments of a special assessment roll shall be due upon such dates as the council shall fix in the resolution confirming the special assessment. The installments of the special assessment rolls shall bear interest at the rate of six (6) percent per annum; provided, however, if the bonds are issued in anticipation of the special assessments, then such unpaid special assessment shall bear interest at a rate of interest equal to one (1) percent above the average rate of interest borne by the bonds. Such interest shall commence on the date of the first installment and shall be paid annually on each installment due date. The full amount of all or any deferred installments, with interest accrued thereon to the date of payment, may be paid in advance of the due dates thereof. Deferred installments shall be collected without penalty until ninety (90) days after the due date thereof, after which time such installments shall be considered as delinquent and such penalties on the installments shall be collected as are provided in the Charter to be collected on delinquent general city taxes. 
(Code 1977, § 1.235; Ord. No. 712, § 1, 8-17-09) 
Sec. 28-16. - Creation of lien. 
(a)  Upon the confirmation of each special assessment roll, the special assessments thereon shall, until paid, constitute a personal obligation to the city of the owner of the property against which it is assessed and shall be and continue to be a lien upon the property assessed for the amount of such assessment and all interest and collection charges which may accrue thereon. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as that which is created by the city charter for city taxes. Such special assessments or the installments thereof as the case may be, shall be charged against the owners of the property assessed, according to the records of the assessor's office at the time the special assessment or installment thereof, as the case may be, is due for payment. All special assessments or installments thereof, made in any calendar year which remain unpaid on the first day of March of the succeeding calendar year, together with the collection charges and interest which have accrued thereto, shall be placed upon the delinquent tax roll of the city as required in chapter 9 of the Charter and shall be collected, or the collection thereof enforced, in the same manner as are delinquent taxes of the city. 
(b)  In addition to the procedures established in subsection (a) hereof for the collection of special assessments levied against property, the city may recover them in a suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. In any such suit, the confirmed special assessment roll upon which the special assessment concerned appears shall be prima facie evidence of the existence of the special assessment, of the regularity of the proceedings in making the special assessment, and of the right of the city to recover judgment therefor. 
(Code 1977, § 1.236) 
Sec. 28-17. - Additional assessments, refunds. 
    The city manager shall, within sixty (60) days after the completion of each public improvement, compile the actual cost thereof and certify the same to the council. When any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to meet the cost of the improvement for which it was made, the council may make an additional pro rata assessment; provided, however, that no property shall be assessed in excess of benefits received. No additional assessment for any public improvement which exceeds ten (10) percent of the original assessment shall be made, unless such additional assessment be reviewed at a meeting of the council for which meeting notices shall be published and mailed as provided in the case of the review of the original special assessment roll, as required by section 28-12. Should the entire amount as finally collected on the assessment roll prove larger than necessary by five (5) percent of the total cost of the improvement or more, the council shall make a refund of the entire amount of the excess thereof pro rata according to assessments. Should the entire amount as finally collected on the assessment roll prove larger than necessary by less than five (5) percent of the total cost of the improvement, the council may transfer such excess to the general funds of the city or make a refund thereof pro rata according to assessments. 
(Code 1977, § 1.237) 
Sec. 28-18. - Additional procedures. 
    In any case where the provisions of this chapter may prove to be insufficient to carry out fully the making of any special assessment, the council shall provide by ordinance any additional steps or procedures required. 
(Code 1977, § 1.238) 
Sec. 28-19. - Special assessment accounts. 
    Monies raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be used to pay on the special assessment portion of the cost of the public improvement for which assessment was levied and of expenses incidental thereto, including the repayment of the principal of and interest on money borrowed therefor, and to refund excessive assessments if refunds be authorized. 
(Code 1977, § 1.239) 
Sec. 28-20. - Contested assessments. 
    No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment or additional special assessment: 
(1)  Unless, within thirty (30) days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll, written notice be filed with the clerk of intention to file such suit or action, stating the grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal; and 
(2)  Unless such suit or action shall be commenced within ninety (90) days after the confirmation of the roll. 
(Code 1977, § 1.240) 
Sec. 28-21. - Reassessment for benefits. 
    Whenever the council shall deem any special assessment invalid or defective for any reason whatever, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall have adjudged such assessment to be illegal for any reason whatever, in whole or in part, the council shall have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made, whether the public improvement or any part thereof has been completed and whether any part of the assessment has been collected or not. All proceedings on such reassessment and for collection thereof shall be made in the manner as provided for the original assessment. If any portion of the original assessment shall have been collected and not refunded, it shall be applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed shall have been collected, the balance shall be refunded to the person making such payment. 
(Code 1977, § 1.241) 
Sec. 28-22. - Combination of projects. 
    The council may combine several districts into one (1) project for the purpose of effecting a saving in the costs; provided, however, that for each district there shall be established separate accounts to cover the cost of the same. 
(Code 1977, § 1.242) 
Sec. 28-23. - Special assessments for certain sidewalks. 
    In any case when the main purpose of a sidewalk is to provide travel convenience to and from a school, factory, or other institution, public or private, and not for the benefit of the property in a district except incidentally, the city shall pay not less than one-half of the cost of such sidewalk. 
(Code 1977, § 1.243) 
Sec. 28-24. - Revolving fund. 
    In the event that funds are on hand or a revolving fund exists to defray the expense of any public improvement prior to the completion thereof, the special assessment roll may be made within sixty (60) days after the improvement is completed and shall be based upon the actual cost thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 1.244) 
Sec. 28-25. - Intergovernmental improvements. 
    When the city may, by law, participate in intergovernmental improvements, the costs of which may be defrayed in whole or in part by special assessments, the procedure therefor shall be as provided by the law permitting the same. If such procedure is not so provided, the procedure established by and under authority of this chapter shall govern. 
(Code 1977, § 1.245) 
Sec. 28-26. - Reconsideration of petitions. 
    If the council shall fail to make any public improvement petitioned for under the provisions of this chapter during the calendar year during which any petition is filed, such petition shall be reconsidered by the council prior to the first day of March of the succeeding calendar year for the purpose of determining whether such public improvement should be made during such calendar year. 
(Code 1977, § 1.246) 
Sec. 28-27. - Condemnation costs. 
    The cost of condemning or otherwise acquiring property needed for any public improvement shall constitute a part of the cost of the public improvement, but in no case shall the amount of such cost which is included in any special assessment for any public improvement cause the assessment to exceed the amount of the benefit received by any property therefor through the making of the improvement. 
(Code 1977, § 1.247) 
Sec. 28-28. - Certain postponements of payments. 
    The council may provide that any person who, in the opinion of the assessor and council, by reason of poverty is unable to contribute toward the cost of the making of a public improvement by special assessment, may execute a lien to the city on all or any part of the real property owned by him or her and benefited by any public improvement, which lien will mature and be effective from and after the execution of such instrument, shall be recorded with the register of deeds of the county, and shall not be discharged or released until the terms thereof are met in full. The council shall establish the procedure for making this section effective. 
(Code 1977, § 1.248) 
Chapter 29 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public land in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(3); consumption of alcoholic liquor in public, § 3-2; dogs running at large, § 5-27; cable television, Ch. 9; library, Ch. 15; mobile homes and recreational vehicles, Ch. 17; littering and distribution of handbills, § 18-46 et seq.; parks and recreation, Ch. 21; planning, Ch. 23; signs, Ch. 26; subdivision regulations, Ch. 30; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 33; utilities and services, Ch. 34; waterways, Ch. 37; zoning, Ch. 38. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 29-1-29-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 473, § 1, adopted May 22, 1990, repealed former Art. II, Divs. 1-9, §§ 29-21-29-30, 29-46-29-53, 29-66-29-70, 29-86, 29-87, 29-101, 29-102, 29-116-29-119, 29-136-29-138, 29-151-29-153, and §§ 29-166-29-169, which pertained to streets; such provisions derived from §§ 4.1-4.13, 4.16, 4.18, 4.19, 4.24, 4.25, 4.28, 4.29, 4.35, 4.41-4.43, 4.46-4.48, and 4.51-4.54 of the city's 1977 Code, as amended by Ord. No. 371, § 1, adopted Mar. 16, 1981. Ord. No. 474, § 1, adopted May 22, 1990, enacted a new Art. II, Divs. 1-8, to read as herein set out. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 29-21. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
    Construction means and includes any erection, formulation or removal of physical facilities, structures or equipment, whether temporary or permanent, within any street within the city. 
    Excavation means and includes any and all digging, hollowing out, tunneling, uncovering and removal of any material within any street located within the city. 
    Operation means and includes any and all processes, work and other modes of action connected with any construction, excavation or use occurring within any street located within the city. 
    Street means all of the land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, alleys and boulevards in the city, and includes lawn extensions and sidewalks and the area reserved therefor where the same are not yet constructed. 
    Use means and includes any and all excavation, construction, operations, parades, functions, activities or uses of whatever kind or nature which occur or are performed above, on or under any street located within the city, which are not otherwise hereinafter excluded from the provisions of this article. 
    Utility means and includes any entity producing and/or delivering electric, gas and telephone goods to residences and businesses within the city. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 29-22. - Prohibited uses and activities. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to perform or otherwise undertake any excavation, construction, operation or use in, under, over or upon any street except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this article; provided, however, that this provision shall not be deemed to prohibit such temporary uses as are incidental to the expeditious delivery or removal of tangible items of personal property to or from premises abutting any such street, nor to the operation or parking of vehicles within the street, nor to the use of such streets by pedestrians or other types of traffic so long as such activities are otherwise lawful. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-23. - Permit required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall perform or otherwise undertake any excavation, construction, operation or use in, under, over or upon any street without having first obtained a permit therefor from the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-24. - Permit not required. 
    No permit will be required for work by utilities, both public and private, cable television organizations or city departments when such work is limited to the routine inspection, maintenance and repair of their existing facilities and equipment or when such work is necessary to provide, repair or restore service to a customer's premises and when such work does not involve excavation within the street right-of-way or the installation, removal or replacement of their facilities and equipment. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-25. - Emergency conditions. 
    If the public health or safety requires the immediate performing or undertaking of any excavation, construction, operation or use in, under, over or upon any street, the provisions of this article shall be deemed to have been met if an application for permit or, in the case of an annual permit, a request to commence work is delivered to the city engineer on the business day next following the day on which the emergency work has commenced. The person, firm or corporation performing emergency work shall endeavor to notify the city engineer prior to the commencement of any emergency work. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-26. - Responsibility for repair and restoration. 
    The person, firm or corporation to whom a permit is issued shall be responsible for the repair and restoration of the street right-of-way, inclusive of all improvements existing therein, to its original or better condition in accordance with such specifications as are from time to time promulgated by the city engineer. Such repair and restoration shall be undertaken and diligently pursued forthwith upon completion of any project for which a permit has been granted or a request to commence work approved under the provisions of this article; provided, further, that all materials utilized in the performance of such restoration shall be new materials of the original or better type and quality. In the event the person, firm or corporation to whom a permit is issued fails to repair and restore the street right-of-way to its original condition, the city may do so and charge such person the reasonable expense for such work. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-27. - Maintenance of installations in street. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation which owns and/or occupies, controls or uses any legally established sidewalk vault, coal hole, manhole or any other excavation or any pole, post, sign, awning, wire, pipe, conduit or other structure, equipment or other facilities in, under, over or upon any street shall maintain same in good repair and condition at all times and shall indemnify and save harmless the city against all damages or claims for damages, actions at law or equity and any and all expenses incurred by the city in connection with its investigation and defense of same, arising by reason of such sidewalk vault, coal hole, manhole or any other excavation or any pole, post, sign, awning, wire, pipe, conduit or other structure, equipment or other facilities in, under, over or upon any street. 
(b)  Any sidewalk vault, coal hole, manhole or any other excavation or any pole, post, sign, awning, wire, pipe, conduit or other structure, equipment or other facilities in, under, over or upon any street shall be removed or relocated as the city engineer shall from time to time direct. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Secs. 29-28-29-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 29-46. - Application for permit; contents. 
(a)  Applications for permits to perform or otherwise undertake any excavation, construction, operation or use in, under, over or upon any street shall be made to the city engineer on forms provided by him for this purpose not less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the planned commencement thereof. The application shall state: 
(1)  The location of the intended excavation, construction, operation or use; 
(2)  A specific and complete description of all facilities and equipment to be installed, whether temporarily or permanently; 
(3)  The purpose therefor; 
(4)  The person, firm or corporation for whom the excavation, construction, operation or use is being performed or undertaken; 
(5)  The date when same shall be started; 
(6)  The time required for completion thereof; and 
(7)  Such further information as the city engineer may reasonably require inclusive of, but not limited to, detailed construction plans, engineering drawings and similar documents and information. 
(b)  The application required pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be deemed an agreement by the applicant to observe all pertinent state, county and local laws and regulations, to repair all damage done to the street right-of-way and to installations on, over or within such street, including trees, and to protect and save harmless the city from all damages or actions at law or equity that may arise or may result from the actions taken by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-47. - Insurance. 
    Each person, firm or corporation applying for a permit, or on whose behalf a permit is applied for, pursuant to the provisions of this article shall also file and maintain during the term of any permit issued under the provisions of this article, as a prerequisite to the issuance thereof, a public liability insurance policy, issued by an insurance carrier acceptable to the city and naming the city as one of the name insureds and protecting against any and all claims for damages of whatever kind or nature arising from the excavation, construction, operation or use covered by such permit, with coverage for personal injuries and property damage in such amounts as are acceptable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-48. - Performance bond. 
(a)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of a permit for which application has been made under this article, the person, firm or corporation to whom or which the permit is to be issued shall file a bond with such sureties and in such amount as are acceptable to the city and conditioned upon the following: 
(1)  Complete and acceptable performance of the work authorized and covered by the permit; 
(2)  Complete and acceptable performance of the conditions contained in the application for the permit; and 
(3)  Compliance with all requirements of state, county and local laws and regulations. 
(b)  In lieu of the foregoing bond requirement, the person, firm or corporation to whom or which the permit is to be issued may make a cash deposit conditioned upon the same terms and conditions as apply to a bond with sureties as above provided. The amount of such cash deposit shall be determined by the city engineer, but in no case shall the cash deposit be less than the amount of the bond with sureties which would otherwise be required. Six (6) months after completion of the work for which a permit is issued, whether such work is done by the person, firm or corporation to whom or which the permit is issued, the city or any other person or entity, any remaining unexpended portions of the cash deposit shall be refunded. 
(c)  In any case where the amount of the bond or the cash deposit does not cover all costs and expenses of the city in the completion of the work authorized and covered by the permit, the deficit shall be paid by the person, firm or corporation to whom or which the permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-49. - Application; approval or disapproval. 
    The city engineer shall have the authority to approve or disapprove the application as made in whole or in part, or to approve same subject to the relocation or placement of the planned excavation, construction, operation or use to a different location than described in the permit application and/or subject to the use of specified materials, equipment and methods of performance. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-50. - Permit; issuance. 
    Permits shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation complying with the provisions of this article, the provisions of any applicable state, county and local laws and regulations and having a legitimate need to perform such excavation, construction, operation or use within any street in the city, provided such excavation, construction, operation or use does not interfere with the public health, safety and welfare. Such permit shall be subject to such terms and upon such conditions as are imposed by the city engineer to protect such public health, safety and welfare. The permit shall describe the purpose for which the same has been granted, the name of the person, firm or corporation to whom or which the same has been issued, the location of the contemplated activity; the time within which the contemplated activity shall be commenced and completed and such further information as the city engineer may reasonably require. The activity for which the permit has been granted shall be started within one (1) week following the date specified in the permit as the commencement date and shall be completed within the time specified therein and, in default thereof, shall be considered null and void. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-51. - Annual permit-Generally. 
    In lieu of applying for a permit pursuant to the provisions of sections 29-46, 29-47, 29-48, 29-49 and 29-50, utilities, both public and private, cable television organizations and city departments may complete an application and receive an annual blanket permit for any excavation, construction, operation or use to be performed or otherwise undertaken during the calendar year for which such permit is issued. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-52. - Same-Request to commence work. 
    Not less than seventy-two (72) hours prior to the commencement of work, the holder of an annual blanket permit issued pursuant to section 29-51 shall deliver to the city engineer a request to commence work. Such request to commence work shall be on a form provided by the city and shall contain such information as is required by the city. A separate request to commence work form shall be provided for each location where work is performed or for work performed at the same location when work activities occur beyond the date for completion of work approved in a request to commence work form which had been approved previously. The city engineer shall have the authority, in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare, to approve or disapprove the request to commence work in whole or in part, or to approve same subject to the relocation or placement of the planned excavation, construction, operation or use to a different location than described in the request to commence work, and/or subject to the use of specified materials, equipment and methods of performance. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-53. - Permit to be available. 
    The permit issued pursuant to this article or a photocopy thereof or, in the case of an annual blanket permit, the approved request to commence work or a photocopy thereof shall be readily available at all times at the location where the excavation, construction, operation or use for which the permit or approved request to commence work was issued is being performed or otherwise undertaken and shall be shown, upon request, to any city officer or employee. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-54. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The city engineer may suspend any permit and may cause such permit to be revoked when the materials, equipment and/or methods of performance do not conform to the plans and specifications authorized upon approval of the permit or request to commence work or when the terms of any permit or of this article are violated or for failure to comply with the requirements of Act No. 53 of Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 (MCL 460.701 et seq., MSA 22.190(1) et seq.), as amended. 
(b)  No person, firm, or corporation shall perform or otherwise undertake any excavation, construction, operation or use for which a permit has been issued or a request to commence work approved while the permit is suspended. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-55. - Fees. 
    Fees for permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be established by the city council by resolution and shall be considered as payment for all work authorized pursuant to said permit. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Secs. 29-56-29-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SAFETY REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 29-66. - Generally. 
    Any and all excavation, construction, operation or use within any street located within the city shall be performed in accordance with good and accepted safety practices as well as all applicable present and future state, county and local laws and regulations and specifications as are from time to time hereafter promulgated by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-67. - Safeguards. 
    All openings, excavations and obstructions shall be properly and substantially barricaded and railed off and, at night, shall be provided with prescribed warning lights as set forth in the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Warning lights perpendicular to the flow of traffic shall not be more than three (3) feet apart, and parallel to the flow of traffic not over fifteen (15) feet apart. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-68. - Shoring excavations. 
    All openings and excavations shall, where necessary, be properly and substantially sheeted and braced as a safeguard to workers and to prevent cave-ins or washouts which would tend to injure the thoroughfare or subsurface structure of the street. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Secs. 29-69-29-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PAVING, RESURFACING 

Sec. 29-86. - Notice to utility companies. 
    Whenever the city council shall determine to pave or resurface any street, the city engineer shall, not less than ninety (90) days prior to commencement of construction, serve notice upon all utilities, public and private, cable television organizations, and property owners abutting the street, requiring them to install and repair all necessary underground work in advance of the paving or resurfacing. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-87. - Sewer and water connections. 
    When street paving or resurfacing shall have been ordered or declared necessary by the city council, such sewer and water connections as are necessary shall be installed in advance of such paving or resurfacing, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the premises adjacent thereto, or to be served thereby, and against the owner of such premises. Where such paving or resurfacing is financed in whole or in part by special assessment, the cost of such sewer and water connections may be made chargeable against the premises served or adjacent thereto as a part of the special assessment for such paving or resurfacing. When such paving or resurfacing is financed otherwise than by special assessment, the cost of the sewer and water connections so installed shall be a lien on said premises adjacent thereto, or to be served thereby, and shall be collected as provided for assessments on single lots pursuant to the provisions of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-88. - Determination of necessity. 
    The necessity for such sewer and water connections shall be determined by the city engineer, which determination shall be based upon the size, shape and area of each abutting lot or parcel of land, the lawful use of such land under the zoning regulations of the city, the character of the locality and the probable future development of each abutting lot or parcel of land. The city engineer shall give written notice of the intention to install such sewer and water connections and to charge the cost of the same to the premises, to each owner of land abutting the street to be furnished with such connections, as shown by the records of the city assessor in accordance with section 1-9. Any owner objecting to the installation of any such sewer or water connection shall file his or her objections in writing, within seven (7) days after service of such notice, with the city engineer who shall, after considering each such objection made in writing, make a final determination of the sewer and water connections to be installed. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-89. - Prohibited openings. 
    No permit to make any opening or excavation in or under a paved street shall be granted to any person within a period of two (2) years after the completion of any paving or resurfacing thereof. If a street opening is necessary as a public safety measure, the city engineer may suspend the operation of this section as to such street opening. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Secs. 29-90-29-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS, ETC. 

Sec. 29-101. - Permit required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall move, transport, haul or convey any building, mobile home, trailer, truck, machinery, equipment or other load having a width of more than eight (8) feet eight (8) inches, or a height of more than thirteen (13) feet six (6) inches above the surface of the street, across or upon any street located within the city without having first applied for and obtained a permit as required in Division 2, sections 29-46 through 29-55 and having complied with all the provisions of this article, any and all applicable present and future state, county and local laws, regulations and such specifications as are herewith from time to time promulgated by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-102. - Utility clearances; moving obstructions. 
    The applicant for a permit required by the provisions of this division shall file written clearances from utilities, both public and private, and cable television organizations, stating that all connections have been properly cut off and, where necessary, all obstructions along the proposed route of moving will be removed without delaying moving operations. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-103. - Clearance by police department. 
    In addition to the other requirements of this division, clearance shall be obtained from the police department approving the proposed route through the city streets and the time of moving, together with an estimated cost of the police department due to the moving operations. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-104. - Deposits, bond, insurance. 
    The applicant for a permit required by the provisions of this division shall deposit with the city the total established cost to the police department and department of public services and shall file such bonds and insurance policies as are required by this article, prior to the commencement of any activities associated with moving the building, mobile home, trailer, truck, machinery, equipment or other load. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Secs. 29-105-29-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - LITTER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Littering and distribution of handbills, § 18-46 et seq.; garbage and rubbish generally, § 34-16 et seq. 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 752.901 et seq.; MSA 28.603(1) et seq. 

Sec. 29-116. - Sweeping. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall sweep or cause to be swept any dirt or litter of any kind or type whatsoever out of or off of any building or private property and into any public sidewalk, parkway, alley or roadway of the city. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-117. - Deposits prohibited. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall place or cause to be placed in or on any public sidewalk or on any pavement, gutter, drain, ditch, alley or roadway in the city any grass clippings, leaves, lawn rakings, tree or bush trimmings, tree trunks, stumps, ashes, soil, dirt or household debris, unless specifically approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-118. - Load security. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall drop, leave or scatter on any sidewalk, park, alley or roadway within the city any coal, sand, dirt, gravel, brick, scrap materials or any other material or substance that is being hauled or carried about in a truck, trailer, wagon or cart or any other vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Secs. 29-119-29-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - BENCH MARKS 

Sec. 29-136. - Zero plane established. 
    A standard zero or plane of reference of grades of streets, sidewalks, sewers, water pipes and all other levels in the city is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-137. - Improvements to conform. 
    All sidewalk grades, street grades and other levels established by anyone in the service of the city shall be referred to the zero plane, and all benches established by anyone in the employ of the city engaged in such work shall be recorded in the office of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-138. - Interference with bench marks. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall move, injure or destroy any bench mark without permission of the city engineer. The city engineer may require as a condition to such permission that such bench mark be replaced. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Secs. 29-139-29-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 29-151. - Obstructions. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall place on or use any street located within the city, or any portion thereof, for any purpose incidental to the construction, demolition or repair of any building adjacent to the street or for any other purpose, without first obtaining a permit and complying with all other provisions of this article, inclusive of any and all applicable present and future state, county and local laws, regulations and such specifications as are from time to time hereafter promulgated by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-152. - Removal of encroachments. 
    Encroachments and obstructions in the street may be removed and excavations refilled and the expense of such removal or refilling charged to the abutting land owner when made or permitted by him or her or suffered to remain by him or her, otherwise than in accordance with the terms and conditions of this article. The procedure for collection of such expenses shall be as prescribed in the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-153. - Temporary street closing. 
    The city engineer shall have authority to temporarily close any street or portion thereof when the city engineer shall deem such street to be unsafe or temporarily unsuitable for use for any reason. The city engineer shall cause suitable barriers and signs to be erected on the street, indicating that the same is closed to public travel. When any street or portion thereof shall have been closed to public travel, no person shall drive any vehicle upon or over the street, except as the same may be necessary incidentally to any street repair or construction work being done in the area closed to public travel. No person shall move or interfere with any sign or barrier erected pursuant to this section without authority from the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-154. - Vacating streets. 
    When the city council shall deem it advisable to vacate, discontinue or abolish any street, alley or public ground or any part thereof, it shall by resolution so declare and in the same resolution shall appoint a time, not less than two (2) weeks thereafter, when it shall meet and hear objections thereto. Notice of such meeting, with a copy of the resolution, shall be published in a newspaper published in the city at least seven (7) days prior to the date of the hearing. Any resolution or ordinance discontinuing or vacating any street, alley or public ground shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds, and the records shall be prima facie evidence of all the matters therein set forth. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-155. - Additional regulations. 
    The city engineer may make such additional regulations as are necessary to effectuate the terms and provisions of this article, which regulations shall be subject to the approval of the city council. No person, firm or corporation shall fail to comply with any such regulations. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-156. - Delegation of powers. 
    The city engineer is authorized to delegate any of the powers conferred on him by this article to any other city employee so designated by him, subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Sec. 29-157. - Savings clause. 
    All applications and permits, and the terms and conditions contained therein, on file with the city or in effect at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article derives are hereby validated and shall remain effectual so far as the same shall conform to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 474, § 1, 5-22-90) 
Secs. 29-158-29-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS, DRIVEWAY APPROACHES AND BOULEVARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 29-186. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this article, the word "sidewalk" shall mean the portion of the street right-of-way designed for pedestrian travel. 
(Code 1977, § 4.61) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 29-187. - Specifications adopted. 
    The city engineer shall adopt detailed specifications for the construction, reconstruction and repair of sidewalks which shall be effective upon approval by the city manager. The city engineer shall maintain copies of such specifications in his or her office available for public inspection. 
(Code 1977, §§ 4.62, 4.64) 
Sec. 29-188. - Line and grade stakes. 
    The city engineer shall furnish line and grade stakes as may be necessary for proper control of the work, but this shall not relieve the owner of responsibility for making careful and accurate measurements in constructing the work to the lines furnished by the city engineer. Where it is necessary to replace engineer's stakes disturbed or destroyed without fault on the part of the city, or its employees, a charge per stake shall be paid as prescribed by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1977, § 4.63) 
Sec. 29-189. - Ordering construction. 
    The council may, by resolution, require the owners of lots and premises to build sidewalks in the public street adjacent to and abutting upon such lots and premises. When such resolution shall be adopted, the city clerk shall give notice thereof, in accordance with section 1-9, to the owner of such lot or premises requiring him or her to construct or rebuild such sidewalk within thirty (30) days from the date of such notice. 
(Code 1977, § 4.66) 
Sec. 29-190. - Construction by city. 
    If the owner of any lot or premises shall fail to build any particular sidewalk as described in the notice, and within the time and in the manner required thereby, the public services director is hereby authorized and required, immediately after the expiration of the time limit for the construction or rebuilding by the owner, to cause such sidewalk to be constructed and the expense thereof shall be charged to such premises and the owner thereof, and collected as provided in chapter 28. 
(Code 1977, § 4.67) 
Sec. 29-191. - Maintenance of sidewalks, driveway approaches and boulevards. 
(a)  All sidewalks and driveway approaches between the lot line and the street curb, except crosswalks at intersections, and boulevards between the sidewalk and curb, shall be repaired and maintained by the abutting property owner and shall comply with all requirements set forth in this article. 
(b)  If any owner shall neglect to keep and maintain the sidewalks, driveway approaches and boulevards along the front, rear or side of the land owned by him or her in good repair and safe for the use of the public, the owner shall be liable to the city for any damages recovered against the city sustained by any person by reason of such sidewalks, driveway approaches or boulevards being unsafe and out of repair. 
(Code 1977, § 4.68) 
Sec. 29-192. - Sidewalk repair. 
    Whenever the city manager shall determine that a sidewalk, driveway approach or boulevard is unsafe for use, notice may be given to the owner of the lot or premises adjacent to and abutting upon the sidewalk, driveway approach or boulevard of such determination which notice shall be given in accordance with section 1-9. Thereafter, it shall be the duty of the owner to place the sidewalk, driveway approach or boulevard in a safe condition. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time, not less than seven (7) days, within which such work shall be commenced, and shall further provide that the work shall be completed with due diligence. If the owner of such lot or premises shall refuse or neglect to repair the sidewalk, driveway approach or boulevard within the time limit therefor, or in a manner otherwise than in accordance with this article, the city manager shall have the sidewalk, driveway approach or boulevard repaired. If the city manager determines that the condition of the sidewalk, driveway approach or boulevard is such that immediate repair is necessary to protect the public, he or she may dispense with the notice. The cost of repairs hereunder shall be charged against the premises which the sidewalk, driveway approach or boulevard adjoins and the owner of the premises, and shall be collected as a hazard assessment pursuant to section 10.7 of the Charter. 
(Code 1977, § 4.69) 
Secs. 29-193-29-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 29-206. - Required. 
    No person shall construct, rebuild or repair any sidewalk without first obtaining a written permit from the public services director, except that sidewalk repairs of less than fifty (50) square feet may be made without a permit. 
(Code 1977, § 4.62) 
Sec. 29-207. - Display. 
    Every permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be prominently displayed on the construction site. 
(Code 1977, § 4.62) 
Sec. 29-208. - Revocation. 
    The city manager may revoke any permit issued under the terms of this division for incompetency or failure to comply with the terms of this article, or the rules, regulations, plans and specifications established by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 4.65) 
Secs. 29-209-29-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CLEARING 

Sec. 29-226. - Required. 
    The occupant of every lot or premises adjoining any street, or the owner of such lot or premises, if same are not occupied, shall clear and keep cleared all sidewalks adjoining such lot or premises from snow, ice, filth and other obstructions. 
(Code 1977, § 4.75) 
Sec. 29-227. - Failure to clear. 
    If any occupant or owner shall neglect or fail to clear ice, snow, filth or other obstructions from the sidewalk adjoining his or her premises, for a period of twenty-four (24) consecutive hours or more, he or she shall be guilty of a violation of this article, and in addition the city manager may cause such sidewalk to be cleared and the expense of clearing shall become a debt to the city from the occupant or owner of such premises and shall be collected as a single lot assessment in accordance with section 10.7 of the Charter. 
(Code 1977, § 4.76) 
Secs. 29-228-29-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - METROPOLITAN EXTENSION TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS-OF-WAY OVERSIGHT ACT 

Sec. 29-251. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this article are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 29-252. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the Act or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 29-253. - Terms defined. 
(a)  The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
    Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. 
    City means the City of Owosso, Michigan. 
    City council means the city council of the City of Owosso or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city council. 
    City manager means the city manager or his or her designee. 
    Permit means non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
(b)  All other terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following: 
    Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to section 3 of the Act. 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in the Act. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunications facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunications services or signals. Telecommunications facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the communications act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean those terms as defined in section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2102. Telecommunications providers does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of the communications act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this article only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
(1)  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunications facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(3)  A person providing broadband Internet transport access service. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 29-254. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city of its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with section 6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one (1) copy of the application with the city clerk, one (1) copy with the city manager, and one (1) copy with the city engineer. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with section 6(5) of the Act. 
(c)  Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)  Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(e)  Additional information. The city manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the city manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement or additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in section 6(2) of the Act. 
(f)  Previously issued permits. Pursuant to section 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this article. 
(g)  Existing providers. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the Act, within one hundred eighty (180) days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located within a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. Pursuant to section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (d) above. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional one hundred eighty (180) days to submit the permit application if allowed by the Authority, as provided in section 5(4) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 29-255. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the city manager. Pursuant to 15(3) of the Act, the city manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within forty-five (45) days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under section 29-254(b) of this article for access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to section 6(6) of the Act, the city manager shall notify the MPSC when the city manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The city manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)  Forms of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the city manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with section 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act. 
(c)  Conditions. Pursuant to section 15(4) of the Act, the city manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Bond required. Pursuant to section 15(3) of the Act, and without limitation on subsection (c) above, the city manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 29-256. - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under this chapter of this Code, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 29-257. - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this article does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 29-258. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within ninety (90) days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city. The route map shall be in paper or electronic format unless and until MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with section 6(8) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 29-259. - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 29-260. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set forth in subsection 29-254(d) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public right-of-way shall pay an annual fee to the Authority pursuant to section 8 of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 29-261. - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirements of section 13(1) of the Act, the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the Authority. In compliance with the requirements of section 13(4) of the Act, the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under section 8 of the Act. The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this article, in compliance with the requirement of section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charge telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 29-262. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to section 13(5) of the Act, if section 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 29-261 above shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 29-263. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant to section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the major street fund and/or the local street fund maintained by the city under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 29-264. - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to section 10(5) of the Act, the city manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 29-265. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to section 13(6) of the Act, the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband Internet transport access services. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 29-266. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this article shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 29-267. - Compliance. 
    The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof shall be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in section 29-254(c) of this article; 
(2)  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with section 29-254(f) of this article; 
(3)  Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the five hundred dollar ($500.00) application fee, in accordance with section 29-254(g) of this article; 
(4)  Approving or denying an application for a permit forty-five (45) days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with section 29-255(a) of this article; 
(5)  Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with section 29-255(a) of this article; 
(6)  Not reasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with section 29-255(a) of this article; 
(7)  Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in section 29-255(b) of this article; 
(8)  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public rights-of-way, in accordance with section 29-255(c) of this article; 
(9)  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use, in accordance with section 29-255(d) of this article; 
(10)  Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 29-255 of this article; 
(11)  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with section 29-261 of this article; 
(12)  Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 29-264 of this article; and 
(13)  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 29-265 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 29-268. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to section 15(2) of the Act, this article shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunications provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 29-269. - Authorized city officials. 
    The city manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations directing alleged violators to appear in court or municipal civil infraction violation notices directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations bureau for violations under this article as provided by the city Code. 
(Ord. No. 621, § 1, 11-18-02) 
Chapter 30 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(7); flood protection, Ch. 14; mobile homes and recreational vehicles, Ch. 17; planning, Ch. 23; signs, Ch. 26; soil erosion control, Ch. 27; utilities and services, Ch. 34; waterways, Ch. 37; zoning, Ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Subdivision control act, MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.; minimum standards, MCL 560.259, MSA 26.430(259). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Purpose, authority and jurisdiction. 
(a)  The rules and regulations in this chapter are intended to serve the following purposes: 
(1)  To assist orderly, efficient and integrated development within the city; 
(2)  To promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the city and environs; 
(3)  To ensure conformance of subdivision plans with the public improvement plans of the city and environs; 
(4)  To secure equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing uniform procedures and standards for observance by subdividers, the planning commission and the council. 
(b)  Any subdivider of land within the city shall submit to the planning commission plats of the subdivision and plans for indicated improvements according to these regulations. In considering the approval of a plat the commission shall observe and enforce the requirements and procedures set forth herein. In the case of a plat constituting a replat of land into two (2) or more lots, all of which will be served by an existing street or streets, the commission shall have the power to vary the requirements so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest served. 
(c)  No subdivider proposing to make or have made a subdivision within the city shall proceed with any construction work on the proposed subdivision, including grading, before obtaining a certificate of preliminary plat approval, and shall not convey title to any lot or lots before obtaining from the council a certificate of final plat approval and acceptance of the plat by the county plat board and the office of the auditor general of the state. 
(Code 1977, § 5.241) 
Sec. 30-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley or service drive shall mean a passage or way affording generally a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting properties. 
    Building line shall mean a line on a plat indicating the limit beyond which buildings or structures may not be erected. 
    Improvements shall mean streets, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water mains, curb and gutter and may include pavements, sidewalks, graded-out lawns, tree plantings, street signs, gas, electric and telephone service installations. 
    Local street shall mean a street intended to serve and to provide access to neighborhoods or subneighborhoods. 
    Major street, highway, parkway shall mean a street or road which serves or is intended to serve as a major traffic way and is designated in the major street plan. 
    Major street plan shall mean the master plan of highways, major streets or parkways adopted by the planning commission. 
    Plat shall mean the map or chart on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented and which he or she submits for approval and intends in final form to record. 
    Subdivide or subdivision means the partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development, where the act of division creates five (5) or more parcels of land each of which is ten (10) acres or less in area; or five (5) or more parcels of land each of which is ten (10) acres or less in area are created by successive divisions within a period of ten (10) years. 
    Subdivider, owner or proprietor shall mean any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity commencing and maintaining proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for himself or herself or for another. 
(Code 1977, § 5.242) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-3. - Variances. 
(a)  Hardship. Where the council finds that extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with this chapter, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided, that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the general community plan or this chapter. 
(b)  Conditions. In granting variances and modifications, the council and the city engineer may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
(Code 1977, § 5.268) 
Sec. 30-4. - Conflicting regulations. 
    In applying the provisions of this chapter they shall be interpreted to be the minimum requirements. It is not intended to repeal, annul, or in any way set aside any other provisions of this Code or regulation or any plat or deed restriction that imposes greater requirements. 
(Code 1977, § 5.269) 
Sec. 30-5. - Lot division. 
    The division of a lot in a recorded plat is prohibited, unless approved following application to the city council. The application shall be filed with the city clerk and shall state the reasons for the proposed division. The city council may request review and comment by the city planning commission. The division to be approved by the city council shall have the suitability of the land for building purposes approved by the city zoning administrator, who may require submission of a professionally prepared boundary survey report. No building permit shall be issued, nor any building construction commenced, prior to the city council's approval. No lot in a recorded plat shall be divided into more than four (4) parts, and the resulting lots shall be not less in area than permitted by the city zoning ordinance. The division of a lot resulting in a smaller area than prescribed herein may be permitted but only for the purpose of adding to the existing building site or sites. The application shall so state and shall be in affidavit form. 
(Ord. No. 456, § 1, 12-19-88) 
Secs. 30-6-30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE FOR THE PREPARATION AND FILING OF PLATS 

Sec. 30-21. - Preapplication. 
    Previous to the submission of plans, it is suggested that the subdivider acquaint himself or herself with the city plans and drawings on file in the office of the city engineer and the planning commission. It is believed that considerable time and expense can be saved the subdivider in the procedure and lay out of a subdivision. 
(Code 1977, § 5.243) 
Sec. 30-22. - Preliminary plat; conditional approval. 
(a)  On reaching conclusions informally, as recommended in section 30-21, regarding his or her general program and objectives the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat, together with improvement plans and other supplementary material as specified in sections 30-35 and 30-36. 
(b)  Four (4) copies of the preliminary plat at a scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to the inch and supplementary material shall be submitted to the city engineer with written application for conditional approval at least two (2) weeks prior to the meeting of the planning commission at which it is to be considered. 
(c)  Preliminary plats shall be subject to the tentative approval of the council and the commission who shall take into consideration the city's requirements and the most appropriate use of the land. Particular attention will be given to the standards of design, the justification for the development of public improvements and the subdivision's conformity to the existing street plan. The width, location and arrangements of streets, the dimensions of lots, the location of utilities and other features will be studied. Tentative approval under this section shall confer upon the subdivider for a period of one (1) year from date, approval of lot sizes, lot orientation and street layout. Such tentative approval may be extended if applied for by the subdivider and granted by the council in writing. 
(d)  If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the reasons therefor together with a list of the changes necessary to render the plan acceptable shall be presented in writing to the subdivider. 
(e)  If the preliminary plat meets the approval of the commission and the council, then the subdivider may proceed to make an accurate survey of the property and prepare the final plat. Plats thus tentatively approved by the commission and the council shall bear the signature of the commission and the council and one (1) signed copy shall be filed in the office of the city engineer, one (1) signed copy in the file of the planning commission and the other (third) signed copy returned to the subdivider. 
(f)  Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final subdivision plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval to the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the installation of streets, sewers and other required improvements and the preparation of the final plat. Final approval of the preliminary plat approval under this section shall confer upon the subdivider for a period of two (2) years from date of approval, the conditional right that the general terms and conditions under which preliminary approval was granted will not be changed. The two-year period may be extended if applied for by the subdivider and granted by the council in writing. Written notice of the extension shall be sent by the council to the other approving authorities. 
(Code 1977, § 5.244) 
Sec. 30-23. - Final or record plat; procedure for approval. 
(a)  Before submission of the plat in its final and permanent form, the subdivider may submit one (1) advance paper copy to the city engineer for inspection, verification of detail and checking. 
(b)  The final plat shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval within two (2) years after final approval of the preliminary plat. Otherwise the approval of the preliminary plat becomes null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the council. 
(c)  Application for approval of the final plat shall be submitted in writing to the city engineer at least two (2) weeks prior to the meeting of the planning commission at which it is to be considered. 
(d)  The final plat shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer or a registered land surveyor, licensed to practice in the state and shall be presented in accordance with the provisions of the subdivision control act (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.). 
(e)  Five (5) permanent typed copies of the final plat and other exhibits required for approval shall be submitted. 
(f)  After the foregoing recommendations and certificates have been received, and provided that the final plat is found to conform with the preliminary plat as approved and the requirements of the subdivision control act (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.), the planning commission will, within forty (40) days of its first meeting after receiving the final plat, enter such approval or disapproval thereon in writing by the secretary. The approval of the final plat by the planning commission shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the public of the dedication of any street or other proposed public way or open space on the plat. 
(g)  After approval by the planning commission, the commission will deliver the five (5) copies of the final plat along with certification of title consisting of either an attorney's opinion or title insurance, to the council for approval and necessary action on any proposed dedications. If the council shall approve the final plat, it shall cause to be transcribed upon the plat its certificate of approval. Action by the council to approve or disapprove the final plat shall be taken within thirty (30) days after the action of the planning commission. 
(h)  The council shall have final authority to approve or disapprove any plats submitted. 
(i)  Approval of the final plat by the council does not in and of itself constitute acceptance for maintenance by the city of streets or other improvements which have been made. 
(j)  Approval of the final plat shall become null and void unless the plat is filed for record within ninety (90) days. 
(Code 1977, § 5.245) 
Sec. 30-24. - Design standards generally. 
(a)  The following shall be the subdivision standards except in those cases where the council, upon recommendation of the city engineer or the planning commission or on its own initiative determines that the size or shape of the land, topographical conditions or proposed land use or other special conditions make compliance therewith impractical. 
(b)  All improvements shall conform to the standard design and specification as prepared by the engineering department and approved by the council, or in the event no official or standard plan, specification or regulation has been adopted by the city regarding the installation of a particular improvement, then the improvement shall conform to the plan, specification and regulation than set forth by the engineering department and approved by the council. 
(Code 1977, § 5.246) 
Sec. 30-25. - Streets. 
(a)  The arrangements, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the major street plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
(b)  Where such is not shown in the major street plan the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
(1)  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or 
(2)  Conform to the plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the planning commission. 
(c)  Local streets shall be planned and laid out to make through traffic difficult, yet provide every lot with adequate and immediate access to the street. 
(d)  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along with the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(e)  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, or limited access highway right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land as for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades, and future grade separations. 
(f)  The street and alley arrangement must provide opportunity for access and use by adjoining property owners. Reserve strips of land controlling ingress and egress to adjoining property will not be permitted. 
(g)  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall be avoided. 
(h)  A tangent at least one hundred (100) feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves of arterial and collector streets. 
(i)  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at less than sixty (60) degrees. 
(j)  Rounded property corners at street intersections shall be avoided whenever possible. The planning commission may require or permit comparable cut-offs, chords or rounded corners when deemed necessary due to street intersection angles. 
(k)  Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown in the general community plan and where not shown therein shall be not less than as follows: 
Right of way Feet Street Type Minimum Maximum Arterial 80 100 Collector 66 100 Local, for other residences 66 Marginal access 66  
(l)  Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with the other requirements of these regulations; and where the planning commission finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided. Wherever a half street is adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract. 
(m)  Cul-de-sacs (courts) designed to be so permanently shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least seventy (70) feet and a street property line diameter of at least one hundred (100) feet. 
(n)  Dead-end streets shall be accepted only when the street will be extended in the future and adequate turnaround facilities have been provided. 
(o)  No private street shall be allowed or approved and no public improvements shall be installed on them. 
(p)  Street grades, whenever feasible, shall not exceed the following with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves: 
Street type Percent Grade Arterial X% 5 Collector 5 Local 8 Marginal Access 8  
(q)  No street grade shall be less than four-tenths of one (0.4) percent with five-tenths of one (0.5) percent the preferred minimum. 
(r)  All subdivisions adjacent or containing a state highway trunk line shall be submitted to the state highway commissioner for approval. 
(Code 1977, § 5.247) 
Sec. 30-26. - Alleys. 
(a)  Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that the planning commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street parking, loading and unloading consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. Alleys shall not be permitted in residential districts unless approved by the planning commission. 
(b)  The minimum width of an alley shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(c)  Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignments shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular movement. 
(d)  Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the dead end, as determined by the planning commission. 
(Code 1977, § 5.248) 
Sec. 30-27. - Easements. 
(a)  Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be of such width as may be reasonably necessary for the utility or utilities to be benefitted. 
(b)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such additional width as will be adequate for the purpose. 
(Code 1977, § 5.249) 
Sec. 30-28. - Blocks. 
(a)  The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; 
(3)  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(b)  The long dimensions of a block shall not exceed one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet or be less than three hundred thirty (330) feet from center line of right-of-way. 
(c)  Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than ten (10) feet wide, shall be required where deemed essential to provide circulation, or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
(d)  The number of intersecting streets along highways and major streets shall be held to a minimum. Wherever practicable blocks along such traffic way shall not be less than one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet in length. 
(Code 1977, § 5.250) 
Sec. 30-29. - Lots. 
(a)  The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, and minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. 
(b)  The lot area shall be as follows: 
(1)  Residential lots where served by public sewer shall not be less than sixty-six (66) feet wide at the front building line nor less than eight thousand seven hundred twelve (8,712) square feet in area. 
(2)  Residential lots where not served by public sewer shall not be less than one hundred thirty-two (132) feet wide at the front building line nor less than seventeen thousand four hundred twenty-four (17,424) square feet in area. 
(3)  Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. 
(c)  Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to permit appropriate building setback and the orientation to both streets. 
(d)  The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide, by means of a public street, each lot with satisfactory access to an existing public street. 
(e)  Double frontage, and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten (10) feet and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
(f)  Said lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. 
(g)  Lot remnants. All remnants of lots below minimum size left over after subdividing of a larger tract shall be added to adjacent lots rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. 
(Code 1977, § 5.251) 
Sec. 30-30. - Public sites and open spaces. 
(a)  The subdivider shall give due consideration to the dedication or reservation of open spaces which are suitably located and of reasonable size for parks and playgrounds. Also, any recreational area or sites for public development, or parks, as designated on the city plans shall be dedicated to the city. 
(b)  If the applicant is not willing to dedicate such area without cost, the public agency involved may, within sixty (60) days tender the reasonable raw land market value of said area to the applicant or contract to pay such sum with reasonable interest within a two-year period. Upon such payment the public body shall be entitled to a warranty deed to said area. Where a proposed plat has been submitted and portions thereof are proposed to be developed from time to time the requirement of payment for acquisition of area to be developed for public use shall apply as the plat of each area is accepted for final approval. 
(Code 1977, § 5.252) 
Sec. 30-31. - Drainage. 
(a)  A design of drainage improvements where necessary, together with support calculations shall be furnished as part of the final plans. 
(b)  Where an adequate natural drainage channel or adequate storm drain exists within or immediately abutting the subdivision, drainage may be carried on subdivision streets, within the design standards set by the city engineer to such channel or drain. 
(c)  Where an adequate drainage channel or adequate storm drain exists below (downstream from) the subdivision, drainage from the subdivision may be carried over existing curbed streets to such drainage channel or storm drain, to the extent that such streets and such drainage channels or storm drain will not be overloaded, within the design standards set by the city engineer, by flows from anticipated full development of the drainage basin. 
(d)  Drainage from the subdivision or the area, considered as fully developed, above the subdivision and draining through same, which cannot be handled by the above methods, must be provided for the construction of adequate underground or permanently lined drainage facilities. 
(e)  Natural drainage channels existing within the subdivision may be required to be improved by the subdivider, if erosion or flooding problems may be created by the continued existence thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 5.253) 
Sec. 30-32. - Slopes. 
(a)  No existing slope or proposed cut slope shall be steeper than one and one-half (11/2) horizontal to one (1) vertical except as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  No fill slope, existing or proposed, shall be steeper than two (2) horizontal to one (1) vertical except as hereinafter provided. 
(c)  Slopes exceeding the foregoing requirements may be approved by the city engineer if soils or other conditions require such approval. 
(Code 1977, § 5.254) 
Sec. 30-33. - Construction schedule. 
    No subdivision or off-tract improvements shall be constructed on any subdivision lot, adjacent public way, or on adjacent land until all required earthwork thereon, including general lot grading and slope excavating of filling, has been completed and approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1977, § 5.255) 
Sec. 30-34. - Zoning and other regulations. 
    No final plat of land within the force and effect of an existing zoning ordinance shall be approved unless it conforms to such ordinance. Wherever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions noted herein and those contained in zoning regulations, building code, or other official regulations or ordinances the most restrictive shall apply. 
(Code 1977, § 5.256) 
Sec. 30-35. - Specifications. 
(a)  Monuments shall be placed at all points as specified by the subdivision control act (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.) and shall be set flush with the finished grade at those points. No person shall move, interfere with, injure or destroy any such monument except with the written authorization of the city engineer. 
(b)  Utilities: 
(1)  Water. The subdivider shall install or have installed a system of six (6) inch water mains complete with regulation service and curb stop with box to a point seven (7) feet from the property line at approximately the center of each platted lot. 
(2)  Sanitary sewer. The subdivider shall install or have installed a system of eight (8) inch sanitary sewer mains complete with house service to within seven (7) feet of the property line of each platted lot, properly stopped with "cookie" and identified by "grape stick" brought to ground surface. Where a public sanitary sewer is not accessible within five hundred (500) feet of a normally designed sewage system for the plat, an alternate method of sewage disposal for each lot may be used when in compliance with the standards of the health department and this Code. 
(3)  Storm sewers. The subdivider shall install or have installed a system of twelve (12) inch storm sewer mains including catch basins, culverts and other facilities. 
a.  All drainage facilities shall be so designed as to serve the entire drainage area. 
b.  All surface water drainage shall be transported to existing storm sewers to drainage facilities approved by the city engineer. 
(c)  Streets. 
(1)  Curbs and gutters. Concrete curbs and gutters shall be installed on all streets. (Thirty (30) feet from face to face of curb.) 
(2)  Surface and grading. All streets and public ways shall be graded and surfaced. Surface shall consist of a bituminous aggregate base course, not less than five (5) inches in compacted thickness, and a bituminous aggregate wearing course not less than one and one-half (11/2) inches thick compacted. 
(d)  Special provisions. When larger water or sewer mains or wider streets are needed to serve areas outside a particular subdivision, the additional cost above standard requirements will be borne by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 5.261) 
Sec. 30-36. - Approval. 
    Plans and specifications must be approved by the city engineer and the construction must be carried out under the direction of the office of the city engineer in strict accordance with standard city specifications for the various kinds of improvements as established by this Code or resolution adopted by the council. A statement from a registered professional engineer stating that he or she has been retained to layout, supervise and inspect the construction of the various improvements shall be submitted with the plans and specifications to the city engineer. 
(Code 1977, § 5.262) 
Sec. 30-37. - Inspections. 
    The subdivider shall be responsible for the engineering inspection of the various stages of all improvements. If a registered professional engineer is not retained by the subdivider, the subdivider shall notify the city engineer in writing before proceeding with any construction and the city engineer will assign a city inspector to the work for such time as may be necessary to insure full compliance with regulations. The subdivider shall reimburse the city for the cost of such inspection. Any construction of required improvements without proper engineering inspection will constitute a violation of this Code. In all cases, the city engineer or the retained registered engineer shall be required to certify that all improvements have been constructed according to plans and specifications. 
(Code 1977, § 5.263) 
Sec. 30-38. - Final report. 
    When all required improvements have been installed, the subdivider shall furnish the city engineer with one (1) set of "as-built" plans indicating in red ink the following: 
(1)  All approved changes in construction; 
(2)  Location of sanitary sewer services; 
(3)  Witness measurements to water valves and services. 
(Code 1977, § 5.264) 
Secs. 30-39-30-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLATS AND DATA FOR FINAL APPROVAL 

Sec. 30-56. - Preliminary plat. 
    The preliminary plat shall contain the following: 
(1)  Proposed name of subdivision; 
(2)  Name and address of owner of record; 
(3)  Name and address of subdivider; 
(4)  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale; 
(5)  Name and address of registered civil engineer or surveyor making map and preliminary engineering or surveying certificate; 
(6)  Location of tract by legal description, giving acreage; 
(7)  Vicinity map locating streets and highways, section lines, railroad, schools, parks, drainage, easements and other significant features in adjacent area; 
(8)  Exact boundary line of the tract indicated by a heavy line giving dimensions, angles and at least one (1) bearing; 
(9)  Ground elevations, based on city datum showing spot elevations at all breaks in grades, along all drainage channels or swales, and at selected critical points; 
(10)  Contours with intervals of two (2) feet or less, referenced to city datum. This requirement may be waived by the city engineer; 
(11)  Other conditions on the tract: Watercourses, marshes, wooded areas, isolated preservable trees one foot or more in diameter, houses, barns, shacks, and other significant features; 
(12)  Names of abutting subdivisions; 
(13)  Names and addresses of owners of abutting unsubdivided properties; 
(14)  All parcels of land proposed to be dedicated to public use and conditions of such dedication; 
(15)  Names, location, and widths of proposed streets, alleys, parks, lots, walkways and easements, including those for utilities; the location of catch basins, culverts and other drainage structures, and layout, numbers and approximate dimensions of proposed lots; 
(16)  Minimum building setback lines; 
(17)  Other preliminary plans shall be furnished when required by the city engineer or planning commission. 
(Code 1977, § 5.265) 
Sec. 30-57. - Final or record plat. 
    The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat, and it may constitute only that portion of the preliminary plat which the subdivider proposed to record and develop at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to this chapter. It shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name of the subdivision; 
(2)  Names of the owner, the subdivider, the engineer or surveyor; 
(3)  North point, graphic scale and date of drawing; 
(4)  Boundaries of the tract with accurate distances, bearings and approximate acreage; 
(5)  Street lines of all existing or recorded streets, principal property lines and municipal, county or section lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distances and angles; 
(6)  Cross-sections and profiles of streets showing grades approved by the city engineer. The profiles shall be drawn to the city standard scales and elevations and shall be based on a datum plane of the city; 
(7)  The accurate location and description of all monuments; 
(8)  The length and bearing of the lines of all lots, streets, alleys, and easements as laid out, length of arc, points of curvatures, radii and tangent bearing in the case of curved lines; 
(9)  Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites; 
(10)  All lots shall be numbered and all streets named; 
(11)  The accurate outline of all property that is offered for dedication for public use, with the purpose indicated thereon, and of all the property that may be reserved by covenant for the common use of the property owners of the subdivision; 
(12)  Private restrictions, if any; 
(13)  A bill of assurance by the owner or owners of his or her or their adoption of the plat, and of the dedication of streets and other public areas; 
(14)  Certification of title showing that applicant is land owner. The certification shall be in the form of either an attorney's opinion or title insurance. 
(Code 1977, § 5.266) 
Sec. 30-58. - Data. 
(a)  The subdivider shall: 
(1)  Install all the required improvements prior to final approval by the council of the final plat, in accordance with the specifications and under the supervision of the city officials having jurisdiction; or 
(2)  Put up a performance bond which shall: 
a.  Run to the city; 
b.  Be in an amount determined by the city engineer to be sufficient to complete the improvements and installations for the subdivision in compliance with this chapter; 
c.  Be with surety by a company entered and licensed to do business in the state; 
d.  Specify the time for the completion of the improvement and installations; or 
(3)  Put up a cash deposit in the full amount as determined by the city engineer, necessary to complete the improvements and installations for the subdivision in compliance with this chapter. Such cash deposit may be withdrawn in direct proportion to the amount of work completed as approved by the council. 
(b)  The building inspector will not be permitted to issue a building permit for any structure upon any lot within a subdivision until the improvements as specified above have been completed, or satisfactory arrangements have been made with the city for the completion of the improvement. 
(c)  When a plat dedicates half of the width of a street on a boundary line separating two (2) or more parcels of property the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the city whereby the subdivider shall be responsible for the installation of improvements on his or her half of the streets at the time one (1) adjacent tract is developed. 
(d)  Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or deductions as may be required by the city engineer and by the council in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 5.267) 
Chapter 31 - SWIMMING POOLS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Public swimming pools at outdoor assemblies, § 20-29(9); waterways, Ch. 37; zoning, Ch. 38. 

Sec. 31-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Private shall mean that it is not open to the public, that it is not publicly owned, or not otherwise regulated by the state, either by statute or by rules or regulations of one of its administrative bodies. 
    Swimming pool shall mean any artificially constructed non-portable pool capable of being used for swimming or bathing, having a depth of two (2) feet or more at any point, or having a surface area exceeding two hundred fifty (250) square feet. 
(Code 1977, § 8.21) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 31-2. - Permit. 
    A permit shall be applied for and issued from the building inspection department before construction shall begin on any swimming pool. The application for the permit shall be accompanied by a complete and detailed set of plans and specifications of the swimming pool and fence. Before any permit shall be issued such plans and specifications shall be approved by the building inspection department and before any swimming pool shall be used, a final inspection and approval must be had from both the building inspection department and the county health department. 
(Code 1977, § 8.22) 
Sec. 31-3. - Right of entry. 
    The county health department and the city building inspection department shall have the right at any reasonable hour, subject to constitutional limitations, to inspect any swimming pool for the purpose of determining that all provisions of this chapter are fulfilled and complied with. 
(Code 1977, § 8.34) 
Sec. 31-4. - Electric wires. 
    No exposed electric wires shall be nearer than five (5) feet from the water's edge, nor shall any exposed and permanently installed electric wire within twenty-five (25) feet from the water's edge to be less than ten (10) feet above ground or pool apron, nor shall wires of any kind cross or be over the water surface unless otherwise approved by the electrical inspector. All other water lighting shall be accomplished by the use of methods and materials approved for such purpose. 
(Code 1977, § 8.23) 
Sec. 31-5. - Cross-connections. 
    There shall be no cross-connection of the city water supply or with any other source of water supply for the pool. The line from the city water supply to the pool shall be protected against back flow of polluted water by means of an air gap and shall discharge at least six (6) inches above the maximum high water level of the make-up tank of the pool. 
(Code 1977, § 8.24) 
Sec. 31-6. - Sewer connection. 
    There shall be no direct connection from swimming pool to any sewer. No swimming pool shall drain into the sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 1977, § 8.25) 
Sec. 31-7. - Wastewater. 
    The construction of the pool shall be made in such a manner that all scum, splash and deck water shall not return to the pool except through the filter system. 
(Code 1977, § 8.26) 
Sec. 31-8. - Cleanliness. 
    The pool shall be kept free at all times of floating material, sediment and debris either by an automatic surface skimmer, scum gutter or by some other means approved by the county health department. 
(Code 1977, § 8.27) 
Sec. 31-9. - Filtration. 
    The entire recirculation system shall be capable of filtering and recirculating the entire volume content of the pool during a twelve-hour period. The rate of application of pool water on the filters shall not be greater than five (5) gallons per minute per square foot of filter area. The county health department may approve other rates of recirculation or rates of application of water on the filters. 
(Code 1977, § 8.28) 
Sec. 31-10. - Disinfecting agents. 
(a)  A provision shall be made for positive germicidal or bacterial control by the use of chlorine or other such disinfecting agents as may be approved by the county health department. 
(b)  Such disinfecting agents shall be applied to the pool water at a uniform rate. 
(c)  Provisions shall be made for adjusting the application thereof so as to keep germicidal or bacterial protection of the water in the pool equal to a standard specified by the state department of public health. 
(d)  Testing devices capable of accurately measuring such residual shall be provided. 
(Code 1977, § 8.29) 
Sec. 31-11. - Fence. 
    All swimming pools shall be enclosed by a fence which is at least four (4) feet in height and of a type not readily climbed by children. The gates shall be of a self-closing and latching type with the latch on the inside of the gate, not readily available for children to open. If the entire premises of the residence or property is enclosed with a fence of the required type, then this provision may be waived by the building inspection department upon inspection and approval thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 8.30) 
Sec. 31-12. - Depth; diving area. 
    In the pool diving area minimum depths shall be as follows: 
Maximum distance above water boards Minimum depth five feet from tip of diving board 18 to 30 inches 8 feet 17 inches 7 feet 11 inches 16 inches 7 feet 10 inches 15 inches 7 feet  9 inches  
(1)  For each one (1) inch of decrease of diving board height below eighteen (18) inches the required minimum depth shall decrease one (1) inch. 
(2)  No diving board shall be more than thirty (30) inches above the water level. 
(3)  If diving board is used, the depth of the water shall be clearly shown by numerals at the diving area. 
(Code 1977, § 8.31) 
Sec. 31-13. - Noise control. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause any loud, offensive or unnecessary noise or sound which annoys or disturbs the comfort, peace or safety of others. In the operation of a swimming pool the use, permitting the use or operating of any radio, receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or any other machine or device for producing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace and comfort of others shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1977, § 8.32) 
Cross reference- Noise control generally, § 18-86 et seq. 
Sec. 31-14. - Lighting. 
    All lighting for swimming pools shall be so shielded, arranged and operated as to prevent annoyance to neighboring premises. 
(Code 1977, § 8.33) 
Chapter 32 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Taxation, Ch. 9. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance levying or imposing annual taxes saved from repeal, § 1-6(5); administration, Ch. 2; finance, § 2-316 et seq.; licensing generally, Ch. 16; special assessments, Ch. 28. 
State Law reference- General property tax act, MCL 211.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32-1. - Taxes and collection charges. 
(a)  City taxes, assessments and charges due and payable July 1 that are paid on or before August 31 shall be collected by the city treasurer without additional charge. There shall be added to such taxes, assessments and charges not paid collection charges of two (2) percent on the first day of September and one (1) percent on the first day of each succeeding month thereafter until the closing of the city tax roll on the first day of November, after a total four (4) percent collection charge has been added thereto. The collection charge herein provided shall be a lien against the property to which the taxes themselves apply, collectible in the same manner as the taxes to which they are added. City taxes, assessments and charges unpaid at the closing of the city tax roll shall be noted on the billing for the December tax roll upon which the county and school taxes are collected. 
(b)  Taxes, assessments and charges on the December tax roll paid on or before February 14 of the succeeding year shall be collected by the city treasurer without additional charge. There shall be added to such taxes, assessments and charges not paid and city taxes, assessments and charges remaining unpaid an additional three (3) percent collection charge until the end of February. 
(Ord. No. 636, § 1, 8-4-03) 
Secs. 32-2-32-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 470, § 1, adopted Feb. 19, 1990, repealed Art. II, §§ 32-16-32-21, which pertained to the board of review and derived from Ord. No. 441, §§ 1.401-1.404, adopted Feb. 17, 1986. 

Secs. 32-16-32-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SERVICE CHARGE IN LIEU OF TAXES FOR CERTAIN HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 739, adopted Feb. 4, 2013, repealed the former art. III, §§ 32-36-32-42, and section 3 of said ordinance enacted a new art. III as set out herein. The former art. III pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 358, §§ 2-8, adopted May 16, 1980. Section 2 of said ordinance states, "the amended ordinance shall be known and cited as the "City of Owosso Payment in Lieu of Taxes Ordinance." 
State Law reference- State Housing Development Authority Act, MCL 125.1401 et seq. 

Sec. 32-36. - Preamble. 
    It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its elderly citizens of low income or citizens of low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended, MCL 125.1401 et seq.). The city is authorized by this Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by any or all classes of housing exempt from taxation under this Act at any amount it chooses not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for this Act. 
    It is further acknowledged that such housing for elderly persons of low income and person of low income is a public necessity, and as the city will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemption for such housing is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this article for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the periods contemplated in this article are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance on such ordinance and service charge. 
    The city further acknowledges that Owosso Limited Dividend Housing Association (a sponsor) has offered subject to receipt of a mortgage loan from the authority, to erect, own and operate a housing development identified as Owosso Mixed, MSHDA #618 on certain property located at (see legal description on file with the city clerk) in the city to serve persons of low income, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city on account of the development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes. 
    The city further acknowledges that Lincoln House Limited Dividend Housing Association Limited Partnership (a sponsor) has offered subject to receipt of low income housing tax credits from the authority, to erect, own and operate a housing development identified as the Lincoln House on certain property located at 120 Michigan Avenue in the city to serve elderly persons and persons of low income, and that the sponsor has offered to pay the city on account of the development an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes. 
(Ord. No. 739, § 3, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 32-37. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act, being Public Act 346 of 1966, of the State of Michigan, as amended. 
    Annual shelter rents means the total collections during an agreed annual period from all occupants of a housing development representing rents or occupancy charges exclusive of charges for gas, electricity, heat or other utilities furnished to the occupants. 
    Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
    Contract rents are as defined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development in regulations promulgated pursuant to Section 8 of the U.S. Housing Act of 1937, as amended. 
    For purposes of Owosso Mixed, elderly persons means a family where the head of household is sixty-two (62) years of age or older or a single person who is sixty-two (62) years of age or older, or as otherwise defined by MSHDA. 
    For purposes of Lincoln House, elderly persons of low income means elderly persons who are aged fifty-five (55) and older or otherwise meet the eligibility criteria set by the authority and/or federal government. 
    Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for elderly persons of low income or persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal, and educational facilities as the authority determines improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
    HUD means the Department of Housing and Urban Development of the United States Government. 
    Mortgage loan means a loan to be made by the authority or Farmers Home Administration or the Department of Housing and Urban Development to a sponsor for the construction and permanent financing of a housing development or a mortgage loan insured by HUD or a federally aided mortgage as otherwise defined by the Act. 
    Persons of low income means persons and families eligible to move into a housing development. 
    Sponsor means persons or entities which have applied to either the authority for a mortgage loan to finance a housing development or to another governmental entity or is a federally-aided mortgage, as otherwise defined by the Act. 
    Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service which are paid by the housing development. 
(Ord. No. 739, § 3, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 32-38. - Class of housing developments. 
    It is determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be multiple dwellings for elderly persons of low income or persons of low income which are financed or assisted by the authority or which have a federally aided mortgage, as defined in the Act. It is determined that Owosso Mixed, MSHDA #618 and the Lincoln House are of this class. 
(Ord. No. 739, § 3, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 32-39. - Establishment of annual service charge for Owosso Mixed, MSHDA #618. 
    The housing development identified as Owosso Mixed, MSHDA #618 and the property on which it shall be constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after the commencement of construction. The city, acknowledging that the sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this article and the qualification of the housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established herein, and in consideration of the sponsor's offer, subject to receipt of a mortgage loan from the authority, to construct, own and operate the housing development, hereby agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. The annual service charges shall be equal to four (4) percent of the difference between contract rents actually collected and utilities. 
(Ord. No. 739, § 3, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 32-40. - Establishment of annual service charge for Lincoln House. 
    Housing developments for elderly persons of low income or persons of low income and the property on which they shall be constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after the commencement of construction. The city, acknowledging that the sponsor and the authority, in the case of a sponsor receiving a federally aided mortgage, have established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this article and the qualification of the housing developments for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes as established in this article, will accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes. The annual service charge shall be equal to four (4) percent of the difference between the annual shelter rent actually collected and utilities. 
(Ord. No. 739, § 3, 2-4-13; Ord. No. 748, § 1, 12-16-13) 
Sec. 32-41. - Payment of service charge. 
    The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this article shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before March 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 739, § 3, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 32-42. - Duration. 
    The tax exempt status of a housing development approved for such status by the city council shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the mortgage loan for such housing development remains outstanding and unpaid, as long as the property is subject to restrictive rents in compliance with the low income housing tax credit program administered by MSHDA, or for such period as the authority or other governmental entity has any interest in the property; provided, the construction of such housing development commences within two (2) years from the effective date the city council approves the housing development for tax exempt status as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 739, § 3, 2-4-13) 
Sec. 32-43. - Contractual effect. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 15a(5) of the Act (MCL 125.1415a(5)), to the contrary, a contract between the city and the sponsor with the authority as third part beneficiary thereunder, to provide tax exemption and accept payments in lieu thereof as previously described is effected by enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 742, § 1, 7-1-13) 
Chapter 33 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets saved from repeal, § 1-6(9); mobile homes and recreational vehicles, Ch. 17; litter thrown by persons in vehicles, § 18-51; truck loads causing litter, § 18-52; unlawful noise from horns and signal devices, § 18-88; unlawful noise from engine exhausts, § 18-94; offenses, Ch. 19; throwing objects from vehicles, § 19-130; throwing objects towards vehicles, § 19-131; access and traffic at outdoor assemblies, § 20-29(10); signs, Ch. 26. 
State Law reference- Michigan vehicle code, MCL 257.1 et seq.; regulation by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 33-1. - Code, amendment and revisions adopted. 
    The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1 to 257.923, and all past and future amendments and revisions to the Michigan Vehicle Code when they are effective in this state are incorporated and adopted by reference. Nothing herein shall affect the previous adoption of the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages and traffic control orders issued thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 594, § 1, 5-1-00; Ord. No. 649, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-2. - References in code. 
    References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall mean the city. 
(Ord. No. 594, § 1, 5-1-00) 
Sec. 33-3. - Notice to be published. 
    The city clerk shall publish sections 33-1-33-4 in the manner required by law and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the Michigan Vehicle Code and the fact that a complete copy of the code is available to the public at the office of the clerk for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 594, § 1, 5-1-00) 
Sec. 33-4. - Penalties. 
    The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by reference, provided, however, that the city may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than ninety-three (93) days. 
(Ord. No. 594, § 1, 5-1-00) 
Sec. 33-5. - Home Rule Cities Act, amendment and revisions adopted. 
(1)  Pursuant to Act 1909 PA 279 as amended by Act 2012 PA 7; Section 625(1)(c) of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.625, is hereby adopted by reference. Violation of this ordinance [from which this section is derived] is punishable by one (1) or more of the following: 
(i)  Community service for not more than three hundred sixty (360) hours; 
(ii)  Imprisonment for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days; 
(iii)  A fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or more than seven hundred dollars ($700.00). 
(Ord. No. 730, § 1, 4-2-12) 
Secs. 33-6-33-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 645, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 2003, repealed article II, sections 33-16-33-18, 33-18.010-33-18.530, in its entirety. Ord. No. 646, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 2003, added a new article II, sections 33-16-33-19 and Ord. No. 647, § 1, adopted Oct. 6, 2003, added new sections 33-20-33-20.160. Former article II pertained to similar material and derived from the Code of 1977, §§ 10.1, 10-2, 10.4, 10.22; Ord. No. 377, §§ 10-1, 10.4, adopted June 1, 1981; Ord. No. 401, § 1, adopted Jan. 4, 1983; Ord. No. 434, adopted June 3, 1985; Ord. No. 461, § 1, adopted Oct. 16, 1989; Ord. No. 484, § 1, adopted Sept. 3, 1991; Ord. No. 488, adopted Feb. 3, 1992; Ord. No. 489, § 1, adopted Feb. 18, 1992; Ord. No. 514, § 1, adopted Jan. 3, 1994; Ord. No. 519, § 1, adopted March 7, 1994; Ord. No. 548, § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 1995; Ord. No. 557, § 1, adopted July 15, 1996; Ord. No. 562, § 1, adopted April 7, 1997; Ord. No. 588, § 1, adopted Oct. 4, 1999; Ord. No. 589, § 1, adopted Oct. 4, 1999. 

Sec. 33-16. - Code and amendments and revisions adopted. 
    The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages as promulgated by the director of the Michigan Department of State Police pursuant to the administrative procedures act of 1969, 1969 PA 306, MCL 24.201 to 24.328 and made effective October 30, 2002, and all future amendments and revisions to the Uniform Traffic Code when they are promulgated and effective in this state are incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 646, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-17. - References in code. 
    References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages to a "governmental unit" shall mean the City of Owosso. 
(Ord. No. 646, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-18. - Penalties. 
    The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages are adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 646, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-19. - Notice to be published. 
    The city clerk shall publish this ordinance in the manner required by law and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages and the fact that a complete copy of the code is available to the public at the office of the clerk for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 646, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-20. - Amendments. 
    Sections 33-20.010 through 33-20.160 amend, delete or add sections and subsections to the Uniform Traffic Code for cities, townships, and villages, hereinafter referred to as the U.T.C. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-20.010. - Unlawful use of license; violation punishable as misdemeanor. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to display or cause or permit to be displayed or to have in his or her possession any operator's or chauffeur's license knowing the same to be fictitious or to have been cancelled, revoked, suspended, or altered. 
(2)  The violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-20.020. - Sudden acceleration. 
    No person operating any motor vehicle shall suddenly accelerate such vehicle at a speed so as to cause any tire on the vehicle to spin against the surface of the street or throw rocks, dust, or debris to the rear of said vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-20.030. - Windshields; obstructions; cleaning devices; wipers; additional equipment; violations as civil infractions. 
    No person shall drive any motor vehicle with the windows so damaged or with any sign, poster, or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield, sidewings, side or rear windows of such vehicle so as to obstruct the driver's clear view of the street, or any intersecting street, or with any dangling ornament or other suspended object, except as authorized by law, which in any way obstructs the vision of the driver of the vehicle. No person shall drive any motor vehicle without first removing, snow, ice, or frost from the front windshield, side or rear windows of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-20.040. - Current regulations and traffic control orders. 
    All intersection stops and yield right-of-way requirements, regulations on stopping, standing or parking; one-way streets, roadways or alleys; crosswalks; restricted turns; through streets; play streets; angle parking; parking meter zones; all night parking restrictions; curb loading zones; speed limits and other traffic control orders or devices heretofore established hereunder shall remain effective until rescinded or modified as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-20.050. - Manual and specifications for traffic-control devices. 
    All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the official Michigan manual of uniform traffic-control devices or shall be approved by the council. All signs and signals required by this code for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout this governmental unit. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this code shall be official traffic-control devices. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-20.060. - Restriction of trucks and commercial vehicles upon use of streets. 
(1)  No person shall operate, or stop, stand, or park any truck or commercial vehicle with a gross weight in excess of five (5) tons or in excess of twenty-two (22) feet in length on any street in the city except on state trunklines or in the central business district, as defined by traffic control order, or on streets designated as truck routes by traffic control order and signs shall be erected on such streets so designating the same as truck routes. 
(2)  No provisions of this section shall prohibit: 
(a)  The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the city. 
(b)  The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city, public utilities, any contractor or material man while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or street utilities within reasonable vicinity of such repair, maintenance, or construction. 
(c)  The operation of a truck upon any officially established detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be operated upon the street for which such detour is established. 
(d)  Any truck which is taking departure from or proceeding to a destination on a prohibited street from operating on such prohibited streets as may be reasonably necessary in traveling to and from, as the case may be, the nearest street intersection on a street wherein such truck is permitted to operate. 
(e)  Any truck while engaged in one (1) or more local pickups or deliveries from using such prohibited streets as may be reasonably necessary in so doing, provided that such truck shall upon completion of the last pickup or delivery, return by the shortest route to the nearest street upon which it is permitted to operate. 
(3)  It shall be the duty of any person who shall be driving or in charge or control of any truck which may at that time be upon any street in the city upon which truck travel is limited or restricted, upon the demand of any police officer, to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether the weight thereof is in excess of the weight limit permitted upon such street. 
(4)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-20.070. - Operation in parks prohibited. 
    No motorcycles or all-terrain vehicles shall be operated within the city limits except upon public streets and public rights-of-way. No motorcycles or all-terrain vehicles shall be operated in any public parks owned by the city, whether such public park is located inside or outside the corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-20.080. - Parking in residential areas. 
    No parking shall be permitted on any portion of any residential lot extending between the residential structure and the street except upon a driveway area presently existing to the side of the home. No concrete, black top, gravel or hardsurface materials for parking purposes shall be placed in the front yard area of any residential lot; provided, however, a special permit for such parking may be granted under the provisions of section 38-380 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-20.090. - Parking prohibited in specified places. 
(1)  A vehicle shall not be parked, except if necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(a)  Within two hundred (200) feet of an accident at which a police officer is in attendance; 
(b)  In a parking lot of a private business establishment without patronizing the establishment or drive a motor vehicle repeatedly in and out of said lot without patronizing said establishment, except with the express permission of the owner of said premises or his or her authorized representative. 
(2)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-20.100. - Blocking, obstructing, impeding, or otherwise interfering with traffic prohibited; violation as civil infraction. 
(1)  A person without authority shall not block, obstruct, impede, or otherwise interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic on a public street or highway by means of a barricade, object, device, or with his or her person. This section does not apply to persons who maintain, rearrange, or construct public utilities in, or adjacent to, a street or highway. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or park a motor vehicle upon the city streets, alleys, or any other place open to the general public, including those areas designated for the parking of motor vehicles, in a manner that impedes or obstructs the free and orderly flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic thereon. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle in and out of the premises of a drive-in establishment repeatedly and without patronizing the establishment, or to park on such premises without utilizing the services offered. 
(4)  Leading or following other vehicles in a circular or continuous pattern on the public streets or within the public parking lots of the city, during periods of congested traffic, shall be deemed to be impeding the free and orderly flow of traffic. 
(5)  A person who violates the section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-20.110. - Snowmobiles; operation on designated public and private property. 
    A snowmobile shall be operated within corporate limits of this governmental unit only on public property and private property open to the public which has been so designated by the governing body of this governmental unit, or on property owned or under the control of the owner of the snowmobile. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-20.120. - Snowmobiles; operation between midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
    A person shall not operate a snowmobile within one hundred (100) feet of a dwelling between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. at a speed greater than the minimum required to maintain forward movement of the snowmobile. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-20.130. - Snowmobile; lights. 
    A snowmobile shall be equipped with one (1) headlight and one (1) taillight. The lights shall be lighted when the snowmobile is being operated between the hours from one-half (1/2) hour after sunset to one-half (1/2) hour before sunrise. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-20.140. - Snowmobile; muffler. 
(1)  A snowmobile shall be equipped with a muffler in good working order and from which noise emission at fifty (50) feet at right angles from the vehicle path under full throttle does not exceed eighty-six (86) dba decibels on the "a" scale, on a sound meter that has characteristics defined by American standards association S1.4 of 1966 entitled "General Purpose Sound Meter." 
(2)  This section does not apply to a snowmobile that is being used in an organized race on a course which is used solely for racing. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-20.150. - Snowmobiles; operation on roadway prohibited; exceptions. 
(1)  A person shall not operate a snowmobile on any roadway within the corporate limits of this governmental unit, with the following exceptions: 
(a)  The chief of police or an individual designated by the chief of police is hereby authorized to permit the operation of a snowmobile on a roadway when, because of snow or other extreme roadway conditions, conventional motor vehicles cannot be used for necessary transportation. 
(b)  A snowmobile may be operated on a roadway when necessary to cross the roadway or to cross a bridge or culvert. The snowmobile shall be brought to a complete stop before entering onto the roadway, and the operator shall yield the right-of-way to a vehicle approaching on the roadway. 
(c)  A snowmobile may be operated on a roadway only for a distance of not more than five hundred (500) feet while traveling to an area approved for snowmobile use or between two (2) approved areas. 
(2)  A person shall not operate a snowmobile in any of the following locations: 
(a)  In a forest nursery or a planting area or, if vegetation might be damaged, on public lands which are posted or which are reasonably identifiable as an area of forest reproduction or as a natural dedicated area in Michigan's lower peninsula. 
(b)  On the frozen surface of public waters within one hundred (100) feet of a person, including a skater, who is not in or on a snowmobile, or within one hundred (100) feet of a fishing shanty or shelter, except at the minimum speed required to maintain forward movement of the snowmobile, or in an area that has been cleared of snow for skating purposes, unless the area is necessary for access to the public water. 
(c)  In an area in which public hunting is permitted during the season open to the taking of deer with firearms from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. and from 2:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m., except during an emergency; for law enforcement purposes; to go to and from a permanent residence or a hunting camp otherwise inaccessible by a conventional wheeled vehicle; for the conduct of necessary work functions involving land and timber survey, communication and transmission line patrol, and timber harvest operations; or on the person's own property, property under the person's control, or property on which the person is an invited guest. 
(d)  On or across a cemetery or burial ground. 
(e)  Within one hundred (100) feet of a slide, ski, or skating area. A snowmobile may enter such an area for the purpose of servicing the area or for medical emergencies. 
(f)  On a railroad or railroad right-of-way, except when the railroad, a public utility, or a law enforcement employee is performing an official duty. 
(3)  A person shall not transport a bow or a firearm on a snowmobile unless the bow is unstrung or the firearm is securely encased or equipped with, and made inoperative by, a manufactured, key-locked, trigger-housing mechanism. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Sec. 33-20.160. - Riding on sidewalks. 
(1)  No person shall ride a bicycle or skateboard upon any sidewalk within a business district or in a school zone or on any other sidewalk or highway when official traffic devises or signs are posted prohibiting the riding of bicycles or skateboards thereon. When any person is riding a bicycle or skateboard upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian, and if necessary, the person riding such bicycle or skateboard shall dismount and vacate the sidewalk in order to prevent a collision, and any person riding a bicycle or skateboard upon the sidewalk must have the bicycle or skateboard under control at all times. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person riding a bicycle or skateboard on the sidewalk to attempt to pass another rider or person going in the same direction on the sidewalk without giving an alarm by audible signals a reasonable distance before overtaking and/or passing such pedestrian and until it becomes evident that the person so warned is aware of the approach of such person riding the bicycle or skateboard. 
(3)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 10-6-03) 
Secs. 33-21-33-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 480, § 1, adopted Mar. 18, 1991, amended this article in its entirety by adding new provisions to read as set out in Div. 1, §§ 33-36-33-47 and by renumbering former §§ 33-46-33-51 of Div. 2 as §§ 33-48-33-53. 
Cross reference- Overnight parking of recreational vehicles in public places, § 17-18; emergency parking of recreational vehicles, § 17-19; parking at outdoor assemblies, a 20-29(11); P-1 vehicular parking districts, § 83-331 et seq.; off-street parking requirements, § 38-380. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate parking, stopping and standing, MCL 257.606(1)(a), MSA 9.2306(1)(a). 

DIVISION 1. - PARKING IN BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 33-36. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this division to regulate and restrict the parking of vehicles within the downtown business district and the westown business district of the city. The provisions of this division shall be applicable to all streets, alleys, parking lots and other public places. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-18-91) 
Sec. 33-37. - Definitions. 
(a)  Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms used in this division shall be as follows: 
    Business districts means and includes the downtown business district and the westown business district. 
    Downtown business district means and includes all that area bounded on the north by Williams Street, on the east by Park Street, and on the west and south by the Shiawassee River, including both sides of all streets referenced as boundary streets within this definition. 
    Parking means and includes parking, stopping and standing as those terms are defined in the Uniform Traffic Code. 
    Parking lot means an area of land, whether or not improved, controlled by the city and available for use by the general public for the purpose of parking vehicles. 
    Westown business district means and includes all that area bounded on the north by a line one hundred ninety-eight (198) feet north of the north line of Main Street, on the east by Cedar Street, on the west by State Street and on the south by a line one hundred thirty-two (132) feet south of the south line of Main Street, including both sides of all streets referenced as boundary streets within this definition. 
(b)  Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, terms other than those defined in section 33-37(a) shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Uniform Traffic Code. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-18-91) 
Sec. 33-38. - Parking in designated space. 
    Vehicles parked in the business districts defined in this division shall park within spaces designated for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-18-91) 
Sec. 33-39. - Parking time limits. 
    Unless otherwise regulated or restricted by traffic-control orders approved pursuant to the provision of section 33-43, it shall be unlawful and a violation of this division to: 
(1)  Park or stop one's vehicle in any parking space in the business district between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.; 
(2)  Park or stop one's vehicle in any parking space in the business districts for a period of time in excess of two (2) hours Monday through Friday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-18-91; Ord. No. 485, § 1, 9-16-91) 
Sec. 33-40. - Parking meters. 
    The chief of police is authorized to install and maintain parking meters adjacent to spaces designated as parking meter spaces in traffic-control orders approved pursuant to the provisions of section 33-43. Each parking meter shall be installed and set to display a signal showing legal parking upon deposit therein of the proper coin or coins of the United States and upon putting the meter in operation, as indicated by instructions on the meter, and for a period of time conforming to the limit of parking time which has been or may be established for the space for which the parking meter is installed, such signal to remain in evidence until expiration of the parking period so designated, at which time a raising of the signal or some other mechanical operation shall indicate expiration of the parking period. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-18-91) 
Sec. 33-41. - Parking meter fees. 
    The city council shall from time to time by resolution establish the fees to be charged for parking in a parking meter space. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-18-91) 
Sec. 33-42. - Leased parking spaces. 
(a)  The city council may designate by traffic-control order approved pursuant to section 33-43 those spaces within city parking lots which may be leased for periods of time not exceeding one (1) year for private and exclusive use by the persons to whom the spaces are leased. 
(b)  The chief of police shall promulgate rules and regulations governing the leasing of spaces in city parking lots, including the fees to be charged for such lease, which rules and regulations shall be approved by resolution by the city council. 
(c)  The chief of police shall have the authority to impound and tow any vehicle which has been parked in any parking space leased to another person. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-18-91) 
Sec. 33-43. - Traffic-control orders. 
(a)  Regulations and restrictions related to parking, including areas where parking is permitted or prohibited, the length of time which vehicles may park, hours when parking is permitted or prohibited, areas where parking meters shall be installed, spaces which are available for lease and the like, shall be established by adoption of traffic-control orders. Such traffic-control orders shall be promulgated and adopted in the same manner as is provided for the promulgation and adoption of traffic-control orders pursuant to the Uniform Traffic Code. 
(b)  Traffic-control orders regulating or restricting parking in the business districts as defined in this division which were in effect on the effective date of this division shall remain in effect until they are amended, repealed or superseded by subsequent traffic-control orders. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-18-91) 
Sec. 33-44. - Signs. 
    Notwithstanding anything contained in this division to the contrary, the provisions of this division shall not be enforced with regard to any streets, alleys or parking lots located within the business districts as defined for which there is not first posted an appropriate sign or signs giving notice of the applicable parking regulations and restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-18-91) 
Sec. 33-45. - Violations designated. 
    It is a violation of this division for any person to: 
(1)  Cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of such person or operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking space; 
(2)  Cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of such person or operated by such person to be parked overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking meter space; 
(3)  Deposit or cause to be deposited in a parking meter a coin for the purpose of increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal maximum parking time which has been established for the parking space adjacent to which the parking meter is placed; 
(4)  Permit a vehicle to remain or be placed in any parking space adjacent to any parking meter while the parking meter is displaying a signal indicating violation; 
(5)  Deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or substitute for a coin of the United States; 
(6)  Deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under the provisions of this chapter; 
(7)  Cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in the name of such person or operated by such person to be parked in any parking space leased to another person; 
(8)  Move a vehicle from one (1) parking space to any other parking space solely for the purpose of evading time limitations on parking. There shall be a rebuttable presumption that any person employed or working in the business districts as defined who moves a vehicle from one (1) parking space to another and then returns directly or indirectly to work has moved such vehicle for the purpose of evading time limitations on parking. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-18-91) 
Sec. 33-46. - Exception for commercial vehicles and trailers. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to commercial vehicles or trailers parked while actually making deliveries or while engaged in and necessary to other types of commercial activity occurring within the business districts defined in this division. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-18-91) 
Sec. 33-47. - Penalties for violations. 
    Penalties for violations of the provisions of this division relating to parking of vehicles shall be those as are listed in section 33-53. All other violations shall be subject to the penalties permitted pursuant to the provisions of section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-18-91) 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to establish a parking violations bureau, MCL 600.8395, MSA 27A.8395. 

Sec. 33-48. - Bureau established. 
    A parking violations bureau is hereby established within the city for the purpose of handling alleged parking violations. The parking violations bureau shall be under the supervision and control of the police chief. 
(Code 1977, § 10.71; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-18-91) 
Sec. 33-49. - Location. 
    The city manager shall, subject to the approval of the council, establish a convenient location for the parking violations bureau, appoint qualified city employees to administer the bureau, and adopt rules and regulations for the operation thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 10.72; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-18-91) 
Sec. 33-50. - Disposition of violations. 
    Violations not scheduled in section 33-53 shall not be disposed of by the parking violations bureau. The fact that a particular violation is scheduled shall not entitle the alleged violator to disposition of the violation at the bureau, and in any case, the person in charge of the bureau may refuse to dispose of such violation, in which case any person having knowledge of the facts may make a sworn complaint before any court having jurisdiction of the offense as provided by law. 
(Code 1977, § 10.73; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-18-91) 
Sec. 33-51. - Procedure. 
    No violation may be settled at the parking violations bureau except at the specific request of the alleged violator. No penalty for any violation shall be accepted from any person who denies having committed the offense and in no case shall the person who is in charge of the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to such alleged violation. No person shall be required to dispose of a parking violation at the parking violations bureau and all persons shall be entitled to have any such violation processed before a court having jurisdiction thereof if they so desire. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the parking violations bureau shall not prejudice him or her or in any way diminish the rights, privileges and protection accorded to him or her by law. 
(Code 1977, § 10.74; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-18-91) 
Sec. 33-52. - Violation ticket. 
    The issuance of a traffic ticket or notice of violation by a police officer of the city shall be deemed an allegation of a parking violation. Such traffic ticket or notice of violation shall indicate the length of time in which the person to whom the same was issued must respond before the parking violations bureau. It shall also indicate the address of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the penalty scheduled for the offense for which the ticket was issued and advise that a warrant for the arrest of the person to whom the ticket was issued will be sought if such person fails to respond within the time limited. 
(Code 1977, § 10.75; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-18-91) 
Sec. 33-53. - Schedule of fines. 
    Fines for the following violations shall be established by resolution and paid to the parking violations bureau. An additional penalty may be assigned if it is necessary to issue a warrant for the alleged violator's arrest. 
Violation No. 
(1)  (This violation has been removed.) 
(2)  Parking over legal limit in areas other than business districts defined in section 33-37. 
(3)  Parking over legal limit in business districts defined in section 33-37. 
(4)  Moving to evade time limitations. 
(5)  Parking in prohibited zone. 
(6)  Parking in loading zone. 
(7)  Parking on sidewalk or crosswalk. 
(8)  Parking at yellow curb. 
(9)  Overtime parking in 3:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. zone. 
(10)  Parking within fifteen (15) feet of fire hydrant. 
(11)  Parking in handicapped zone. 
(12)  Double parking. 
(13)  Parked facing wrong way. 
(14)  Blocking driveway. 
(15)  Across parking line. 
(16)  Blocking alley. 
(17)  Blocking traffic. 
(18)  Parking over twelve (12) inches from curb. 
(19)  Abandoned car. 
(20)  Parking of a truck or commercial vehicle with a gross weight in excess of five (5) tons or in excess of twenty-two (22) feet in length in violation of the provisions of section 5.61 of the Uniform Traffic Code. 
(21)  Other parking violation. 
(22)  Fifth violation of any above violation within a 30-day period. 
(Code 1977, § 10.76; Ord. No. 354, § 1, 11-5-79; Ord. No. 429, § 1, 10-15-84; Ord. No. 438, § 1, 11-18-86; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 10-16-89; Ord. No. 480, § 1, 3-18-91; Ord. No. 518, § 1, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 648, § 1, 10-6-03; Ord. No. 794, § 1, 9-17-18) 
Secs. 33-54-33-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BICYCLES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate bicycles, MCL 257.606(1)(i), MSA 9.2306(1)(i). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 33-66. - Parental responsibility. 
    No parent or guardian shall authorize or knowingly permit his or her child, or ward, to violate any of the provisions of this article and Uniform Traffic Code bicycle provisions. 
(Code 1977, § 10.32) 
Secs. 33-67-33-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 33-81. - Required. 
    No person shall ride or propel a bicycle upon any street, sidewalk or alley unless such bicycle has been licensed and a license plate is attached thereto, as provided herein; except that no license shall be required for a bicycle, the wheels of which are less than twenty (20) inches in diameter. 
(Code 1977, § 10.23) 
Sec. 33-82. - Application. 
    Applications for a bicycle license shall be made upon a form provided by the city and shall be made at the police department and a license fee as prescribed by resolution of the council shall accompany each application for a license, and such application shall contain the name of the manufacturer of the bicycle, its number, style and general description. 
(Code 1977, § 10.24) 
Sec. 33-83. - Issuance. 
    The police chief, upon receiving a proper application therefor, is authorized to issue a bicycle license, and such license and registration shall be effective so long as such bicycle continues to belong to the same owner. The police chief shall not issue a license for any bicycle when he or she knows or has reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant is not the owner or entitled to possession of such bicycle. 
(Code 1977, § 10.25) 
Sec. 33-84. - Record. 
    The police chief shall keep a record of the number of each bicycle license, the date it is issued, the name of the person to whom it is issued, and the number of the frame of the bicycle for which it is issued. 
(Code 1977, § 10.26) 
Sec. 33-85. - License plate. 
    The police chief upon issuing a bicycle license shall also issue a suitable license plate bearing the license number assigned to the bicycle, and the name of the city for which it is issued. 
(Code 1977, § 10.27) 
Sec. 33-86. - Transfer, loss. 
    Upon change of ownership, a license plate issued under the provisions of this division may be transferred to and issued in the name of a new owner upon the payment of a fee as prescribed by resolution of the council to the police chief. A plate shall not be transferred from one bicycle to another, and no person shall attach to any bicycle a plate not issued for the use thereon. Upon the loss of any such plate, and upon application and satisfactory evidence of such loss, a new plate shall be issued by the police chief, upon payment of a further fee as provided by resolution of the council. In case any such plate is mutilated or defaced, a replacement may be made, provided such mutilated or defaced plate is presented to the police chief and upon the payment of a fee as prescribed by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1977, § 10.28) 
Sec. 33-87. - Attachment of plate. 
    All license plates issued under the provisions of this division shall be firmly attached to the rear mud guard or frame of the bicycle for which it is issued, in such a position as to be plainly visible from the rear. 
(Code 1977, § 10.29) 
Sec. 33-88. - Removing plate. 
    No person shall remove a license plate from a bicycle for which it is issued except when the bicycle is dismantled or when it is no longer operated in this city. 
(Code 1977, § 10.30) 
Secs. 33-89-33-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RAILROADS 

Sec. 33-106. - Unguarded crossings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any railroad company and for any officer, agent or employee thereof in charge of any train to propel or permit to be propelled any cars in advance of any locomotive engine over or across any street in the city where there is not stationed a crossing watchman or where such crossing is not equipped with automatic signals, unless a member of the train crew shall be posted at the crossing in advance of the train or cars to warn persons desiring to cross the railroad. 
(Code 1977, § 10.53) 
State Law reference- Street crossings, MCL 469.1 et seq., MSA 22.761 et seq. 
Sec. 33-107. - Speed of trains. 
    It shall be unlawful for any engineer, fireman, conductor, officer, agent or servant of any railroad company or for any other person to operate any locomotive, car or train of cars, or any combination thereof, at a rate of speed exceeding forty (40) miles per hour within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 10.54) 
Sec. 33-108. - Blowing of whistles. 
    No person shall blow, or cause to be blown, a bell, siren or other warning device of any locomotive within the limits of the city for the purpose of signaling to make up trains, or in any other cases than those which the laws of the state prescribe and designate as requiring the use of such whistle. 
(Code 1977, § 10.55) 
Secs. 33-109-33-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SCHOOL GROUNDS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Operation of motor vehicles on school district property in municipalities, MCL 257.961. 

Sec. 33-126. - Operation of certain vehicles prohibited. 
    Motorized recreational vehicles, including, but not limited to motorcycles (except for reasonable transportation purposes to and from school grounds), mini-bikes, snowmobiles and motorscooters, shall not be operated upon any public school grounds of the city public schools in a recreational manner at any time. 
(Code 1977, § 10.61) 
Sec. 33-127. - Notices. 
    Notices large enough for a reasonably observant person to be able to read shall be posted in prominent locations upon all school grounds, forbidding any activity coming under the provisions of this article. Such notices to substantially read: 
    "No motorcycles, snowmobiles, mini-bikes and other recreational vehicles on school grounds. (Owosso City Code 33-126)" 
(Code 1977, § 10.62) 
Secs. 33-128-33-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MOTOR VEHICLE SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD RESTRICTIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 746, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 3, 2013, repealed former art. VII, §§ 33-150-33-153, and enacted a new art. VII as set out herein. The former art. VII pertained to motor carrier safety and derived from Ord. No. 565, § 1, adopted Oct. 20, 1997. 

Sec. 33-150. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Motor Vehicle Size, Weight and Load Restrictions Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 746, § 2, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-150.1. - Size, weight and load restrictions. 
(a)  Unless specifically declared to be a civil infraction, it is a misdemeanor for a person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or permit to be driven or moved on a highway a vehicle of a size and weight exceeding the limitations stated in this article or otherwise in violation of this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this article governing size, weight, and load do not apply to a fire apparatus; to an implement of husbandry; to a boat lift or oversized hydraulic boat trailer owned and operated by a marina or watercraft dealer and used exclusively in a commercial boat storage operation which is incidentally moved upon a highway; or to a vehicle operated under the terms of a special permit issued as provided in this article. 
(c)  The Michigan Department of Transportation, under the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, 1969 PA 306 (MCL 24.201 to MCL 24.328), may promulgate rules permitting and regulating the operation of a vehicle or vehicles of a size or weight that exceeds the size or weight limitations of this article. The city may enforce those rules under this article, but can take no actions in conflict with federal, state, or local law. 
(d)  A wrecker and a disabled vehicle, or a wrecker and a combination of a disabled vehicle and one (1) trailer that exceeds the size and weight limitations in this article may be operated upon the highways of the city under the following conditions: 
(1)  The wrecker is specifically designed for such towing operations; is equipped with flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber or red lights as permitted under MCL 257.698; and is capable of utilizing the lighting and braking systems of the disabled vehicle or combination of disabled vehicles if those systems are operational. 
(2)  For a combination of disabled vehicles, the wrecker is issued a special permit under section under MCL 257.725 by the Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission for Shiawassee County if each trip beginning from the place of original disablement is twenty-five (25) miles or less. The special permit is valid for the entire twenty-five-mile towing distance, and the operator of that wrecker may remove the disabled vehicles from the roadway at any lawful point of his or her choosing within that distance. 
(3)  For a single disabled vehicle, the wrecker is issued a special permit under MCL 257.725 by the Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission for Shiawassee County for the transport of the disabled vehicle. A wrecker operator is not subject to mileage limitations under such a special permit. 
(4)  The wrecker does not operate on any highway, road, street or structure that is included on a list provided by the state transportation department that prohibits wreckers unless the disabled vehicle or combination of vehicles is actually located on one (1) of those roads or structures. 
(e)  The owner or operator of a wrecker that does not comply with subsection (d) is responsible for a civil infraction and shall pay a civil fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). The civil fine imposed under this subsection is in addition to any fine that may be imposed under section 33-150.3 or 33-150.15. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 2, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-150.2. - Maximum outside width of vehicles or loads; operation or movement of boat lifts and trailers. 
(a)  The total outside width of a vehicle or the load on a vehicle that is operated on the highways, streets, and roadways in the city shall not exceed ninety-six (96) inches, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  A person may operate or move an implement of husbandry of any width on a highway as required, designed, and intended for farming operations, including the movement of implements of husbandry being driven or towed and not hauled on a trailer, without obtaining a special permit by the Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission for Shiawassee County for an excessively wide vehicle or load under MCL 257.725. The operation or movement of the implement of husbandry shall be in a manner so as to minimize the interruption of traffic flow. A person shall not operate or move an implement of husbandry to the left of center of the roadway from a half hour after sunset or a half hour before sunrise or at any other time where visibility is substantially diminished due to weather conditions. A person operating or moving an implement of husbandry shall follow all traffic regulations. 
(c)  The total outside width of the load of a vehicle hauling concrete pipe; agricultural products; or unprocessed logs, pulpwood, or wood bolts shall not exceed one hundred eight (108) inches. 
(d)  Except as provided in subsections (b) and (e), if a vehicle that is equipped with pneumatic tires is operated on a highway, the maximum width from the outside of one (1) wheel and tire to the outside of the opposite wheel and tire shall not exceed one hundred two (102) inches, and the outside width of the body of the vehicle or the load on the vehicle shall not exceed ninety-six (96) inches. However, a truck or trailer or a tractor and semitrailer combination hauling pulpwood or unprocessed logs may operate with a maximum width of up to one hundred eight (108) inches, in accordance with a special permit issued under MCL 257.725. 
(e)  The total outside body width of a bus, a trailer coach, a trailer, a semitrailer, a truck camper, or a motor home shall not exceed one hundred two (102) inches. However, an appurtenance of a trailer coach, a truck camper, or a motor home that extends not more than six (6) inches beyond the total outside body width is not a violation of this section. 
(f)  A vehicle shall not extend beyond the center line of a state trunk highway except when authorized by law. Except as provided in subsection (b) above, if the width of the vehicle makes it impossible to stay away from the center line, a permit shall be obtained under MCL 257.725. 
(g)  The city may designate a highway under its jurisdiction as a highway on which a person may operate a vehicle or vehicle combination that is not more than one hundred two (102) inches in width, including load, the operation of which would otherwise be prohibited by this section. The city may require that the owner or lessee of the vehicle or of each vehicle in the vehicle combination secure a permit before operating the vehicle or vehicle combination. This section does not permit the operation of a vehicle or vehicle combination described in section 33-150.11 if the operation would otherwise result in a violation of that section. 
(h)  The Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission of Shiawassee County may issue a special permit under MCL 257.725 to a person operating a vehicle or vehicle combination if all of the following are met: 
(1)  The vehicle or vehicle combination, including load, is not more than one hundred six (106) inches in width. 
(2)  The vehicle or vehicle combination is used solely to move new motor vehicles or parts or components of new motor vehicles between facilities that meet all of the following: 
a.  New motor vehicles or parts or components of new motor vehicles are manufactured or assembled in the facilities. 
b.  The facilities are located within ten (10) miles of each other. 
c.  The facilities are located with the Owosso city limits. 
d.  The special permit and any renewals are each issued for a term of one (1) year or less. 
(i)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. The operator or the owner of the vehicle may be charged with a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 2, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-150.3. - Passenger-type vehicles; projected load. 
(a)  A passenger type vehicle shall not be operated on a highway with a load carried on the vehicle extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of the vehicle nor extending more than six (6) inches beyond the line of the fenders on the right side of the vehicle. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 2, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-150.4. - Height, length; combinations; connecting assemblies, lighting devices; weight; violations. 
(a)  A vehicle either unloaded or with load, shall not exceed a height of thirteen (13) feet six (6) inches. The owner of a vehicle that collides with a lawfully established bridge or viaduct is liable for all damage and injury resulting from a collision caused by the height of the vehicle, whether the clearance of the bridge or viaduct is posted or not. 
(b)  Lengths described in this section shall be known as the normal length maximum. Except as provided in subsection (c) below, the following vehicles and combinations of vehicles shall not be operated on a highway in this city in excess of these lengths: 
(1)  Subject to subsection (h) below, any single vehicle-Forty (40) feet; a crib vehicle on which logs are loaded lengthwise of the vehicle-Forty-two and one-half (42.5) feet; any single bus or motor home-Forty-five (45) feet. 
(2)  Articulated buses-Sixty-five (65) feet. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a combination of a truck and semitrailer or trailer, or a truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer, or truck tractor and semitrailer or trailer, designated and used exclusively to transport assembled motor vehicles or bodies, recreational vehicles, or boats-Sixty-five (65) feet. Stinger-steered combinations-Seventy-five (75) feet. The load on the combinations of vehicles described in this section may extend an additional three (3) feet beyond the front and four (4) feet beyond the rear of the combinations of vehicles. Retractable extensions used to support and secure the load that do not extend beyond the allowable overhang for the front and rear shall not be included in determining length of a loaded vehicle or vehicle combination. 
(4)  Truck tractor and semitrailer combinations-No overall length, but the semitrailer shall not exceed fifty (50) feet. 
(5)  Truck and semitrailer or trailer-Fifty-nine (59) feet. 
(6)  Except as provided in subsection (7) below, a combination of a truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer, or truck tractor and two (2) semitrailers-Fifty-nine (59) feet. 
(7)  A truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer, or a truck tractor and two (2) semitrailers, in which no semitrailer or trailer is more than twenty-eight and one-half (281/2) feet long-Sixty-five (65) feet. This section only applies while the vehicle is being used for a business purpose that is reasonably related to picking up or delivering a load and only if each semitrailer or trailer is equipped with a device or system capable of mechanically dumping construction materials or dumping construction materials by force of gravity. 
(8)  More than one (1) motor vehicle, wholly or partially assembled, in combination, utilizing one (1) tow bar or three (3) saddle mounts with full mount mechanisms and utilizing the motive power of one (1) of the vehicles in combination-Fifty-five (55) feet. 
(c)  The normal length maximums, as set forth in subsection (b) above, may be exceeded for the following vehicles and combinations of vehicles, but they shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Truck tractor and semitrailer combinations-No overall length limit, but the semitrailer shall not exceed fifty-three (53) feet. All semitrailers longer than fifty (50) feet shall have a wheelbase of thirty-seven and one-half (37.5) to forty and one-half (40.5) feet, plus or minus one-half (0.5) foot, measured from the kingpin coupling to the center of the rear axle or the center or the rear axle assembly. A semitrailer with a length longer than fifty (50) feet shall not operate with more than three (3) axles on the semitrailer. Vehicles with a semitrailer longer than fifty (50) feet may be prohibited from stopping in the city unless the stop occurs along appropriately designated routes, or is necessary for emergency purposes or to reach shippers, receivers, warehouses, and terminals along designated routes. 
(2)  Truck and semitrailer or trailer combinations-Sixty-five (65) feet, except that a person may operate a truck and semitrailer or trailer designed and used to transport saw logs, pulpwood, and tree length poles that does not exceed an overall length of seventy (70) feet or a crib vehicle and semitrailer or trailer designated and used to transport saw logs that does not exceed an overall length of seventy-five (75) feet. A crib vehicle and semitrailer or trailer designed for and used to transport saw logs shall not exceed a gross vehicle weight of one hundred sixty-four thousand (164,000) pounds. A person may operate a truck tractor and semitrailer designed for and used to transport saw logs, pulpwood, and tree length wooden poles with a load overhang to the rear of the semitrailer which does not exceed six (6) feet if the semitrailer does not exceed fifty (50) feet in length. 
(3)  Notwithstanding subsection (d)(4), a truck tractor with a log slasher unit and a log saw unit-No maximum length limit if the length of each unit does not exceed twenty-eight and one-half (281/2) feet, or the overall length of the log slasher unit and the log saw unit, as measured from the front of the first towed unit to the rear of the second towed unit while the units are coupled together, does not exceed fifty-eight (58) feet. The coupling devices of the truck tractor and units set forth in this section shall meet the requirements established under the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, 1963 PA 181, MCL 480.11 to MCL 480.25. 
(4)  Truck tractor and two (2) semitrailers, or truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer combinations-No overall length limit, as long as the length of each semitrailer or trailer does not exceed twenty-eight and one-half (281/2) feet each, or the overall length of the semitrailer and trailer, or two (2) semitrailers, as measured from the front of the first towed unit to the rear of the second towed unit while the units are coupled together, does not exceed fifty-eight (58) feet. 
(5)  More than one (1) motor vehicle, wholly or partially assembled, in combination, utilizing one (1) tow bar or three (3) saddle mounts with full mount mechanisms and utilizing the motive power of one (1) of the vehicles in combination-Maximum seventy-five (75) feet. 
(d)  The following combinations and movements are prohibited: 
(1)  A truck shall not haul more than one (1) trailer or semitrailer, and a truck tractor shall not haul more than two (2) semitrailers or one (1) semitrailer and one (1) trailer in combination at any one (1) time, except that a farm tractor may haul two (2) wagons or trailers, or garbage and refuse haulers may, during daylight hours, haul up to four (4) trailers for garbage and refuse collection purposes, as long as the total length of any combination does not exceed fifty-five (55) feet and the vehicles are operated at a speed limit of fifteen (15) miles per hour or less. 
(2)  A combination of vehicles or a vehicle shall not have more than eleven (11) axles, except when operating under a valid permit issued by the Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission of Shiawassee County under MCL 257.725 on highways under its jurisdiction. 
(3)  Any combination of vehicles not specifically authorized under this section is prohibited. 
(4)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(3) a combination of two (2) semitrailers pulled by a truck tractor, unless each semitrailer uses a fifth wheel connection assembly that conforms to the requirements of the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, 1963 PA 181, MCL 480.11 to MCL 480.25. 
(5)  A vehicle or combination of vehicles shall not carry a load extending more than three (3) feet beyond the front of the lead vehicle. 
(6)  A vehicle described in subsections (b)(5) and (c)(5) employing triple saddle mounts, unless all wheels that are in contact with the roadway have operating brakes. 
(e)  All combinations of vehicles under this section shall employ connecting assemblies and lighting devices that are in compliance with the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, 1963 PA 181, MCL 480.11 to MCL 480.25. 
(f)  The total gross weight of a truck tractor, semitrailer, and trailer combination or a truck tractor and two (2) semitrailers combination that exceeds fifty-nine (59) feet in length shall not exceed a ratio of four hundred (400) pounds per engine net horsepower delivered to clutch or its equivalent, as specified in the handbook published by the Society of Automotive Engineers, Inc. (SAE), 1977 edition. 
(g)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. The owner of the vehicle may be charged with a violation of this section. 
(h)  The provisions in subsections (b)(1) and (c)(2) prescribing the length of a crib vehicle on which logs are loaded lengthwise do not apply unless section 127(d) of Title 23 of the United States Code, 23 USC 127, is amended to allow crib vehicles carrying logs to be loaded as described in this section. 
(i)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Designated highway" means a highway under the jurisdiction of the City of Owosso and approved by the State of Michigan as a highway. 
(2)  "Length" means the total length of a vehicle, or combination of vehicles, including any load the vehicle is carrying. Length does not include devices described in 23 CFR 658.16 and 23 CFR part 658, appendix D, 23 CFR 658.16 and 23 CFR part 658, appendix D, as on file with the Michigan Secretary of State and as adopted by reference. A safety or energy conservation device shall be excluded from a determination of length only if it is not designed or used for the carrying of cargo, freight, or equipment. Semitrailers and trailers shall be measured from the front vertical plane of the foremost transverse load supporting the structure to the rear-most transverse load supporting the structure. Vehicle components not excluded by law shall be included in the measurement of the length, height, and width of the vehicle. 
(3)  "Stinger-steered combinations" means a truck tractor and semitrailer combination in which the fifth wheel is located on a drop frame located behind and below the rear-most axle of the power unit. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 2, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-150.5. - Towing vehicle with mobile home attached; operating restrictions; permits; transport requirements; violations; definitions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, a person shall not operate on a highway of this city a towing vehicle to which a mobile home is attached, if that mobile home is more than forty-five (45) feet in length or more than sixty (60) feet in length when combined with the towing vehicle; or is more than twelve and one-half (121/2) feet in height; or has an actual body width of more than one hundred two (102) inches at base rail, unless that person possesses either of the following: 
(1)  A permit issued by the Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission of Shiawassee County pursuant to MCL 257.725. 
(2)  A special permit issued by the Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission of Shiawassee County pursuant to MCL 257.725. 
(b)  Pursuant to MCL 257.725, the Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission of Shiawassee County may issue an annual permit to a mobile home transport company; a mobile home manufacturer; or a mobile home dealer to move a mobile home over a highway under the jurisdiction of the city, in the ordinary course of that company's, manufacturer's, or dealer's business, as long as the mobile home conforms to each of the following: 
(1)  The mobile home is not more than twelve (12) feet wide. 
(2)  The actual body length of the mobile home is not more than eighty (80) feet and the combined length of the mobile home and towing vehicle is not more than one hundred five (105) feet; or the total length of a combination of mobile homes is not more than eighty (80) feet and the total length of a combination of mobile homes and towing is not more than one hundred five (105) feet. 
(c)  Pursuant to MCL 257.725, the Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission of Shiawassee County may issue a special permit for the movement of a mobile home over a highway within its jurisdiction if the width of that mobile home conforms to both of the following: 
(1)  The mobile home is not more than sixteen (16) feet wide plus normal appurtenances or eaves that extend not more than six (6) inches from any side of the mobile home. 
(2)  The length of the mobile home complies with subsection (b)(2). 
(d)  A person operating a towing vehicle under subsection (c) shall transport a mobile home only on the lane farthest to the right of that person. When the wind velocity exceeds twenty-five (25) miles per hour, a person shall not move a mobile home that is fourteen (14) or more feet in width. 
(e)  Pursuant to MCL 257.725, the Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission of Shiawassee County shall not issue a permit for the transportation of a mobile home on a Saturday, Sunday, legal holiday (from noon the day before until the noon the day after a holiday), or during the hours between sunset and sunrise. 
(f)  Persons operating a vehicle towing a mobile home shall comply with all of the conditions of a permit issued by Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission of Shiawassee County pursuant to MCL 257.725. A permit issued under MCL 257.725 includes all of the following: 
(1)  The date, day, and time period during which a mobile home may be moved on a highway, subject to the permit. 
(2)  Notice that the permit is conditioned upon its holders compliance with all of the permit's terms and with the law. 
(3)  Notice that the operator of a towing vehicle transporting the mobile home shall operate the towing vehicle on a highway as follows: 
a.  At a safe speed and in a safe manner that will not impede motor traffic. 
b.  Only when the surface condition of the highway is not slippery. 
c.  In accordance with seasonal load restrictions. 
(4)  For a mobile home or park model trailer and towing vehicle, when combined, are more than eighty (80) feet in length or more than twelve (12) feet wide, all of the following: 
a.  Notice that the mobile home or park model trailer shall be equipped with two (2) flashing amber lights on the rear of the mobile home or park model trailer and one (1) flashing amber light on the top of the towing vehicle. 
b.  Notice that the mobile home or park model trailer shall be equipped with stop lights and directional lights on the rear of the mobile home or park model trailer. 
c.  Notice that the signs with the words "oversize load" shall be displayed on the front bumper of the towing vehicle and the back of the mobile home or park model trailer, or in the case of mobile homes or park model trailers that are sixteen (16) feet wide, notice that signs with the words "16-ft wide load" shall be displayed on the front bumper of the towing vehicle and the back of the mobile home or park model trailer. 
d.  Notice that the signs identified in subsection (c) above shall be of durable material, in good condition, with black lettering on interstate yellow background, and that each letter shall be of block lettering that is not less than twelve (12) inches high at the front and not less than sixteen (16) inches high at the rear of the unit. 
e.  Notice that a vehicle escort is required on those roads where the Michigan State Police and the Owosso Police Department considers escort vehicles necessary for highway safety. 
(g)  Signs and other special identification for escort vehicles shall conform to Michigan Transportation Department's requirements for all escort vehicles for oversized loads. 
(h)  For a mobile home or park model trailer being moved pursuant to this section or MCL 257.725, the distance between mobile home or park model trailer axle centers shall not be less than thirty-four (34) inches. The axle and tires shall meet standards established by the Michigan Transportation Department. 
(i)  This section does not grant or give authority to the Michigan Department of Transportation, the Road Commission of Shiawassee County or the Owosso Police Department that did not exist on May 1, 1982, in accordance with 23 USC 127. 
(j)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction and may be assessed a civil fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). The operator or the owner of the towing vehicle may be charged with a violation of this section. 
(k)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Jurisdictional authority" means the Michigan Transportation Department, the Road Commission of Shiawassee County or the City of Owosso. 
(2)  "Mobile home" means any of the following: 
a.  A pre-built housing module. 
b.  That term, as defined in section 2 of the Mobile Home Commission Act, Act No. 96 of the Public Acts of 1987, being MCL 125.2302. 
c.  Section of a mobile home as that term is defined under this article. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 2, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-150.6. - Mobile homes; additional requirements for transporting. 
    All mobile homes transported on the highways of the city that are more than fourteen and one-third (14 1/3 ) feet wide (plus normal appurtenances that expand no more than six inches, and an eave that extends no more than two (2) feet from the width of the mobile home), are subject to the following requirements in addition to the requirements of section 33-150.4: 
(a)  Two (2) escort vehicles shall escort the towing vehicle and mobile home on all two (2) lane roads and on those roads where the Owosso Police Department considers two (2) escort vehicles necessary for highway safety. 
(b)  Each towing vehicle shall be equipped with a radio or other device that allows for continuous communication between the towing vehicle and each escort vehicle. 
(c)  The person transporting the mobile home shall have in effect a liability insurance policy covering personal injury and property damage and having a policy limit of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(d)  The towing vehicle and mobile home shall not exceed a speed of forty-five (45) miles per hour or ten (10) miles per hour below the posted speed limit, whichever is lower. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 2, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-150.7. - Trucks hauling semitrailers, transportation of passengers for sightseeing purposes; approval of city; speed limitation; safety equipment; inspection. 
(a)  Notwithstanding section 33-150.4, the Owosso Police Department may give approval for a truck to be used to haul up to four (4) semitrailers for the purpose of transporting passengers for sightseeing purposes, as long as the truck does not travel more than three (3) miles beyond the city boundaries and does not exceed a speed limit of twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(b)  A truck and a semitrailer, as described in this section, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Be equipped with hazard warning lights, and slow-moving vehicle emblems, as described in MCL 257.688. 
(2)  Be equipped with safety belts, as described in MCL 257.710e, for each individual seat. 
(3)  Be compliant with any applicable federal safety standards. 
(c)  Before operating a truck regulated by this section, the operator of the truck shall secure the proper group vehicle designation and any required endorsement required on his or her operator's or chauffeur's license. 
(d)  A truck and semitrailer used as described in this section shall be inspected annually by the Michigan Department of State Police. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 2, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-150.8. - Construction or loading of vehicle to prevent spillage on highway or roadway; loading of vehicle which is not completely enclosed; operation of vehicle equipped with front end loading device with protruding tine; offenses and penalties. 
(a)  A person shall not drive or move a vehicle on a highway unless the vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking, blowing off, or otherwise escaping from the vehicle. This requirement does not apply to a vehicle transporting agricultural or horticultural products, such as hay, straw, silage, or residue from a product (but not including the product itself), or when materials such as water that is used to preserve and handle agricultural or horticultural products while in transportation, escape from the vehicle in an amount that does not interfere with other traffic on the highway. The tailgate, faucets, and taps on a vehicle shall be securely closed to prevent spillage during transportation, whether the vehicle is loaded or empty, and the vehicle shall not have any holes or cracks through which material can escape. Any highway maintenance vehicle engaged in either ice or snow removal shall be exempt from this section. 
(b)  Actual spillage of material on the highway or proof of that spillage is not necessary to prove a violation of this section. 
(c)  Except as provided in this section, a vehicle carrying a load, (other than logs or tubular products), which is not completely enclosed shall meet either of the following requirements: 
(1)  The load shall be covered with firmly secured canvas or a similar type of covering. A device used to comply with the requirement of this section shall not exceed a width of one hundred eight (108) inches nor by design or use have the capability to carry cargo by itself. 
(2)  The load shall be securely fastened to the body or the frame of the vehicle with binders of an adequate number and of adequate breaking strength to prevent the dropping off or shifting of the load. 
(d)  A company or individual who loads or unloads a vehicle or causes it to be loaded or unloaded, with the knowledge that it is to be driven on a public highway, and the loading or unloading is done in a manner so as to cause a violation of subsection (a) shall be prima facie liable for a violation of this section. 
(e)  Subsection (c) does not apply to a person operating a vehicle to transport agricultural commodities or to a person operating a farm truck or implement of husbandry that is transporting sand, gravel, and dirt which is necessary in the normal operation of a farm. However, if such person violates subsections (a) or (d), the person is guilty of a misdemeanor and is subject to the penalties prescribed in subsection (i). 
(f)  Subsection (c)(1) does not apply to a motor vehicle transporting items in a load that, because of their weight, will not fall off the moving vehicle and that have their center of gravity located at least six (6) inches below the top of the enclosure. Similarly, subsection (c) does not apply to a motor vehicle carrying metal that, because of its weight and density, is so loaded as to prevent it from dropping or falling off the moving vehicle. 
(g)  Subsection (c)(1) does not apply to motor vehicles and other equipment that is engaged in work upon the surface of a highway or street in a designated work area. 
(h)  A person shall not drive or move on a highway a vehicle equipped with a front end loading device with a tine protruding parallel to the highway beyond the front bumper of the vehicle unless the tine is carrying a load designed to be carried by the front end loading device. This section does not apply to a vehicle designed to be used or being used to transport agricultural commodities; to a vehicle en route to a repair facility; or to a vehicle engaged in construction activity. As used in this section, "agricultural commodities" means that term as defined in section 33-150.10. 
(i)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both. 
(j)  As used in this section, "logs" means saw-logs, pulpwood, or tree length poles. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 2, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-150.9. - Trailers towed by passenger vehicle, attachment. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (e), a passenger vehicle or a pickup truck shall not be driven upon a highway drawing or having attached to the passenger vehicle or pickup truck more than one (1) vehicle or trailer. 
(b)  The drawbar or other connection between two (2) vehicles, one (1) of which is towing or drawing the other on a highway, shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in length from one (1) vehicle to the other. If the connection consists of a chain, rope, or cable, there shall be a red flag or other signal or cloth on the connection that is at least twelve (12) inches both in length and width. 
(c)  A vehicle or trailer towed or drawn by a vehicle shall be attached to the vehicle with coupling devices in a manner so that when the combination is operated in a linear alignment on a level, smooth, paved surface, the movement of the towed or drawn vehicle or trailer does not deviate more than three (3) inches to either side of the path of the towing vehicle that tows or draws it. The vehicle or trailer shall also be connected to the towing vehicle by suitable safety chains or devices, one (1) on each side of the coupling and at the extreme outer edge of the vehicle or trailer. Each chain or device and connection used shall be of sufficient strength to haul the vehicle or trailer when loaded. In the case of an implement of husbandry with a gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or less, the safety chains or devices required under this subsection shall conform to the federal motor carrier safety regulations requirements, which are currently provided in 49 C.F.R. 393.70(d)(5). 
(d)  A pickup truck with a fifth wheel assembly shall not tow a semitrailer unless the fifth wheel assembly conforms to the standards prescribed in the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, 1963 PA 181, MCL 480.11 to MCL 480.22 and sections 33-151.1 to 33-151.19 of this article. 
(e)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), a pickup truck with a towing rating equal to or greater than the weight being towed, that is equipped with a fifth wheel assembly that conforms with the standards prescribed in the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963,1963 PA 181, MCL 480.11 to MCL 480.22, which is towing a semitrailer that is designated for recreational living purposes, may tow an additional trailer or semitrailer under the following conditions: 
(1)  The additional trailer or semitrailer shall be attached as set forth in subsection (c). The safety chains described in subsection (c) shall be securely attached at the extreme outer edge of the attached trailer or semitrailer with a locking mechanism. The towing vehicle hitch shall be of substantial material and shall be attached in a proper and skillful manner to the frame of the towing vehicle. 
(2)  The total length of the pickup truck, plus the semitrailer that is designed for recreational living purposes, and the additional trailer or semitrailer, and the load of the vehicle, shall not exceed sixty-five (65) feet while on any highway in the city. 
(3)  The gross weight of the additional trailer or semitrailer towed or drawn shall not exceed the empty weight of the pickup truck or the empty weight of the semitrailer. 
(f)  For the purpose of this section, a pickup truck towing a semitrailer and an additional trailer shall be considered a passenger vehicle and shall comply with the speed limit requirements of MCL 257.627(5). 
(g)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 2, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-150.10. - Wheel and axle loads; seasonal weight restrictions, exceptions. 
(a)  The maximum axle load shall not exceed the number of pounds, as designated in the following provisions which prescribe the distance between axles: 
(1)  If the axle spacing is nine (9) feet or more between axles, the maximum axle load shall not exceed eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds for vehicles equipped with high pressure pneumatic or balloon tires. 
(2)  If the axle spacing between two (2) axles is less than nine (9) feet but more than three and one-half (31/2) feet, the maximum axle load shall not exceed thirteen thousand (13,000) pounds for vehicles equipped with high pressure pneumatic or balloon tires. 
(3)  If the axles are spaced less than three and one-half (31/2) feet apart, the maximum axle load shall not exceed nine thousand (9,000) pounds per axle. 
(4)  Subsections (a)(1), (2) and (3) shall be known as the normal loading maximum. 
(b)  When normal loading is in effect, the Owosso Police Department may designate certain highways, or sections of those highways under its jurisdiction, where bridges and road surfaces are adequate for heavier loading, and may also revise a designation to allow the maximum tandem axle assembly loading of up to sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds for any axle of the assembly, as long as there is no other axle within nine (9) feet of any axle of the assembly. 
(c)  On a legal combination of vehicles, only one (1) tandem axle assembly shall be permitted on the designated highways at the gross permissible weight of sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds per axle, but only if there is no other axle within nine (9) feet of any axle of the assembly, and if no other tandem axle assembly in the combination of vehicles exceeds a gross weight of thirteen thousand (13,000) pounds per axle. On a combination of truck tractor and semitrailer having up to five (5) axles, two (2) consecutive tandem axle assemblies shall be permitted on the designated highways at a gross permissible weight of sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds per axle, if there is no other axle within nine (9) feet of any axle of the assembly. 
(d)  Notwithstanding subsection (c), on a combination of truck tractor and semitrailer having up to five (5) axles, two (2) consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross permissible weight of up to seventeen thousand (17,000) pounds on any of the tandem axles if there is no other axle within nine (9) feet of any axle of the tandem axle and if the first and last axle of the consecutive sets of tandem axles are at least thirty-six (36) feet apart and the gross vehicle weight does not exceed eighty thousand (80,000) pounds, to pick up and deliver agricultural commodities between the national truck network or special designated highways and any other highway. This section is not subject to the maximum axle loads of subsections (a), (b) and (c). For purposes of this section, a "tandem axle" means two (2) axles spaced more than forty (40) inches but not more than ninety-six (96) inches apart or two (2) axles spaced more than three and one-half (31/2) feet but less than nine (9) feet apart. This section does not apply during that period when reduced maximum loads are in effect, pursuant to subsection (h). 
(e)  In order to be exempt from the loading maximums and gross vehicle weight requirements, the person hauling agricultural commodities, who picks up or delivers either from a farm or to a farm, shall notify the Road Commission for Shiawassee County at least forty-eight (48) hours before the pickup or delivery, indicating the time and location of the pickup or delivery. Pursuant to MCL 257.722(5) the Shiawassee County Road Commission shall issue a permit to such a person and charge a fee that does not exceed the administrative costs incurred. The permit shall contain the all of the following: 
(1)  The designated route or routes of travel for the load. 
(2)  The date and time period requested by the person who picks up or delivers the agricultural commodities during which the load may be delivered or picked up. 
(3)  A maximum speed limit of travel, if necessary. 
(4)  Any other specific conditions agreed to between the parties. 
(f)  In order to be exempt from the loading maximums and gross vehicle weight requirements, public utility vehicles that are owned or operated by public utilities under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Public Service Commission, or are subcontracted by public utilities under the jurisdiction of the Michigan Public Service Commission, when performing electrical emergency public utility work, must meet the following circumstances: 
(1)  For emergency public utility work on restricted roads, as follows: 
a.  If required by the Road Commission for Shiawassee County, the public utility shall notify the Road Commission for Shiawassee County, as soon as practical, of the location of the emergency public utility work and provide a statement that the vehicles that were used to perform the emergency utility work may have exceeded the loading maximums and gross vehicle weight requirements of this article. The notification may be made via facsimile or electronically. 
b.  The public utility vehicle travels to and from the site of the emergency public utility work while on a restricted road at a speed not greater than thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(2)  For nonemergency public utility work on restricted roads, as follows: 
a.  If the Road Commission for Shiawassee County requires, the public utility shall apply to the Road Commission for Shiawassee County annually for a seasonal truck permit for roads under its authority before seasonal weight restrictions are effective. Pursuant to MCL 257.722(6), the Road Commission for Shiawassee County shall issue a seasonal truck permit for each vehicle or vehicle configuration the public utility anticipates will be utilized for nonemergency public utility work. Pursuant to MCL 257.722(6), the Road Commission for Shiawassee County may charge a fee for a permit that does not exceed the administrative costs incurred for the permit. The seasonal truck permit shall contain all of the following: 
1.  The seasonal period requested by the public utility, during which the permit is valid. 
2.  A unique identification number for the vehicle and any vehicle configuration to be covered on the seasonal truck permit that is requested by the public utility. 
3.  A requirement that travel on restricted roads during weight restriction periods will be minimized and only utilized when necessary to perform work using the public utility vehicle or vehicle configuration and that nonrestricted roads shall be used for travel when available and for routine travel. 
b.  Pursuant to MCL 257.722(6), if the Road Commission for Shiawassee County requires notification, the Road Commission of Shiawassee County shall provide a notification application for the public utility to use when requesting access to operate on restricted roads and the public utility shall provide notification to the Road Commission of Shiawassee County, via facsimile or electronically, not later than twenty-four (24) hours before the time of the intended travel. Notwithstanding this section or an agreement under this section, if the Road Commission for Shiawassee County determines that the condition of a particular road under its jurisdiction makes it unusable, the Road Commission for Shiawassee County may deny access to all or any part of that road. The denial shall be made and communicated via facsimile or electronically to the public utility within twenty-four (24) hours after receiving notification that the public utility intends to perform nonemergency work that requires use of that road. Any notification that is not disapproved within twenty-four (24) hours after the notice is received by the Road Commission of Shiawassee County is considered approved. The notification application, as required under MCL 257.722(6), may include all of the following information: 
1.  The address or location of the nonemergency work. 
2.  The date or dates of the nonemergency work. 
3.  The route to be taken to the nonemergency work. 
4.  The restricted road or roads intended to be traveled upon to the nonemergency work site or sites. 
(g)  The normal size of tires shall be the rated size, as published by the manufacturers, and the maximum wheel load permissible for any wheel shall not exceed seven hundred (700) pounds per inch of width of tire. 
(h)  Except as provided in this section and subsection (i), during the months of March, April, and May in each year, the maximum axle load allowable on concrete pavements or pavements with a concrete base is reduced by twenty-five (25) percent from the maximum axle load as specified in this article, and the maximum axle loads allowable on all other types of roads during these months are reduced by thirty-five (35) percent from the maximum axle loads as specified. The maximum wheel load shall not exceed five hundred twenty-five (525) pounds per inch of tire width on concrete and concrete base or four hundred fifty (450) pounds per inch of tire width on all other roads during the time that the seasonal road restrictions are in effect. This section does not apply to vehicles transporting agricultural commodities or public utility vehicles on a highway, road, or street under the jurisdiction of Owosso. For the highways, roads, or streets under Owosso's jurisdiction to which the seasonal restrictions prescribed under this section apply, Owosso shall post all of the following information on the homepage of its website: 
(1)  The dates when the seasonal restrictions are in effect. 
(2)  The names of the highways and streets and portions of highways and streets to which seasonal restrictions apply. 
(i)  Pursuant to MCL 257.722(9), the Michigan Department of Transportation (for roads under its jurisdiction) and the Road Commission for Shiawassee County (for roads under its jurisdiction) may grant exemptions from seasonal weight restrictions for the transport of milk on specific routes, when requested in writing. Approval or denial of a request for an exemption shall be given by written notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days of submission of the application. If a request is denied, the written notice shall state the reason for the denial and alternate routes for which the permit may be issued. The applicant may appeal to the Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission for Shiawassee County. These exemptions do not apply on county roads in counties that have negotiated agreements with milk haulers or haulers of other commodities during periods of seasonal load limits before April 13, 1993. This subsection does not limit the ability of these counties to negotiate such agreements. 
(j)  The Owosso Police Department, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction, may suspend the restrictions imposed by this section when and where conditions of the highways or the public health, safety, and welfare warrant suspension, and impose the restricted loading requirements of this section on designated highways at any other time that the conditions of the highway require. 
(k)  For the purpose of enforcing this article, the gross vehicle weight of a single vehicle and load or a combination of vehicles and loads shall be determined by weighing individual axles or groups of axles, and the total weight on all the axles shall be the gross vehicle weight. In addition, the gross axle weight shall be determined by weighing individual axles or by weighing a group of axles and dividing the gross weight of the group of axles by the number of axles in the group. The overall gross weight on a group of two (2) or more axles shall be determined by weighing individual axles or several axles, and the total weight of all the axles in the group shall be the overall gross weight of the group. 
(l)  The loading maximum in this subsection applies to the highways under Owosso's jurisdiction. The Owosso Police Department may designate a highway, or a section of a highway for the operation of vehicles having a gross vehicle weight of up to eighty thousand (80,000) pounds, subject to the following load maximums: 
(1)  Twenty thousand (20,000) pounds on any one (1) axle, including all enforcement tolerances. 
(2)  A tandem axle weight of thirty-four thousand (34,000) pounds, including all enforcement tolerances. 
(3)  An overall gross weight of a group of two (2) or more consecutive axles equaling: 
W=500/LN + 12N + 36 \ ____________ \ - / 1 where W = overall gross weight on a group of two (2) or more consecutive axles to the nearest five hundred (500) pounds, L = distance in feet between the extreme of a group of two (2) or more consecutive axles, and N = number of axles in the group under consideration; except that two (2) consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross load of thirty-four thousand (34,000) pounds each if the first and last axles of the consecutive sets of tandem axles are not less than thirty-six (36) feet apart. The gross vehicle weight shall not exceed eighty thousand (80,000) pounds, including all enforcement tolerances. Except for a five-axle truck tractor; semitrailer combinations having two (2) consecutive sets of tandem axles, vehicles having a gross weight in excess of eighty thousand (80,000) pounds or in excess of the vehicle gross weight determined by application of the formula in this subsection are subject to the maximum axle loads of subsections (a), (b), and (c). As used in this section, "tandem axle weight" means the total weight transmitted to the road by two (2) or more consecutive axles, the centers of which may be included between parallel transverse vertical planes spaced more than forty (40) inches but not more than ninety-six (96) inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle. Except as otherwise provided in this section, vehicles transporting agricultural commodities shall have weight load maximums as set forth in this section. 
(m)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Agricultural commodities" means those plants and animals useful to human beings produced by agriculture and includes, but is not limited to, forages and sod crops, grains and feed crops, field crops, dairy and dairy products, poultry and poultry products, cervidae, livestock, including breeding and grazing, equine, fish, and other aquacultural products, bees and bee products, berries, herbs, fruits, vegetables, flowers, seeds, grasses, nursery stock, mushrooms, fertilizer, livestock bedding, farming equipment, and fuel for agricultural use. The term does not include trees or lumber. 
(2)  "Emergency public utility work" means work performed to restore public utility service or to eliminate a danger to the public due to a natural disaster, an act of God, or an emergency situation, whether or not a public official has declared an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 2, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-150.11. - Restrictions on transportation of flammable liquids and gases; violations, penalties; enforcement. 
(a)  A truck pulling a trailer, a truck tractor pulling a semitrailer and trailer combination, or a truck tractor pulling two (2) semitrailers shall not transport within the city a flammable liquid, in bulk, with a flash point at or below seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(b)  A truck pulling a trailer, a truck tractor pulling a semitrailer and trailer combination, or a truck tractor pulling two (2) semitrailers shall not transport within the city a flammable gas or a compressed flammable gas, in bulk, as defined by 49 C.F.R. parts 100 to 180. 
(c)  A truck or a truck tractor pulling a semitrailer shall not transport within the city a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a flash point at or below seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit, unless the truck or the semitrailer has a water capacity of less than thirteen thousand eight hundred (13,800) gallons. This section does not apply to those vehicles registered with the Motor Carrier Division of the Michigan Department of State Police on or before January 1, 1986. 
(d)  A truck or truck tractor pulling a semitrailer shall not transport within the city a flammable liquid, in bulk, which has a flash point at or below seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit in a quantity of more than thirteen thousand four hundred (13,400) gallons. 
(e)  The owner or driver of a vehicle that transports, or a shipper who loads a vehicle with a flammable liquid, flammable gas, or compressed flammable gas in violation of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both. 
(f)  This section shall be enforced only by a police officer. 
(g)  For the purposes of this section, "in bulk" means an amount of product or material of three thousand five hundred (3,500) water gallons or more in a single containment system. Commercial motor vehicles transporting hazardous materials shall comply with the Motor Carrier Safety Act, Act Nol. 181 of the Public Acts of 1963, being sections MCL 480.11 to MCL 480.21 and section 33-150.12 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 2, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-150.12. - Information to be painted or permanently attached on certain commercial vehicles and towing or platform bed wrecker service vehicles; use of removable devices; effects of compliance with federal identification requirements; exemptions; penalties. 
(a)  All commercial vehicles with a single or combination gross weight rating or total gross weight of more than five thousand (5,000) pounds and all towing or platform bed wrecker road service vehicles in operation upon the public highways of the city shall have the name, city, and state or the registered logo or emblem of the registered owner of the vehicle, (and lessee of the vehicle if the vehicle is being operated under lease), painted or permanently attached on each side of the vehicle in letters of not less than three (3) inches in height, not lower than the bottom edge of the door. This information shall be in sharp color contrast to the background. 
(b)  Except for towing or platform bed wrecker road service vehicles, the identification requirement of subsection (a) may be met through the use of removable devices which meet the requirements. These devices shall be of durable construction and securely attached to each side of the motor truck or truck tractor. The removable devices shall be attached so that the identification is in a horizontal position. 
(c)  A vehicle in compliance with the identification requirements of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations, 49 C.F.R. 390-399, is considered to be in compliance with this section. 
(d)  This section does not apply to a truck eligible for and registered under a farm or manufacturer license plate, that has a gross vehicle weight of less than ten thousand (10,000) pounds. 
(e)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 2, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-150.13. - Stopping vehicles for weighing; offense and penalties. 
(a)  A police officer, having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and load is unlawful, may require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the vehicle by either portable or stationary scales approved and sealed by the department of agriculture as a legal weighing device; and may require that the vehicle be driven to the nearest weigh station of the Michigan Department of Transportation for the purpose of allowing a police officer to determine whether the vehicle is loaded in conformity with this article. 
(b)  When a police officer, upon weighing a vehicle and load, determines that the weight is unlawful, the officer may require the driver to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until that portion of the load is shifted or removed as necessary to reduce the gross axle load weight of the vehicle to the limit permitted under this article. All material unloaded as provided under this subsection shall be cared for by the owner or operator of the vehicle at the risk of the owner or operator. A judge or magistrate imposing a civil fine and costs under this section that are not paid in full immediately or for which a bond is not immediately posted (in double the amount of the civil fine and costs) shall order the driver or owner to move the vehicle at the driver's own risk to a place of safekeeping, and keep the vehicle until the fine and costs are paid or sufficient bond is furnished or until the judge or magistrate is satisfied that the fine and costs will be paid. The officer, who determined, after weighing a vehicle and load, that the weight is unlawful, may require the driver to proceed to a judge or magistrate within the city. If the judge or magistrate is satisfied that the probable civil fine and costs will be paid by the owner or lessee, the judge or magistrate may allow the driver to proceed, after the load is made legal. If the judge or magistrate is not satisfied that the owner or lessee, after a notice and a right to be heard on the merits is given, will pay the amount of the probable civil fine and costs, the judge or magistrate may order the vehicle to be impounded until trial on the merits is completed under conditions set forth in this section for the impounding of vehicles after the civil fine and costs have been imposed. Removal of the vehicle, and forwarding, care or preservation of the load shall be under the control of and at the risk of the owner or driver. Vehicles impounded shall be subject to a lien, subject to a prior valid bona fide lien of prior record, in the amount of the civil fine and costs and if the civil fine and costs are not paid within ninety (90) days after the seizure, the court shall certify the unpaid judgment to the Owosso City Attorney, who may proceed to enforce the lien by foreclosure sale in accordance with procedure authorized in the case of chattel mortgage foreclosures. 
(c)  Subject to subsection (d), an owner of a vehicle, or a lessee of the vehicle, or other person, who causes or allows a vehicle to be loaded and driven or moved on a highway, when the weight of that vehicle violates section 33-150.10, is responsible for a civil infraction and shall pay a civil fine in an amount equal to three cents ($0.03) per pound for each pound of excess load over one thousand (1,000) pounds when the excess is two thousand (2,000) pounds or less; six cents ($0.06) per pound of excess load when the excess is over two thousand (2,000) pounds but not over three thousand (3,000) pounds; nine cents ($0.09) per pound for each pound in excess load when the excess if over three thousand (3,000) pounds but not over four thousand (4,000) pounds; twelve cents ($0.12) per pound for each pound of excess load when the excess is over four thousand (4,000) [pounds] but not over five thousand (5,000) pounds; fifteen cents ($0.15) per pound for each pound of excess load when the excess is over five thousand (5,000) pounds but not over ten thousand (10,000) pounds; and twenty cents ($0.20) per pound for each pound of excess load when the excess if over ten thousand (10,000) pounds. 
(d)  If the court determines that the motor vehicle or the combination of vehicles was operated in violation of this section, the court shall impose a fine as follows: 
(1)  If the court determines that the motor vehicle or the combination of vehicles was operated in such a manner that the gross weight of the vehicle or the combination of vehicles would not be lawful by a proper distribution of the load upon all the axles of the vehicle or the combination of vehicles, the court shall impose a fine for the violation according to the schedule provided for in subsection (c). 
(2)  If the court determines that the motor vehicle or the combination of vehicles would be lawful by a proper distribution of the load upon all of the axles of the vehicle or the combination of the vehicles, but that one (1) or more axles of the vehicle exceeded the maximum allowable axle weight by four thousand (4,000) pounds or less, the court shall impose a misload fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per axle. Not more than three (3) axles shall be used in calculating the fine to be imposed under this section. This section does not apply to vehicles subject to the maximum loading provisions of subsection (k) or to a vehicle found to be in violation of a special permit issued under section 33-150.15. 
(3)  If the court determines that the motor vehicle or the combination of vehicles would be lawful by a proper distribution of the load upon all of the axles of the vehicle or the combination of vehicles, but that one (1) or more axles of the vehicle exceeded the maximum allowable axle weight by more than four thousand (4,000) pounds, the court shall impose a fine for the violation according to the schedule provided in subsection (c). 
(e)  A driver or owner of a commercial vehicle with other vehicles or trailers in combination, a truck or truck tractor, a truck or truck tractor with other vehicles in combination, or any special mobile equipment, who fails to stop at or bypasses any scales or weighing station, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  A driver or owner of a vehicle who knowingly fails to stop when requested or ordered to do so, or who fails to submit to a weighing by a police officer authorized to require the driver to stop and submit to a weighing of the vehicle and load, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or both. A driver or person who dumps his or her load when ordered to submit to a weigh, or who otherwise attempts to commit or commits an act to avoid a vehicle weigh is in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 2, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-150.14. - Axle weight requirements; vehicles equipped with lift axles. 
(a)  The axle weight requirements of this article do not apply to a vehicle equipped with lift axles during the period in which axles are raised to negotiate an intersection, driveway, or other turn and until the lift axles are fully engaged after the period of time or the distance necessary to negotiate that intersection, driveway or other turn. 
(b)  This section does not exempt axle weight requirements due to a lift axle system that is not working properly or due to driver error or noncompliance. 
(c)  If a vehicle is to be weighed to determine whether the vehicle is being operated in violation of this article or a rule promulgated under the Motor Carrier Safety Act, and the vehicle is equipped with lift axles that have been raised to allow the vehicle to negotiate an intersection, driveway, or other turn, the vehicle shall be weighed only after the lift axles have been fully lowered and are under operational pressure as provided in subsection (a). This section does not exempt axle weight requirements due to a lift axle system that is not working properly or due to driver error or noncompliance. 
(d)  As used in this section, "lift axle" means an axle on a vehicle that can be raised or lowered by mechanical means. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 2, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-150.15. - Special permits for nonconforming vehicles; applications; farm machinery, telephone, telegraph, or electric poles, concrete pipes, mobile homes. 
(a)  Pursuant to MCL 257.725, the Michigan Transportation Department or the Road Commission of Shiawassee County, upon receipt of a written application and upon good cause being shown, may issue a written special permit, authorizing an applicant to operate upon or remove from a highway maintained by the city, a vehicle or combination of vehicles that are any of the following: 
(1)  Of a size, weight, or load exceeding the maximum specified in this article. 
(2)  Otherwise not in conformity with this article. 
(b)  The special permit application shall be on a form prescribed by the Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission of Shiawassee County and shall specifically describe the vehicle or vehicles and load to be operated or moved and the particular highways upon which the special permit to operate is requested. 
(c)  The Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission of Shiawassee County may issue a special permit and charge a fee, which shall not exceed the administrative costs incurred. The special permit can authorize the operation of the following upon a highway: 
(1)  Traction engines or tractors having movable tracks with transverse corrugations upon the periphery of those movable tracks on farm tractors. 
(2)  Other farm machinery otherwise prohibited under this article. 
(d)  A special permit shall specify the trip or trips and date or dates for which it is valid, and the Michigan Department of Transportation or the Road Commission of Shiawassee County may restrict or prescribe conditions of operation of a vehicle or vehicles, if necessary, to protect the safety of the public or to insure against undue damage to the road foundations, surfaces, structures, or installations, and may require a reasonable inspection fee and other security as set out in MCL 257.725 to compensate for damages caused by the movement. A special permit may be issued on an annual basis. 
(e)  A special permit issued under this section shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by a police officer. A person shall not violate any of the terms or conditions of the special permit. 
(f)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(g)  A person who is issued a special permit to move a mobile home under this section is subject to section 33-150.5. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 2, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-150.16. - Regulation of highways by city; penalty for violations. 
(a)  For highways under the city's jurisdiction, except state trunk line highways, the city may do any of the following: 
(1)  Prohibit the operation of trucks or other commercial vehicles on designated highways or streets. 
(2)  Impose limitations as to the weight of trucks or other commercial vehicles on designated highways or streets. 
(3)  Provide that only certain highways or streets may be used by trucks or other commercial vehicles. 
(b)  Any prohibitions, limitations, or truck route designations established under subsection (a) shall be designated by appropriate signs placed on the highways or streets. The design and placement of the signs shall be consistent with the requirements of MCL 257.608. 
(c)  A person who violates a prohibition, limitation, or truck route designation established pursuant to subsection (a) is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 2, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-150.17. - Police officer's authority to enforce ordinance on boundary streets and highways. 
    Pursuant to MCL 257.726a, a police officer of the city may exercise authority and powers outside his or her own city or county when enforcing this article on a street or highway which is on the boundary of the city or county, the same as if the police officer were in his or her own city and county. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 2, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-150.18. - Stopping motor vehicles for possible load, weight, or height violations; temporary detention; arrests. 
    Any police officer having reason to believe that the load, weight, or height of a vehicle or load is in violation of sections 33-150.4, 33-150.8, 33-150.11 or 33-150.13, and that violation is a misdemeanor or civil infraction, may require the driver of the vehicle to stop, and the officer may investigate, weigh, or measure the vehicle or load. If after personally investigating, weighing, or measuring the vehicle or load, the officer determines that the load, weight, or height of a vehicle or load are in violation of the requirements of sections 33-150.4, 33-150.8, 33-150.11, or 33-150.13, the officer may temporarily detain the driver of the vehicle for purposes of making a record or vehicle check, and may make an arrest for the violation, and may proceed as otherwise provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 2, 9-3-13) 
ARTICLE VIII. - MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY 

Sec. 33-151. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Motor Carrier Safety Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-151.1. - Adoption of federal regulations; modifications of federal definitions; application of ordinance; definitions. 
(a)  The City of Owosso adopts the following provisions of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, on file with the office of the Michigan Secretary of State and the Owosso City Clerk, except where modified by this article: 
(1)  Hazardous materials regulations, being 49 CFR parts 100 through 180, except for the transportation of agricultural products (for which an exception from the application of 49 CFR subchapter C and 49 CFR subchapters G and H, part 172, is provided under 49 CFR 173.5), is specifically authorized if the transportation is in compliance with this article and state law. 
(2)  Motor carrier safety regulations, being 49 CFR parts 40, 356, 365, 368, 371 through 373, 375, 376, 379, 382, 385, 387, 390 through 393, 395 through 399 including the appendices of each part except for the following: 
a.  Except as provided in this subparagraph, where the term "United States Department of Transportation", "Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration", "Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administrator", "director", "bureau of motor carrier safety", pipeline and hazardous materials administration", or "associate administrator for hazardous materials safety" appears, it refers to the Michigan Department of State Police or the City of Owosso. If the term is being used for purposes of 49 CFR 397 as it relates to routing and movement of hazardous materials, it refers to the Michigan Department of Transportation or the City of Owosso. 
b.  Where "inter-state" appears, it shall mean intra-state or inter-state, or both, as applicable, except as specifically provided in this article. 
c.  Where "Special Agent of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration", "administration personnel", or "hazardous materials enforcement specialist" appears, it either means a police officer or an enforcement member of the motor carrier division of the city. 
d.  Where MCS 63 appears, it means MC 9 and MC 9b. 
e.  Where MCS 64 appears, it means UD-70. 
f.  Exempt intra-city zones and the regulations applicable to exempt intra-city zones do not apply to this article. 
(b)  This article does not apply to a bus operated by a public transit agency operating under any of the following: 
(1)  A county, city, township, or village as provided by law or other authority incorporated under 1963 PA 55, MCL 124.351 to MCL 124.359. Each authority and governmental agency incorporated under 1963 PA 55, MCL 124.351 to MCL 124.359, has the exclusive jurisdiction to determine its own contemplated routes, hours of service, estimated transit vehicle miles, costs of public transportation services, and projected capital improvements or projects within its service area. 
(2)  An authority incorporated under the Metropolitan Transportation Authorities Act of 1967, 1967 PA 204, MCL 124.401 to MCL 124.426, or an authority that operates a transportation service pursuant to an inter-local agreement under the Urban Cooperation Act of 1967, (Ex Sess.) PA 7, MCL 124.501 to MCL 124.512. 
(3)  A contract entered into pursuant to 1967 (Ex Sess.) PA 8, MCL 124.531 to MCL 124.536 or 1951 PA 35, MCL 124.1 to MCL 124.13. 
(4)  An authority incorporated under the Public Transportation Authority Act, 1986 PA 196, MCL 124.451 to MCL 124.479, or a nonprofit corporation organized under the Nonprofit Corporation Act, 1982 PA 162, MCL 450.2101 to MCL 450.3192, that provides transportation services. 
(5)  An authority financing public improvements to transportation systems under the Revenue Bond Act of 1933, 1933 PA 94, MCL 141.101 to MCL 141.140. 
(c)  As used in this article: 
"Hazardous material vehicle inspection or repair facility" means a commercial enterprise that performs inspections, certification, testing, or repairs to commercial motor vehicles transporting hazardous materials as required by 49 CFR parts 100 to 180 and includes motor carriers that perform the inspections, certification, testing, or repairs to vehicles owned or leased by the motor carrier. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-151.2. - Operation of commercial motor vehicle; requirements; qualifications for operation in intra-state transportation. 
(a)  A person shall not drive a commercial motor vehicle unless he or she is qualified to drive that vehicle. A motor carrier shall not require or permit a person to drive a commercial motor vehicle unless that person is qualified to drive that vehicle. 
(b)  In the case of intra-state or intra-city transportation, a person is qualified to drive a commercial motor vehicle if he or she meets all the requirements of 49 CFR part 391, except the following provisions: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2), the person is at least eighteen (18) years old when transporting intra-state or intra-city property or passengers. 
(2)  The person is at least twenty-one (21) years old when transporting hazardous materials in a quantity that requires the vehicle to be marked or placarded under 49 CFR parts 100 to 180. 
(3)  The person is eligible for and displays a grandfather rights card issued in accordance with the Motor Carrier Safety Act, MCL 480.11 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-151.3. - Trailers; equipment with surge brakes. 
    Trailers with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of fifteen thousand (15,000) pounds or less or trailer-vehicle combinations with an actual gross vehicle weight or a gross vehicle weight rating of twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds or less may be equipped with surge brakes for intra-state and intra-city operations as allowed by section 705(1)(c) of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.705. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-151.4. - Application of ordinance to drivers for intra-state or intra-city motor carriers regularly employed for period beginning on or before June 10, 1984; application of certain requirements of ordinance to all drivers granted grandfather rights; duration of grandfather rights; application of exemption. 
    The provisions of this article and 40 CFR 391.21, adopted by reference, relating to the applications for employment, 49 CFR 391.23, adopted by reference, relating to investigations and inquiries, and 49 CFR 391.31 and CFR 391.33 adopted by reference, relating to road tests, do not apply to a driver who has been a regularly employed driver of an intra-state or intra-city motor carrier of property for a continuous period which began on or before June 10, 1984, as long as he or she continues to be a regularly employed driver of that motor carrier or a driver who has been a regularly employed driver of an intra-state or intra-city motor carrier of passengers for a continuous period which began on or before March 3, 1991, as long as he or she continued to be a regularly employed driver of that motor carrier. Such a driver is qualified to drive a commercial motor vehicle if he or she fulfills the requirements of subsection 33-151.2(4)(b). 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-151.5. - Application of ordinance to operation of farm vehicles, implements of husbandry, public utility vehicles, government vehicles, combinations of vehicles, school buses, motor buses, and commercial vehicles engaged in seasonal construction related activities; definitions. 
(a)  In the case of intra-state or intra-city transportation, the provisions of 49 CFR 391.21, adopted by reference, relating to application for employment, 49 CFR 391.23, adopted by reference, relating to investigations and inquires, 49 CFR 391.31, adopted by reference, relating to road tests, 49 CFR part 395, adopted by reference, relating to hours of service, 49 CFR 391.41 to 391.45, adopted by reference, to the extent that they require a driver to be medically qualified or examined and to have a medical examiner's certificate on his or her person and the provisions of this article relating to files and records do not apply to a farm vehicle driver as defined in 49 CFR 390.5, adopted by reference. 
(b)  For intra-state or intra-city transportation, the provisions of this article do not apply to a self-propelled implement of husbandry or an implement of husbandry being drawn by a farm tractor or another implement of husbandry. 
(c)  The provision of this article related to driver qualifications do not apply to public utility, telephone, and cable television company service employees if those employees are not otherwise being used as a regularly employed driver and are not operating a vehicle that meets the definition of a commercial motor vehicle in 49 CFR part 383. 
(d)  The requirements of 49 CFR part 395 do not apply to any driver of a public utility service vehicle when being used in cases of emergency. As used in this subsection, "emergency" means any instance of loss of public utility service due to an unforeseen circumstance, a natural disaster, or an act of God. A declaration of emergency by a public official is not required to constitute an emergency under this subsection. 
(e)  A commercial motor vehicle constructed and maintained so that the body chassis or other parts of the vehicle afford the rear end protection required by 49 CFR 393.86 is in compliance with that section. 
(f)  This article and the rules promulgated under the federal regulations which are adopted by reference do not apply to a commercial motor vehicle owned and operated by a unit of government or its employees, except as otherwise provided by this article, and except for all of the following parts of 49 CFR: 
(1)  Part 382. 
(2)  Part 391. 
(3)  Part 392. 
(4)  Part 393. 
(g)  A combination of vehicles with an actual combination gross vehicle weight or a gross combination weight rating of twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds or less, provided the trailer or semitrailer has an actual gross vehicle or gross vehicle weight rating of fifteen thousand (15,000) pounds or less, may be equipped with surge brakes for intra-state and intra-city operation as allowed by section 705(1)(c) of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.705. Vehicles of any size that are transporting hazardous materials in an amount that requires placarding or vehicles that are designed to transport more than eight (8) passengers, including the driver, are prohibited from being equipped with surge brakes for intra-state and intra-city operation. 
(h)  This article and the rules promulgated under the federal regulations which are adopted by reference do not apply to a school bus as defined in the Pupil Transportation Act, 1990 PA 187, MCL 257.1801 to MCL 257.1877, or a bus defined and certified under the Motor Bus Transportation Act, 1982 PA 432, MCL 474.101 to MCL 474.141. 
(i)  As used in subsections (c) and (d), "public utility" means a person or corporation operating equipment or facilities for producing, generating, transmitting, delivering, or furnishing gas or electricity for the production of light, heat, or power for the public for compensation. 
(j)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Implement of husbandry" means that term as defined in section 21 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.21. 
(2)  "Farm tractor" means that term as defined in section 16 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.16. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-151.6. - Submission of transportation safety related documents by motor carriers and hazardous materials vehicle inspection and repair facilities to motor carrier officers; facsimile of motor carrier division identification card; inspection of cargo or vehicle without warrant by motor carrier officer. 
(a)  Motor carriers shall submit, upon demand, all their transportation safety related documents, such as all records and information pertaining to any accident, drivers records of duty status, bills of lading, shipping records, driver time and payroll records, driver qualification records, vehicle maintenance records, and equipment for inspection or copying during regular business hours to any Owosso motor carrier enforcement police officer. 
(b)  Hazardous materials vehicle inspections and repair facilities shall submit, upon demand, all their transportation safety related documents as required by this article, such as hazardous materials tank certification and repair documents, and annual inspection certification documents to any Owosso motor carrier enforcement police officer. 
(c)  A motor carrier or a hazardous material vehicle inspection or repair facility operating within the city with main offices in another city, state or province shall submit all transportation safety related documents as outlined in subsection (a) for inspection and copying within ten (10) working days after receiving formal notification requesting the documents. 
(d)  An Owosso motor carrier enforcement police officer, may without a warrant, require the cargo carrying portion of a vehicle to be opened for inspection of the cargo, any object within that portion of the vehicle, or the interior of the vehicle or any compartment within the interior of the vehicle. If a commercial motor vehicle is inspected by breaking the load seal, then the police officer shall give to the driver a signed receipt of inspection and the police officer shall be responsible for applying a City of Owosso seal. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-151.7. - Penalties for violations of ordinance or rules; warrantees stops and investigations of motor vehicles; issuance of citations; enforcement of federal or foreign out-of service orders; penalties for violations of out-of-service orders. 
(a)  Except as provided in sections 33.151.9, 33.151.10 and 33.151.11, any person, driver, or motor carrier, as defined by 49 CFR 390.5, who violates this article or a rule adopted by reference under this article, or permits or requires any person to violate this article or a rule adopted by reference under this article, is responsible for a civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation. 
(b)  A Owosso motor carrier enforcement police officer, with probable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is being operated in violation of this article or a rule adopted by reference under this article, may stop the motor vehicle and inspect the motor vehicle. If a violation is found, the officer may issue a notice to appear for that violation. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-151.8. - Adoption by reference of rules promulgated by the Michigan Department of State Police. 
    Any rules promulgated by the Michigan Department of State Police necessary to the accomplishment of purposes of the Motor Carrier Safety Act, 1963 PA 181, MCL 480.11 et seq. are hereby adopted by reference, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-151.9. - Penalties; "serious safety defect" defined. 
(a)  A driver, person, or motor carrier, as defined by 49 CFR 390.5, who operates or who requires or permits the driver to operate a commercial motor vehicle with a serious safety defect in violation of this article or a rule adopted by reference under this article, is responsible for a civil infraction and shall be assessed a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. A fine ordered to be paid by the district court under this section shall be paid to the court and the court shall apply the fines to the city and the state for library purposes, as provided by law. 
(b)  As used in this section, "serious safety defect" means a violation of this article or a rule adopted by reference under this article relative to brakes, tires, steering, coupling devices, headlights, taillights, brake lights, and turn signals that results in the vehicle being placed out of service. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-151.10. - Offenses relating to operating or requiring or permitting operation of commercial motor vehicle in violation of provisions of ordinance or rules related to transportation of hazardous materials; penalties. 
(a)  A person who operates or who requires or permits a person to operate a commercial motor vehicle in violation of this article or a rule adopted by reference under this article related to the transportation of hazardous materials, if the vehicle is transporting a package required to be marked or labeled under 49 CFR parts 100 to 180, is responsible for a civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. 
(b)  A person or entity identified in subsection (a) who knowingly or willfully violates this article or a rule adopted by reference under this article is, upon conviction, guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both, for each violation. 
(c)  A person or entity identified in subsection 33-151.9(a), who causes injury or death during a violation of this article, while a vehicle identified in subsection (a) that is transporting a package required to be marked or labeled under 49 CFR parts 100 to 180 is, upon conviction, guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment of not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both, for each violation. 
(d)  An officer, employee, owner, or agent of an individual, partnership, corporation, or association, or their lessees or receiver appointed by a court that is the owner or user of any hazardous materials vehicle inspection or repair facility that violates a section of this article, or a rule adopted by reference under this article, related to the transportation of hazardous materials, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both, for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-151.11. - Issuance and contents of compliance and shut down orders; penalties for failure to comply with shut down orders. 
    As used in this section: 
(1)  "Immediate destination" means the next scheduled stop of a commercial vehicle already in motion where the cargo on board can be safely secured. 
(2)  "Motor carrier division" means the motor carrier division of the Michigan State Police and/or the City of Owosso. 
(3)  "Person" means an individual, driver, or employee or a firm, motor carrier, lessee, lesser, association, partnership, or corporation, and their affiliated or related successors, that undertakes to control, direct, conduct, or otherwise perform transportation by commercial motor vehicle upon the public highways of this city. 
(4)  "Shut down order" means a court order issued to the Owosso Police Department Motor Carrier Enforcement Division upon proof shown of unreasonable risk or an imminent hazard. 
(5)  "Unreasonable risk or an imminent hazard" shall be defined as any condition of commercial motor vehicle, employee, or commercial motor operation which creates, causes, or compounds the substantial likelihood that death, serious illness, or severe personal injury may occur if not discontinued immediately. 
(6)  Upon determination that the continued operation of commercial motor vehicles by a person upon the highways of this city and state poses an unreasonable risk or an imminent hazard to the public safety, the motor carrier division of the Owosso Police Department shall issue a compliance order. The order may direct a person to make certain changes, repairs, or alterations to the person's vehicles or operations, to comply with the laws of the city and the State of Michigan. In making an order, restrictions shall not be imposed on any employee or person beyond that required to abate the hazard. Any vehicle or driver operating during the specified time period of the order shall be in compliance with all applicable laws and rules. 
(7)  A compliance order shall include the name and address of the person and the chief operating officer of the person, the reason or reasons for the order, and the requirements or conditions that must be met for rescission of the order. The order shall also include a statement that the person has a set time limit to comply with the order. If the set time limit expires and the person is not in compliance with the order, the motor carrier division of the Owosso Police Department may seek a shut down order from the 66th Judicial District Court. The Motor Carrier Division of the Owosso Police Department shall set the time limit for compliance, with the compliance order to be not less than thirty (30) days and not more than one hundred eighty (180) days. 
(8)  Upon petition to the 66th Judicial District Court by the motor carrier division of the Owosso Police Department, the court may issue a shut down order. The order shall direct a vehicle or vehicles or employee or employees out of service from further operations, or shall direct a person to cease all or part of the person's commercial motor vehicle operation. In making such an order, restrictions shall not be imposed on any employee or person beyond that required to abate the hazard. 
(9)  A shut down order shall include the name and address of the person and the chief operating officer of the person, the reason or reasons for the order, the requirements or conditions that must be met for rescission of the order, and a statement of the right of appeal. 
(10)  An order to any person to cease all or part of its operation shall not prevent vehicles in transit at the time the order is served from proceeding to their immediate destinations, unless that vehicle or person is specifically ordered out of service. However, vehicles and drivers proceeding to their immediate destination shall be subject to compliance upon arrival. 
(11)  A person who fails to comply with a shut down order is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation, or by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both. A person or vehicle found operating on the highway of this city while under a shut down order shall be immediately stopped, and impounded or arrested. The owner or lessee of the vehicle shall be responsible for any costs incurred during impoundment. The vehicle shall be released upon the court's determination that there is compliance with the order. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-151.12. - Venue of prosecutions under this article. 
    When this article or a rule adopted by reference under this article has been violated, the offense may be prosecuted in the 66th Judicial District Court if the motor vehicle, driver or operator implicated was situated in or passed through the city when the offense was committed. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-151.13. - Incidents involving transportation of hazardous materials; notification of state police and fire department. 
    Immediately following any of the following occurrences involving the transportation of hazardous materials, the owner, driver, or lessee, or representative of the owner, driver, or lessee, shall notify the motor carrier division of the department of state police, the motor carrier division of the Owosso Police Department and the Owosso Fire Department of the known details regarding the incident. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-151.14. - Vehicle combination transporting combustible liquids; requirements; information required to be on file; retention and transfer of information; applicability of requirements in subsections (b) and (c); transport of flammable liquids, gases, or compressed gases by vehicle combinations, equipment requirements; retention of records regarding devices; compliance with other requirements by motor vehicles transporting flammable liquids or gases. 
(a)  A truck tractor pulling a semitrailer and a trailer, or pulling two (2) semitrailers, shall not transport a combustible liquid unless the vehicle combination meets the following requirements: 
(1)  Is equipped with a device that restricts the horizontal and vertical rotation of the dolly assemblage of the vehicle combination in a manner that maintains the longitudinal tracking of the dolly and semitrailer in a truck, tractor, semitrailer, and trailer combination, or the dolly and the truck in a truck and trailer combination. This device shall be welded to the vehicle in a workmanlike manner, and the efficiency of a weld shall not be less than eighty-five (85) percent of the mechanical properties of the adjacent metal in the chassis. 
(2)  Is equipped with stops in the spring hangers of each semitrailer and trailer in the vehicle combination in a manner that improves the stability of the vehicle combination by reducing the free play of the leaf spring suspension to a maximum of three-fourths (3/4) of an inch when the spring passes from tension to compression. 
(b)  The owner of the semitrailer or trailer to which the device described in subsection (a) is attached shall keep on file in their principal place of business the following information: 
(1)  Specifications and plans of the device. 
(2)  Name of the manufacturer of the device. 
(3)  Date of installation of the device 
(4)  An individual manufacturer identification number which is stamped or permanently affixed to the device. 
(c)  The information required in subsection (b) shall be kept by the vehicle's owner and shall be transferred to the new owner if the vehicle is sold, or may be destroyed if the vehicle is retired from service or scrapped. 
(d)  The requirements specified in subsections (b) and (c) apply to devices affixed to vehicles on or after January 8, 1996. 
(e)  Commercial motor vehicles used to transport flammable liquids, flammable gases, or compressed flammable gases shall also comply with section 33-150.11 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-151.15. - Adoption or enforcement of inconsistent ordinance or resolutions; disposition of fines for operation of vehicles with serious safety defects; issuance of multiple citations within twenty-four-hour period for violation of provisions substantially corresponding to MCL 257.683 to MCL 257.725a; dismissal of city citations upon production of proof of repair of equipment violations; requirements for classification as motor carrier enforcement officer. 
(a)  This article shall not be amended by the City of Owosso to adopt or enforce provisions which are inconsistent with the Motor Carrier Safety Act, being MCL 480.11 et seq. As used in this section, "inconsistent means a provision or rule that is more permissive or more restrictive than the Motor Carrier Safety Act, or that would require more action, equipment, or permits than required by the Motor Carrier Safety Act, or that prevents or obstructs compliance with the Motor Carrier Safety Act. 
(b)  The fine for operating a vehicle with a serious safety defect, which is ordered to be paid under this article or a resolution adopted by the City of Owosso that is consistent with section 33-151.9, shall be paid as follows: 
(1)  Seventy (70) percent to the City of Owosso. 
(2)  Thirty (30) percent for library purposes, as provided by law. 
(c)  Subsection 33-151.14(b) does not apply to a fine ordered to be paid for a case in which the citation is dismissed, as set forth below. 
(d)  The owner or operator of a commercial motor vehicle shall not be issued more than one (1) citation for each violation of the provisions of this article regulating the operation of a commercial motor vehicle and substantially corresponding to 683 to 725a of the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.683 to MCL 257.725a, within a twenty-four-hour period. If the owner or operator of a commercial motor vehicle is issued a citation by the City of Owosso for an equipment violation that does not result in the vehicle being placed out of service, the court shall dismiss the citation if the owner or operator of that commercial motor vehicle provides written proof of the court within fourteen (14) days after the citation is issued showing that the defective equipment indicated in the citation has been repaired. 
(e)  In order to be classified as a motor carrier enforcement officer, an Owosso police officer must have training equal to the minimum training requirements, including any annual training updates, established by the Michigan Department of State Police for an officer of the motor carrier division of the Michigan Department of State Police. A police officer who has received training equal to these minimum training requirements before the effective date of this article is considered a motor carrier enforcement officer for purposes of the Michigan Motor Carrier Safety Act and this article. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-151.16. - Transfer of hazardous materials on highways, roads, streets, or alleys; overfilling of containers during transfers; penalties. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), a person, driver, owner, carrier, lessee, or lesser shall not transfer or allow to be transferred a hazardous material from a cargo tank, portable tank, or any other container to any cargo tank, portable tank, fuel tank, or any other container on a highway, road, street, or alley within the city. 
(b)  Subsection (a) does not apply to the following transfer situations: 
(1)  Fueling machinery or equipment for construction, farm, and maintenance use. 
(2)  Fueling emergency vehicles. 
(3)  Under emergency conditions, a transfer may be made provided it is approved by the Owosso Fire Chief, or his/her designee and the Bureau of Fire Service created in section 1b of the Fire Prevention Code, 1941 PA 207, MCL 29.1b, or a hazardous materials investigator of the motor carrier division of the Michigan Department of State Police pursuant to their respective authority under the Fire Prevention Code, 1941 PA 207, MCL 29.1 to MCL 29.34. 
(c)  A person shall not overfill a container, including a storage tank, during a transfer of a hazardous material from or into a vehicle, so that hazardous material is released from the package or container. 
(d)  The penalty for violating this section is as prescribed in section 33-151.10. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-151.17. - Transportation or allowance of transportation of vehicle carrying hazardous materials on publicly maintained route. 
(a)  A person, driver, owner, carrier, lessee, or lesser shall not transport or allow to be transported a vehicle carrying hazardous materials in an amount required to be placarded under title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations on a publicly maintained route as identified on the national hazardous materials route registry as determined by the United States Department of Transportation under title 49 CFR. 
(b)  The penalty for violating this section shall be as prescribed in section 33-151.10. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-151.18. - Enforcement of civil infractions; procedure for provision of security and appearance by nonresidents stopped for civil infractions; disposition by police officers at end of tour of duty of certificates or deposits of money taken as security for appearance; entry of default judgment and forfeiture of posted certificate or deposit. 
(a)  A civil infraction action shall be enforced in the manner provided for enforcement under this chapter. 
(b)  When a person who is not a resident of the State of Michigan is stopped for a civil infraction in the City of Owosso, the police officer making the stop may take security for the nonresidents appearance in court. The person stopped may recognize to the officer or to the court for his or her appearance by leaving with the officer or court a guaranteed appearance certificate or a sum of money not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(c)  If a magistrate is available for an immediate appearance, upon demand of the person stopped, the officer immediately shall take the nonresident driver before the magistrate to answer to the civil infraction alleged. If the nonresident defendant requests a hearing, the hearing shall be scheduled and the defendant shall leave with the court the guaranteed appearance certificate or deposit as security for appearance at the scheduled informal or formal hearing. 
(d)  The officer receiving a guaranteed appearance certificate or deposit of money shall give a receipt to the person stopped for the guaranteed appearance certificate or the money deposited together with the written citation. 
(e)  At or before the completion of his or her tour of duty, a police officer taking a certificate or deposit of money shall deliver the certificate or deposit of money and the citation either to the court named in the citation or to the police chief or person authorized by the police chief to receive certificates or deposits. The police chief or person authorized by the police chief shall deposit the certificate or the money deposited and the citation with the court. Failure to deliver the money deposited shall be embezzlement of public money. 
(f)  If the person who posts a certificate or deposit fails to appear as required in the citation or fails to appear for a scheduled informal or formal hearing, the district court shall enter a default judgment against the person, and the guaranteed appearance certificate or money deposit shall be forfeited and applied to any civil fine or costs ordered. 
(g)  For purposes of this section, "guaranteed appearance certificate" means a card or certificate containing a printed statement that a surety company authorized to do business in Michigan guarantees the appearance of the person whose signature appears on the card or certificate and that the company, if the person fails to appear in court at the time of a scheduled informal or formal hearing or to pay any fine or costs imposed, will pay any fine, costs, or bond forfeiture imposed on the person in a total amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Sec. 33-151.19. - Prevention of throwing of water or other road surface substances from rear wheels of vehicles or combinations; use of flaps. 
    A truck, truck tractor, trailer, semitrailer, or any combination of these, when used on a highway, shall be constructed, equipped, or operated to prevent water or other road surface substances from being thrown from the rear wheels of the vehicle or combination at tangents exceeding twenty-two and one-half (221/2) degrees measured from the road surface. If a flap type device is used, it shall not have attached any type of lamp, breakable reflective material, or reflecting buttons nor may the device extend beyond the maximum width of the vehicle or combination. 
(Ord. No. 746, § 3, 9-3-13) 
Chapter 34 - UTILITIES AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Public utility services, Ch. 15. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; cable television, Ch. 9; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 13; flood protection, Ch. 14; nuisances, Ch. 18; planning, Ch. 23; subdivision regulations, Ch. 30. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GARBAGE AND RUBBISH[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 563, § 1, adopted August 18, 1997, has been treated as repealing Art. II, §§ 34-16 and 34-31-34-50, in its entirety, and adding a new Art. II, §§ 34-16 and 34-39-34-50. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1977, §§ 2.1-2.8, and 2.9(1)-(8), (10)-(12); and Ord. No. 356, adopted March 3, 1980. 
Cross reference- Waste materials and litter on premises having mechanical and electronic amusement devices, § 4-155; littering and distribution of handbills, § 18-46 et seq.; solid waste disposal for outdoor assemblies, § 20-29(7); litter on streets, § 29-136 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate disposal of garbage and rubbish, MCL 123.241 et seq., 123.361 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-16. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved incineration and approved garbage grinder shall mean incinerators and garbage grinders respectively, which conform in all respects to the requirements for incinerators and garbage grinders contained in the building code of the city. 
    Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other combustible materials. 
    Garbage means rejected food wastes including waste accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for food or that attend the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
    Recyclable materials means post-consumer waste materials collected with the intent of providing for their eventual reuse in the manufacture of other products. 
    Refuse means putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes and recyclable materials and includes garbage, rubbish and ashes. 
    Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes and recyclable materials, consisting of both combustible or noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, grass, bedding, crockery or litter of any kind that will be a detriment to the public health and safety. 
    Vehicle means any automobile, truck, trailer, semi-trailer, tractor, any self-propelled or mechanically driven vehicle or any vehicle in anywise attached to or connected or drawn by any self-propelled or mechanically driven vehicle or any conveyance, whether self-propelled or mechanically driven, used for the transportation of garbage or rubbish. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 1, 8-18-97) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 34-17-34-38. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COLLECTION 

Sec. 34-39. - Rules, regulations. 
    The city manager shall make such rules and regulations governing refuse collection, transportation and disposal as may be deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 34-40. - Reserved. 
Sec. 34-41. - Receptacles-Generally. 
    No person shall operate, use or cause to be driven or used upon the streets, alleys or public ways of the city, any vehicle transporting or delivering any refuse unless the same is so carried, carted or conveyed in an appropriate receptacle, which receptacle shall be covered at all times with a suitable cover. Any receptacle so used shall not be made of wood and shall always be kept in a clean condition. Any person transporting any refuse shall securely cover and secure the load so that no part of the load shall be lost while being transported. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 34-42. - Reserved. 
Sec. 34-43. - Owner's duty as to refuse. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant, or person in charge of any dwelling, house, store or other business establishment, manufacturing company or other building where refuse accumulates to provide approved refuse receptacles, to cause to be placed therein refuse or other waste material created or accumulated on the premises owned or controlled by him or her, and to provide for the collection or disposal of such refuse or waste material on such regular basis as is necessary to avoid the creation of a public nuisance. 
(b)  Except as permitted in section 34-49, it shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain containers for garbage, waste, rubbish or debris of any nature in front of a residence or structure or in the area from the front of the residence or structure to the center of the roadway, and if on a vacant lot, then not closer than thirty (30) feet back from the lot line at the street. 
(c)  All rates and charges for the use of garbage or refuse service under the provisions of this division shall be determined by contractual agreement between the citizen using the garbage and rubbish collection service and the provider of the garbage and rubbish collection service. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 34-44. - Construction wastes. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner, contractor or other person responsible for construction work to remove from the premises within a reasonable time after completion of such construction work, all surplus construction material and refuse building material. Such materials shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 34-45. - Uncollectible refuse. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place in any receptacle for collection any material that might either endanger the collection personnel or that would be detrimental to the normal operation of disposal such as gaseous, solid or liquid poisons, dead animals, ammunition, explosives or any material that possesses heat sufficient to ignite any other collected materials. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 34-46. - Refuse littering and accumulation. 
    No paper, lawn cuttings, or rakings, leaves, weeds, ashes or any other refuse material whatsoever shall be thrown or swept into any street, gutter, intake, alley, vacant lot, park, greenbelt, or other property whether public or private. It shall be the duty of every tenant, lessee, owner or occupant of any property at all times to maintain the premises in a clean and orderly condition, permitting no deposit or accumulation of materials other than those ordinarily attendant upon the day to day use for which the premises are legally intended. It shall be unlawful to bury any animal or vegetable wastes anywhere in the city and it shall be unlawful to deposit, throw, or leave refuse on the premises of any other person. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 34-47. - Disposal of refuse. 
    No person shall dispose of any garbage within the city other than in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 34-48. - Accumulation and disposal of refuse. 
    Any refuse accumulated or stored outside of a dwelling or building on any premises, shall be stored in receptacles meeting the requirements of this article. No rubbish may be stored or accumulated which is contaminated by any garbage, unless stored as garbage. Refuse shall be disposed of only to a refuse collector, except that any person may dispose of his or her own refuse as follows: 
(1)  By an approved incinerator or approved garbage grinder located within a building. 
(2)  Where such refuse consists wholly of material which will burn readily without objectionable odor, by outside incineration, but only in approved containers located in a safe place at least twenty-five (25) feet from any structures or property line. No person shall burn any rubbish, except leaves, within thirty (30) feet of any street line. On any premises where any building or structure exists, no rubbish, except leaves, shall be burned in any part of the front yard or in any side yard abutting on any street. The terms "front yard" and "side yard" shall have the meanings defined in section 38-5. 
(3)  By transporting the same to a solid waste transfer facility or state-licensed landfill, but only in accordance with the rules and regulations pertaining thereto. 
(4)  Where such refuse consists of putrescible solid waste, by composting in such a manner as to minimize the creation of objectionable odors and the attraction of animals. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 1, 8-18-97) 
Sec. 34-49. - Refuse collection-Residential collection. 
    The following rules and regulations shall apply to residential refuse collection in the city: 
(1)  The type of service to be desired by the resident may be either back or side door pick-up or curb side pick-up. 
(2)  If curb side pick-up is selected by the resident, refuse is to be placed inside the curb so that the same shall not in any way be in the traffic portion of the street, and shall be placed inside the curb for pick-up on the morning no earlier than 4:00 p.m. the day before the day of collection in residential areas. Any containers belonging to the resident that are left at the curb after collection of refuse are to be removed to the back or side yard on or before 12:00 midnight, of the day of collection. Materials left at the curb for pick-up must be in city-approved containers. The responsibility of compliance with the provisions of this section shall be with the property owner or person placing refuse at the curb. Any violator of the provisions of this section will be immediately ticketed by the police department. 
(3)  Collection shall be conducted on the following prescribed routes and schedules and no collection shall be allowed on any dates other than those set forth below: 
a.  Tuesday-South of M-21 
b.  Thursday-North of M-21 
Collection shall begin no earlier than 7:00 a.m., and finished no later than 6:00 p.m., on the day of collection. 
Non-work holidays will move the schedule back one day during those weeks, with Saturday added as a day of pick-up. 
(4)  Collections shall be made once each week for each customer. 
(5)  Quantity of material to be collected shall be limited only by the arrangement the resident has with his or her collector. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 1, 8-18-97; Ord. No. 699, § 1, 7-7-08; Ord. No. 765, § 1, 5-4-15) 
Sec. 34-50. - Same-Commercial, multiple residential collection. 
    Refuse collection from commercial or multiple residential or other establishments using collector-owned containers shall be the responsibility of the owner of the establishment. The following rules and regulations shall apply to this type of collection: 
(1)  Containers shall remain covered at all times. 
(2)  Sufficient containers shall be required so that no overflowing shall occur. 
(3)  Containers shall be kept clean and odor free. 
(4)  All putrescible material shall be in tightly sealed plastic bags before being placed in containers. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 1, 8-18-97) 
Secs. 34-51-34-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Plumbing code, § 8-101 et seq.; water facilities for outdoor assemblies, § 20-29(2). 

Sec. 34-66. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City water distribution system shall mean all mains, connections, pipes, meters, hydrants and appurtenances connected with or served by the city water system. 
    Service connection shall mean a connection serving a single water customer consisting of one (1) water connection, one (1) curb stop and one (1) meter. 
    Water connection shall mean that part of the city water distribution system connecting the water main with the premises served. 
    Water main shall mean that part of the city water distribution system located within easement lines or streets designed to supply more than one (1) water connection. 
(Code 1977, § 2.21) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-67. - Water service connections, connection charges. 
(a)  Application for water service connection(s) shall be made to the public utilities department on forms prescribed and furnished by it. Water service connections and water meters shall be installed, maintained and replaced in accordance with applicable rules and standards of the public utilities department and applicable plumbing code provisions. The size of the service line and meter, and installation details, are subject to review and approval by the director. 
(b)  The city shall be responsible for the installation, maintenance and replacement in like size of that portion of the water connection from the water main to and including the curb stop and stop box, or through the water meter pit if the meter is located in a pit in the public right-of-way or water easement. The property owner or customer shall be responsible for the installation, maintenance and replacement of that portion of the water connection from the curb stop, or meter pit if such meter pit is located in the public right-of-way or water easement, to and within the premises being served. 
(c)  Water meters shall generally be supplied by the city. Any water meter provided by the customer shall conform to city standards and specifications, and shall be approved by the director prior to installation or start of service. All meters shall be owned by and under the control of the city. The city shall be responsible for the cost of meter replacement except in the case of a customer requested change in meter size, or damage to the meter attributable to the customer, or agent or tenant of the customer. 
(d)  Connection charges for new water service connections, or for an increase in service size or capacity, in effect on the effective date of this ordinance shall remain in effect until changed by resolution of the council, which may thereafter be modified or revised by council resolution. Such connection charges may include: recovery of costs for water system capacity attributable to the new user, recovery of costs for water distribution piping serving the user if not previously assessed, recovery of city costs for the initial installation of the service connection and initial provision of the water meter, and recovery of city costs for increasing the service connection and/or meter size. In addition the connection charge schedule may include permit application and review fees, and inspection fees. 
(Code 1977, § 2.22; Ord. No. 670, § 1, 12-5-05) 
Sec. 34-68. - Turning on water service. 
    No person, other than an authorized employee of the public services department, shall turn on or off any water service, except that a licensed plumber may turn on water service for testing his or her work (when it must be immediately turned off) or upon receiving written order from the department, provided, that upon written permit from the department, water may be turned on for construction purposes only, prior to the granting of a certificate of occupancy for the premises, and upon payment of the charges applicable thereto, which shall include the connection fee, meter installation fee and deposit. 
(Code 1977, § 2.23) 
Sec. 34-69. - Water meters. 
    All premises using water shall be metered. No person, except a public services department employee shall break or injure the seal or change the location of, alter or interfere in any way with any water meter. The public services director, with the approval of the city manager, may authorize service on flat rate charges where it is not practical to install a meter. 
(Code 1977, § 2.24) 
Sec. 34-70. - Meter location. 
    Meters shall be set in an accessible, inside location, and in a manner satisfactory to the public services director. Where the premises contain no basement or cellar, the meter shall be installed outside in a meter pit or box, the location of which shall be approved by the director. Where it is necessary to set the meter in a pit or box, such pit or box shall be built at the expense of the owner as directed by the director. Owners who refuse to allow an inside water meter installation shall pay a monthly surcharge in an amount to be determined by the director. 
(Code 1977, § 2.25; Ord. No. 403, § 1, 2-21-83) 
Sec. 34-71. - Access to meters. 
    The public services department shall have the right to shut off the supply of water to any premises where the department is not able to obtain access to the meter. Any qualified employee of the department shall at all reasonable hours, have the right to enter the premises where such meters are installed for the purpose of reading, testing, removing or inspecting same and no person shall hinder, obstruct, or interfere with such employee in the lawful discharge of his or her duties in relation to the care and maintenance of such water meter. 
(Code 1977, § 2.26) 
Sec. 34-72. - Reimbursement for damage. 
    Any damage which a meter may sustain resulting from carelessness of the owner, agent, or tenant or from neglect of either of them to properly secure and protect the meter, as well as any damage which may be wrought by frost, hot water, or steam backing from a boiler, shall be paid by the owner of the property to the city on presentation of a bill which shall be based on time and materials, and shall be collected as specified in article V of this chapter for the collection of service charges. 
(Code 1977, § 2.27) 
Sec. 34-73. - Meter failures. 
    If any meter shall fail to register properly, the public services department shall estimate the consumption on the basis of former consumption and bill accordingly. 
(Code 1977, § 2.28) 
Sec. 34-74. - Inaccurate meters. 
    A consumer may require that the meter be tested. If the meter is found accurate, a charge as prescribed by resolution of the council will be made. If the meter is found defective, it shall be repaired or an accurate meter installed and no charge shall be made. 
(Code 1977, § 2.29) 
Sec. 34-75. - Accuracy required. 
    A meter shall be considered accurate if, when tested it registers not to exceed five (5) percent more or five (5) percent less than the actual quantity of water passing through it. If a meter registers in excess of five (5) percent more than the actual quantity of water passing through it, it shall be considered "fast" to that extent. If a meter registers in excess of five (5) percent less than the actual quantity of water passing through it, it shall be considered "slow" to that extent. 
(Code 1977, § 2.30) 
Sec. 34-76. - Bill adjustment. 
    If a meter has been tested at the request of a consumer and shall have been determined to register "fast," the city shall credit the consumer with a sum equal to the percent "fast" multiplied by the amount of all bills incurred by the consumer, within the three (3) months prior to the test, and if a meter so tested is determined to register "slow," the public services department may collect from the consumer a sum equal to the percent "slow" multiplied by the amount of all the bills incurred by the consumer for the prior three (3) months. When the department on its own initiative makes a test of a water meter, it shall be done without cost to the consumer, other than his or her paying the amount due the city for water used by him or her as above provided, if the meter is found to be "slow." 
(Code 1977, § 2.31) 
Sec. 34-77. - Hydrant use. 
    No person shall open or use any fire hydrant connected with the city water distribution system unless duly authorized by the city to do so nor in any case for other than a public purpose. 
(Code 1977, § 2.32) 
Sec. 34-78. - Water emergency orders. 
(a)  The city manager may regulate, limit or prohibit the use of water for any purpose. Such regulations shall restrict less essential water uses to the extent deemed necessary to assure an adequate supply for essential domestic and commercial needs and for firefighting. No such regulation, limitation or prohibition shall be effective until twenty-four (24) hours after the publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Any person violating any such rule or regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as prescribed in section 1-8. 
(b)  In addition, the city manager may order that the water service to the premises of any person refusing to comply with water emergency regulations be shut off for a period not longer than ten (10) days. 
(Code 1977, § 2.33) 
Sec. 34-79. - Additional regulations. 
    The city manager may make and issue additional rules and regulations concerning the water distribution system, connections thereto, meter installations and maintenance, connection and meter installation fees, hydrants and water mains and the appurtenances thereto, not inconsistent herewith. Such rules and regulations shall be effective upon approval by the council. The rules and regulations now in effect shall continue until changed in accordance with this section. 
(Code 1977, § 2.34) 
Sec. 34-80. - Injury to facilities. 
    No person, except an employee of the city in the performance of his or her duties shall wilfully or carelessly break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the city water distribution system. 
(Code 1977, § 2.35) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq. 
Sec. 34-81. - Rules, regulations and fees. 
    The following rules, regulations and fees shall apply to water services in the city: 
(1)  All costs of changing the meter size in any existing installation shall be borne by the customer. 
(2)  All meters of sizes one (1) inch or larger shall be provided with by-pass valves. 
(3)  Investigation of abnormally high consumption by public services department personnel shall terminate at the meter unless the customer requests further investigation beyond the meter and agrees in advance to pay labor charges for such further work. 
(4)  Service costs shall be established by council resolution. 
(Code 1977, § 2.36; Ord. No. 374, § I, 4-20-81) 
Sec. 34-82. - Water supply cross connection rules. 
(a)  The water supply cross connection rules of the state department of environmental quality, being R 325.11401 to R 325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code, are adopted by reference as part of this article. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the public services department and as approved by the state department of environmental quality. 
(c)  A representative of the city shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. On request, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(d)  The public services department of the city is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this article exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection(s) has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  All testable backflow prevention devices shall be tested initially upon installation to assure the device is working properly. Subsequent testing of devices shall be conducted at the time interval specified by the public services department and in accordance with requirements of the state department of environmental quality and the state plumbing code. The owner of the water service and device shall be responsible for testing and maintenance or replacement of the device. Device testing is to be done by an individual approved by the public services department. Approval is to be based on evidence of proper training, equipment, and certification as required and issued by the state. The approved tester shall certify the device test results to the public services department on forms provided or approved by the department. 
(f)  The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this article and by the state plumbing code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
WATER UNSAFE 
FOR DRINKING 
(g)  This article does not supersede, but is supplementary to, the state plumbing code. 
(Code 1977, § 2.37; Ord. No. 674, § 1, 6-19-06) 
Sec. 34-83. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the public services director with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  A violation of the provisions of this article shall be considered a public nuisance per se and any action authorized or permitted by law for the abatement of public nuisances may be instituted by the city in regard to such violation. 
(c)  Whenever a person has violated any provision of this article, the city may take any legal action necessary to recover damages sustained by the city as a result thereof. 
(Ord. No. 674, § 1, 6-19-06) 
Secs. 34-84-34-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWER SERVICE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Plumbing code, § 8-101 et seq.; liquid waste disposal for outdoor assemblies, § 20-29(6). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-101. - Management. 
    The sewage works of the city is under the management of the public services director or his or her designated representative who may implement this article by making such rules, regulations, determinations and requirements as he or she deems necessary and advisable for the safe, efficient, and proper operation of the sewage works subject, however, to the rights, powers and duties with respect thereto which are reserved by law to the council. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.40), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-102. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized representative means: 
(1)  In the case of a corporation, a president, secretary, treasurer or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function; 
(2)  In the case of a partnership or proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor; and 
(3)  An authorized representative of the individual designated above if: 
a.  Such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge originated; 
b.  The authorization is in writing and 
c.  The written authorization is submitted to the public services director. 
    Best management practices or BMPs means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in section 34-168. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    BOD or biochemical oxygen demand shall mean the quantity of oxygen, expressed in milligrams per liter, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five (5) days at a temperature of twenty (20) degrees Celsius. The laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in standard methods. 
    Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system that receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and convey it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Bypass shall mean the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
    Categorical pretreatment standard shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits or requirements promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    COD or chemical oxygen demand shall mean the quantity of oxygen consumed in the chemical oxidation of organic matter expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Combined sewer shall mean a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Compatible pollutant shall mean the pollutants which are treated and removed to a substantial degree by the treatment works. These pollutants include COD, BOD suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform, phosphorus and its compounds, nitrogen and its compounds. 
    Environmental protection agency or EPA shall mean the United States Environmental Protection Agency or, also be used as a designation for the administrator or other authorized official of such agency. 
    Federal act or Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by the Clean Water Act and the Water Quality Act of 1987, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., and rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
    Garbage shall mean the residue from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
    Ground garbage shall mean the residue from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely in suspension under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Industrial user shall mean any nondomestic user discharging or potentially discharging, from any nondomestic source to the city's wastewater system, pollutants which are subject to regulation under the Federal Act, state law or local ordinance. 
    Industrial waste shall mean liquid waste carried from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Instantaneous limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Interference shall mean any inhibition or disruption of the city's wastewater system, treatment process, operations, or residuals management program, which may cause or contribute to a violation of the city's NPDES permit. 
    NPDES permit shall mean a national pollution discharge elimination system permit. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
    Natural outlet shall mean any outlet, including storm drains, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    New source shall mean any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section provided that: 
(1)  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
(2)  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(3)  The production or wastewater generating processes are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. 
    Nondomestic user shall mean any user of the wastewater system that discharges wastes other than or in addition to water-carried wastes from toilet, kitchen, laundry, bathing or other facilities used for household purposes. 
    Normal strength domestic wastewater shall mean wastewater with a BOD of two hundred twenty (220) mg/l, suspended solids of three hundred (300) mg/l, phosphorus of ten (10) mg/l, ammonia-nitrogen of twenty (20) mg/l, a pH between 6.5 and 9.5, and not containing a concentration or quantity of other constituents which may interfere with the normal wastewater treatment process. 
    Pass-through shall mean a discharge which exits the wastewater treatment system into the receiving water in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, causes a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agent or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
    pH shall mean the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in moles per liter. 
    Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, commercial, and agricultural waste or any other contaminant. 
    Pretreatment shall mean reducing the amount of pollutants, eliminating pollutants, or altering the nature of pollutant properties to a less harmful state prior to discharge into a public sewer. The reduction or alteration can be by physical, chemical, or biological processes, process changes, or by other means. Dilution is not considered pretreatment unless expressly authorized by an applicable national pretreatment standard for a particular industrial category. 
    Pretreatment requirement means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standard or standard shall mean any local, state or federal regulation containing pollutant discharge prohibitions, limitations or requirements applicable to discharges to the city's wastewater system. 
    Public services director or director shall mean the head of the public services department or his duly authorized representative. 
    Public sewer shall mean a sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the city. It shall also include sewers within or outside the city boundaries that serve one (1) or more persons and ultimately discharge into the city's wastewater facilities, even though those sewers may not have been constructed with city funds. 
    Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both and into which storm, surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
    Sewage or wastewater shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments. 
    Sewage works or wastewater system shall mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit that conveys wastewater or drainage water. 
    Significant industrial user. 
(1)  Except as provided in paragraph (2) below, the term "significant industrial user" means: 
a.  Any industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N; or 
b.  Any other industrial user that discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day or more of process wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the public services director on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the operation of the wastewater system or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.(f)(6)). 
(2)  Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subparagraph (1)b. above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the operation of the wastewater system or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the public services director may at any time on his own initiative or in response to a request from an industrial user, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
    Significant noncompliance (SNC) means the noncompliance status of an industrial user with a violation or pattern of violations that meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including an instantaneous limit, as defined in section 34-102; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including an instantaneous limit, as defined in section 34-102, multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined in section 34-102(daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the public services director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health and safety of city personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in an emergency suspension of service to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices, which the public services director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Slug discharge shall mean any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. 
    Standard methods shall mean the laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association or Methods given in 40 CFR 136 "Guidelines for Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants." 
    Storm drain shall mean a drain, sewer or open ditch for conveying stormwater, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water discharged in accordance with a NPDES permit. 
    Suspended solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids. 
    Toxic or hazardous pollutant shall mean any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed in accordance with section 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or included in the critical materials register of the state water resources commission. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.41), 6-3-85; Ord. No. 490, § 1, 4-20-92; Ord. No. 710, § 1, 5-4-09) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 34-103-34-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED 

Sec. 34-121. - Waste deposits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.42), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-122. - Water pollution. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of local, state and federal regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.43), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-123. - Sewer connection required. 
    The owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may hereafter be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.44), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-124. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  Except for facilities approved by the county health department in accordance with the county environmental health code and approved by the public services director, it shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater within the city. 
(b)  The owner shall operate and maintain any private disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(c)  Within sixty (60) days after notice that a public sanitary sewer is available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sanitary sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article. Any septic tanks, cesspools and similar disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and wastewater and filled with clean gravel or dirt. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.45), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-125. - Storm drains. 
(a)  Stormwater and all other uncontaminated drainage shall be discharged to storm drains or to natural outlets as approved by the public services director and other regulating agencies. Industrial or commercial process water, cooling water or other discharges may be discharged to a storm drain or natural outlet only under a NPDES permit. 
(b)  Whenever a separate building sewer is required to accommodate surface runoff or groundwater and provided a storm drain is available contiguous to the property requiring the separate building drain, the building drain shall be connected directly to the storm drain. All separate building drains to accommodate surface runoff and groundwater discharge shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.46), 6-3-85) 
Secs. 34-126-34-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC SEWERS 

Sec. 34-141. - Permit required. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer, storm drain or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the public services director. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.47), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-142. - Permit application. 
    The owner or his or her agent shall make application for permit on a form provided by the city. The permit application for all industrial users and certain nondomestic users, as determined by the public services director, shall be supplemented by plans, specifications, reports and other information required by the director in order to implement the provisions of this article. All connection charges and permit fees shall be paid in full, together with any deposits for work in the public right-of-way, prior to issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.48), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-143. - Protection of capacity for existing users. 
    The public services director shall not issue a permit for connection to the city sanitary sewer system or wastewater treatment facilities unless there is sufficient capacity, not legally committed to other users, available for the wastewater to be discharged in all downstream sewers, lift stations, force mains and the wastewater treatment plant. Capacity determinations or nondomestic users may include considerations such as, but not limited to, the concentration and mass loading of the pollutants to be discharged as well as flow or volume considerations. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.49), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-144. - Connection charges. 
(a)  Upon recommendation of the public services director and approval by resolution of the council, a schedule of charges and fees for connection to a public sewer shall be established to recover the city's cost in providing this service to the property and user to be served. In addition to recovery of capital cost the charge schedule may include permit application and review fees and inspection fees for various user classifications. 
(b)  All costs and expense incidental to the installation of the building sewer and connection to the public sewer, including street repair and restoration in the public right-of-way, shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.50), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-145. - Separate building sewer. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any responsibility or obligation for drainage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.51), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-146. - Abandoned building sewers. 
(a)  Prior to the demolition of any building or facility containing a building sewer connection to a public sewer, the building sewer connection shall be abandoned and plugged in accordance with procedures and specifications set forth by the public services director. 
(b)  Abandoned building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the public services director, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.52), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-147. - Building sewer standards. 
(a)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, connecting to the public sewer, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in application thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F. Manual of Practice 9 shall apply. 
(b)  The building sanitary sewer and connection to the public sewer shall be reasonably gas tight and water tight to prevent infiltration or inflow of surface or ground water and exfiltration of sewage. The public services director shall establish standards and testing requirements for infiltration/exfiltration in accordance with good engineering practice. The director may require such tests on any building sewer prior to approval and commencement of service. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.53), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-148. - Grade. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer sanitary sewage as carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.54), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-149. - Supervision. 
    The applicant for a building sewer connection or abandonment permit shall notify the public services director when the building sewer connection to or abandonment from the public sewer is ready for inspection. All connections and abandonments shall be made under the supervision of the director. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.55), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-150. - Excavations. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation or abandonment shall be adequately guarded and lighted so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city and in accordance with chapter 29. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.56), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-151. - Maintenance of building sewer. 
    The building sewer, including that portion in the public right-of-way, shall be maintained, repaired and replaced as required by the owner at no cost to the city. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.57), 6-3-85) 
Secs. 34-152-34-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REGULATION OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGES 

Sec. 34-166. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This division sets forth uniform requirements for discharges into the city's wastewater collection and treatment systems, and enables the city to protect public health in conformity with all applicable local, state and federal laws relating thereto. 
(b)  The objectives of this division are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's sewage works which will interfere with the normal operation of the system or interfere with the use or disposal of the resulting municipal sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's sewage works which will pass through the treatment works or otherwise be incompatible with such works; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system. 
(c)  This article provides for the regulation of discharges to the city sewage works through the enforcement of administrative regulations. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.58), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-167. - Right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to amend this article to revise limitations or requirements on persons discharging to the sewage works in order to meet the intent and objectives of section 34-166. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.59), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-168. - General discharge prohibitions. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any pollutant, waste or wastewater which will pass through or cause interference with the operation or performance of the wastewater system. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly to the wastewater system, any of the following: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, toluene, xylene, fuel oil, oil or any substances which by reason of their nature or quantity may create a fire or explosive hazard or be injurious to the wastewater system or its operation, including but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit or sixty (60) degrees Centigrade using test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or hazardous pollutants as solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity (either singly or by interaction with other wastes) to interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, create any hazard in the receiving waters, or interfere with the operation of the wastewater system or the utilization or disposal of sludges or residuals; 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.0 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage to structures or equipment, or which may cause a safety hazard; 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater system such as, but not limited to, grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, or any material which can be disposed of as trash. 
(5)  Heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment process resulting in interference but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the treatment works influent exceeds one hundred four (104) Fahrenheit (forty (40) degrees Celsius); 
(6)  Any storm water, surface or subsurface drainage or roof runoff, except that contaminated surface drainage from limited areas may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by written permission of the public services director. Such discharge shall be subject to sewer use charges as determined by the director. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the public services director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(8)  Any substance with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions; 
(9)  Any slug discharge, in such volume or strength as to cause interference with the sewage works or overload the collection system. 
(10)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. Such oils which may be separated by flotation and skimming or removed by standard oil and grease traps, sumps or traps shall not be discharged. Used oils, such as automotive engine oil, shall not be disposed of by dumping or discharging to the sanitary sewer system. 
(11)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the wastewater system in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(12)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the public services director. 
(13)  Any wastes which are listed hazardous wastes in 40 CFR 261.30-33 pursuant to Section 3001 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.60), 6-3-85; Ord. No. 490, § 1, 4-20-92) 
Sec. 34-169. - Federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
(a)  Compliance required. Users in regulated industrial subcategories, pursuant to the appropriate subpart of 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, shall meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. New sources shall install and have in operating condition, and shall "start-up" all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed ninety (90) days), new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards. 
(b)  Order of determination. The public services director shall set forth the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements for users subject to categorical standards through issuance of an order of determination pursuant to section 34-202. 
(c)  Category determination requests. In cases where it is not clear, or in dispute, whether a particular user is subject to categorical pretreatment standards, category determination requests shall be made in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(a). 
(d)  Removal credits. The public services director may apply, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.7 (Removal Credits), for modification of categorical pretreatment standards when the wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of the pollutant(s) in question. 
(e)  Baseline report for categorical dischargers. Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or one hundred eighty (180) days after a final administrative decision has been made upon a category determination submission in accordance with 40 CFR Section 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the city wastewater system shall submit to the public services director a report containing the information as required under 40 CFR 403.12(b). New sources subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall submit to the public services director a report containing the information as required under 40 CFR 403.12(b) at least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of discharge to the city wastewater system. New sources shall also be required to include in this report information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. 
(f)  Compliance date report. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of discharge from the regulated process, any user subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall submit to the public services director a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by such standards and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. Such reporting shall conform to the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b)(4-6). Where equivalent mass or concentration limits are established by the public services director for a user, this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's longterm production rate. Where a user is subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production, the report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified professional. 
(g)  Periodic compliance reports. Any user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard shall be required to submit periodic compliance reports to the public services director unless all the information required for the report is obtained by the city. Periodic compliance reports by the user shall conform to the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12 as set forth in an order of determination to the user by the public services director. 
(h)  Signatory requirements for reports. The reports required by (e), (f), and (g) above shall include the certification statement as set forth in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii), and shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.61), 6-3-85; Ord. No. 490, § 1, 4-20-92) 
Sec. 34-170. - Limitations on toxic and hazardous pollutants. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes except as authorized by an order of determination as issued by the public services director. The following numerical limitations were based on technical analysis of NPDES permit requirements, industrial loadings, sludge management practices and treatment process tolerance and efficiency as in place at the time of ordinance adoption and are intended to meet the objectives given in section 34-166. The technical support documentation for numerical limitations is on file as a part of the city's industrial pretreatment program. The director may set limitations lower than the limitations established below if in his or her review changing factors in the technical support documentation necessitate more stringent limitations in order to meet the objectives given in section 34-166. The director may establish numerical limitations for substances not specifically limited below in order to meet the objectives of section 34-166. The director may set, by an order of determination for individual dischargers, alternative or additional mass limitations provided adequate provision for flow metering and sampling are provided by the discharger. 
(1)  These limitations shall be daily maximum limitations. Compliance or noncompliance may be determined by analysis of: Twenty-four-hour flow proportioned samples, twenty-four-hour composite samples, or one (1) or more grab samples averaged over a twenty-four-hour period as determined to be appropriate by the public services director for the discharge and parameters to be measured. No discharge to the city's wastewater system shall exceed the following limitations unless so authorized in an order of determination from the public services director which sets alternative mass limitations for the specific parameter: 
1.0 mg/l Arsenic 
0.1 mg/l Cadmium 
2.7 mg/l Chromium (total) 
2.0 mg/l Copper 
0.6 mg/l Lead 
1.0 mg/l Nickel 
4.5 mg/l Zinc 
0.0002 mg/l Mercury 
0.07 mg/l Selenium 
1.0 mg/l Silver 
0.56 mg/l Cyanide (free) 
1.0 mg/l Trichloroetheylene 
No detectable discharge PCB's (total) 
(2)  Specific limitations on compatible pollutants. 
a.  These limitations shall be daily maximum limitations. Compliance or noncompliance is to be based on twenty-four-hour composite samples. No discharge to the city's wastewater system shall exceed the following limitations unless so authorized in an order of determination by the public services director pursuant to subsection b. below: 
500 mg/l BOD-5 (or CBOD-5) 
1000 mg/l Suspended solids 
100 mg/l Total phosphorous 
100 mg/l Ammonia 
b.  The public services director may specify alternate mass and/or concentration limits for compatible pollutants for individual industrial users through issuance of an order of determination. Such alternate limitations shall be based on plant treatment capacity available for the user, treatability of the wastewater and determination that such discharges will not cause interference with the wastewater system. Such alternate limitations are subject to revocation or modification by the public services director due to changing conditions. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease, petroleum oil, cutting oil or other oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l; or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit; 
(4)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-six (66) degrees Celsius); 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste and odor producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the public services director to meet the objectives of section 34-166; 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5 unless specifically authorized in an order of determination issued by the public services director. The public services director may allow a higher discharge pH, not to exceed 11.0, upon determining that such discharge will not cause corrosion or interfere with the operation of the wastewater system; 
(7)  Any waters or wastes which contain unusual concentrations of dissolved solids; 
(8)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment process employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of its NPDES permit or which may interfere with the sludge management practices. 
(9)  Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or order of determination by the public services director, no industrial user shall increase the use of process water or dilute a discharge as a substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with any pretreatment standard. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.62), 6-3-85; Ord. No. 490, § 1, 4-20-92; Ord. No. 688, § 1, 11-5-07) 
Sec. 34-171. - Determination by director. 
    If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the sewage works, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in sections 34-168, 34-169, or 34-170, or which in the judgment of the public services director may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater treatment facilities, processes, equipment, sludge management practice, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, or which are discharged or proposed to be discharged by an industry subject to categorical pretreatment standards, the director may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to meet categorical standards or local limits contained herein or as established by the public services director whichever is more restrictive; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes and sewer charges, under the provisions of section 34-174; 
(5)  Require the installation and maintenance of a control manhole or other monitoring facility together with such meters and other appurtenances necessary for the observation, sampling and measurement of the wastewater discharge. Such manhole or monitoring facility and equipment shall be installed by the owner, at his or her expense, in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the public services director. Such manhole or monitoring facility shall be maintained by the owner in proper operating condition and safely accessible at all times. The director shall have access to the control manhole or monitoring facility at any time for the purpose of observing, sampling and measuring the wastewater discharge or inspecting the monitoring equipment used by the discharger; 
(6)  If the public services director permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the director and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his or her expense; 
(7)  Require that grease, oil and sand interceptors be provided when, in his or her opinion, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the public services director and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the director. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner's personnel must be performed by properly licensed waste disposal firms. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.63), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-172. - Measurements and tests. 
    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto or, if 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant or waste characteristic in question, in accordance with procedures approved by EPA or as found in standard methods and approved by the public services director. Sampling methods, times, duration and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to the approval of the public services director. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.64), 6-3-85; Ord. No. 490, § 1, 4-20-92) 
Sec. 34-173. - Flow measurement. 
    The volume of flow used for computing industrial waste loadings, sewer use charges and surcharges shall be metered water consumption of the person as shown in records of water meter readings maintained by the city water department except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)  If a person discharging into the city sanitary sewers procures any part or all of his or her water from sources other than the city water system, all or a part of which is discharged into the sanitary sewers, the person shall install and maintain at his or her expense water meters of a type approved by the public services director for the purpose of determining the volume of waters obtained from these other sources. 
(2)  If a person discharging industrial waste into the sanitary sewers produces evidence satisfactory to the public services director that more than ten (10) percent of the total annual volume of water used for all purposes does not reach the sanitary sewer, then the determination of the water consumption to be used in computing the waste volume discharged into the sanitary sewer may be made a matter of agreement between the city and the person. 
(3)  If the public services director determines the volume of waste discharged cannot be adequately determined using metered water consumption records or that direct measurement of industrial wastewater discharges is necessary to identify and control slug loadings, then he or she may require an industrial user to provide direct measurement of the wastewater discharge. Metering devices so required shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of section 34-171(5). 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.65), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-174. - Extra strength surcharge. 
    Users approved by the public services director for the discharge of a wastewater greater in strength than normal strength domestic wastewater will be subject to an extra strength surcharge. The extra strength surcharge will be computed from loadings based on twenty-four (24) hours' composite samples and rates established by resolution of the council under section 34-249. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.66), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-175. - Pretreatment requirements. 
(a)  Users shall provide necessary wastewater pretreatment or control measures as required to comply with the most stringent requirements of federal categorical pretreatment standards, state law and regulations or the requirements of this division or orders of determination issued pursuant to section 34-202. All facilities required to pretreat or control wastewater discharges shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. 
(b)  Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the public services director for review and approval prior to the construction of the facility. The review and approval of the plans and operating procedures does not relieve the user from complying with applicable standards and requirements. Any subsequent change in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to the public services director prior to the user initiating such change. 
(Ord. No. 490, § 1, 4-20-92) 
Sec. 34-176. - Bypass. 
(a)  Bypass not violating applicable pretreatment standards or requirements An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not violate pretreatment standards or requirements, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to paragraphs (b) and (c) and (d) below. 
(b)  Notice. An industrial user shall provide notice of bypass as follows: 
(1)  If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the public services director, if possible at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass. 
(2)  An industrial user shall orally notify the public services director or the wastewater treatment plant operator of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards or requirements immediately upon becoming aware of the bypass. Unless specifically waived by the public services director, a written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of becoming aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact times and dates, and if the bypass has not been connected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue, and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass. 
(c)  Prohibition of bypass. Bypasses are prohibited and the industrial user is subject to enforcement action for a bypass, unless: 
(1)  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage; 
(2)  There are no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed to prevent bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtown or preventative maintenance; and 
(3)  The industrial user submitted notices as required by paragraph (b) of this section. 
(d)  The public services director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, upon determining that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (c) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 490, § 1, 4-20-92) 
Sec. 34-177. - RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(a)  Section 34-168(13) prohibits the discharge to the wastewater system of any wastes which are listed hazardous wastes in 40 CFR 261.30-33 pursuant to Section 3001 of the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). The discharge to the wastewater system of certain wastes which, if otherwise disposed of would be characteristic hazardous wastes under 40 CFR 261, may be permissible if the discharge otherwise complies with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, federal and state law. 
(b)  Notification requirements. Any industrial user discharging or proposing to discharge a waste, which if otherwise disposed of would be a characteristic hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261, shall notify the public services director in writing of such discharge or proposed discharge. Such reporting shall be by completion and submittal of a form provided by the public services director or otherwise meeting the information requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(p). Initial reporting shall be no later than ninety (90) days following adoption of sections 12-75-12-77. Users who have provided the initial notification prior to adoption of these sections 34-175-34-177 need not resubmit such information unless there has been a change in the discharge or information reported. Industrial users not reporting any such discharge may be required by the public services director to submit a statement, signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, certifying that the user does not discharge listed or characteristic hazardous wastes as identified pursuant to 40 C FR 261. Any industrial user shall notify the public services director in advance of any new or increased discharge of a characteristic hazardous waste. 
(c)  The public services director shall review the information reported by the user and shall make such determinations as authorized by section 34-171 of the Owosso city Code relative to the discharge of the waste to the city wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 490, § 1, 4-20-92) 
Secs. 34-178-34-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SPILL PREVENTION AND NOTIFICATION 

Sec. 34-186. - Plan. 
    Any nondomestic user storing, utilizing, or producing any toxic or hazardous materials which, as determined by the public services director have the potential for accidental discharge or "slug" loading to the sewage works may be required to develop and submit a spill prevention plan. The plan as a minimum shall contain: 
(1)  Identification of the type and volume of toxic or hazardous materials stored, handled or produced; 
(2)  Identification of possible spill situations; 
(3)  Description of facilities, structures or control measures in place or to be constructed or developed to prevent an accidental discharge or slug loading to the sewage works; 
(4)  Provisions for detection of spills and procedures to be followed in the event of a spill including specific instructions for notification of the city. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.67), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-187. - Facilities. 
    Each discharger shall provide protection from accidental discharge of materials or substances prohibited or regulated by this article. When, in the opinion of the public services director, an accidental spill or leakage of toxic or hazardous materials to the sewage works could result in a threat to the public health and safety, or cause interference with the sewage works, or pass through the sewage works to potentially impact the receiving waters, then the director may require that the user install and implement such containment facilities and practices as necessary to prevent such accidental discharge. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the director for review and approval prior to their construction and implementation. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.68), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-188. - Notification requirements. 
(a)  An industrial user shall immediately notify the public services director or the wastewater treatment plant of any discharge, including any slug discharge or accidental release, which could cause interference with the wastewater system. The notification shall include: 
(1)  The date, time, location and duration of the discharge; 
(2)  The type of waste including concentration and volume; and 
(3)  Any corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation of a pretreatment standard, the user shall notify the public services director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the public services director within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. 
(c)  An industrial user shall promptly notify the public services director in advance of: 
(1)  The discharge of any toxic or hazardous pollutant not previously reported, or 
(2)  Any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p). 
(d)  Such notification shall not relieve the user of any enforcement action, fines, penalties, damages or liability which may be imposed pursuant to this code or state or federal law. Proper notification, however, shall be considered by the public services director in determining the appropriate enforcement action for a violation. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.69), 6-3-85; Ord. No. 490, § 1, 4-20-92) 
Secs. 34-189-34-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - ADMINISTRATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Administration generally, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 34-201. - User classification. 
(a)  The public services director shall assign users of the city wastewater system to one of the following classes. 
(1)  Class I: Significant industrial users. 
(2)  Class II: Nondomestic users discharging greater than ten thousand (10,000) gallons per average day and/or known to discharge pollutants subject to prohibition, limitation or surcharge but who are not significant industrial users. 
(3)  Class III: Nondomestic users discharging less than ten thousand (10,000) gallons per day with the potential for discharge of pollutants subject to prohibition, limitation or surcharge. 
(4)  Class IV: All other users. 
(b)  The public services director shall review and update, at least once per year, the user classification listing and notify any Class I, II, or III users of any change in their classification. New users shall be classified after review of their sewer connection permit application and added to the listing. 
(c)  The user may appeal his or her assigned classification by submitting a written appeal to the city manager who, after consideration of information supplied by the user and by the public services director, shall make a final determination. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.70), 6-3-85; Ord. No. 490, § 1, 4-20-92) 
Sec. 34-202. - Order of determination. 
(a)  The public services director may issue an order of determination to any user setting forth the requirements and conditions of discharge to the city wastewater system pursuant to the provisions of this article. The public services director shall periodically review such orders and may revoke, modify and/or reissue any order as appropriate. 
(b)  Any order of determination issued pursuant to this article shall be considered a part of this article for the user or facility, and shall be enforceable in the same manner as this article. 
(c)  An order of determination is issued to a user and applies to operations or processes contributing wastewater at a specific facility or location. Such an order is not transferable to a new or alternate facility or location. Such an order is not transferable to a new owner or user of an existing facility without prior notification to the public services director and provision of a copy of the existing order to the new owner or user. Any succeeding owner or user shall comply with the terms and conditions of the existing order until such order is revoked or reissued. 
(d)  For each significant industrial user the director shall issue an order of determination which shall include as a minimum: 
(1)  A statement of duration, not to exceed five (5) years, including issuance and expiration dates; and 
(2)  Effluent limitations based on the more stringent of applicable federal categorical pretreatment standards, state law, or local limits pursuant to this article; and 
(3)  Self-monitoring sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type; and 
(4)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the public service director to ensure compliance with this article, state and federal pretreatment standards and requirements; and 
(5)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule; and 
(6)  A statement of nontransferability. 
(e)  For pollutants, such as mercury, that are of concern at a level below background concentrations and subject to regulation in the city's wastewater discharge (NPDES Permit MI0023752) through implementation of a state approved pollutant minimization program, an order of determination may be issued to any class I, II, or III user of the city wastewater system that has the reasonable potential to discharge controllable levels of mercury at or above the limitation established in section 34-170 above. For low discharge volume users (class III users), such as dental offices, where sampling and analysis of the individual user's discharge is not feasible or practicable, the user may be determined to be in compliance with the local limitation by implementing acceptable pollutant minimization practices to eliminate the discharge of controllable mercury levels. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.71), 6-3-85; Ord. No. 490, § 1, 4-20-92; Ord. No. 689, § 1, 11-5-07) 
Sec. 34-203. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  With approval of the council and for the purpose of preventing, discontinuing or correcting any violations of this article, the public services director may adopt and establish rules and regulations for the enforcement of this article. 
(b)  Rules and regulations adopted under this section may include, but are not limited to, imposing requirements upon nondomestic users to submit plans for the pretreatment of wastewater, to install equipment to monitor the nature and quantity of the wastewater being discharged into the system, to keep records, and/or to establish compliance schedules. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.72), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-204. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Basic data. Any new or existing nondomestic user may be required by the public services director to provide information needed to implement the provisions of this article, state and federal law and regulations. Any nondomestic user may be required to provide periodic updates of this basic data. Following review of the data provided by the user, the public services director may require additional information as necessary to evaluate the discharge or potential discharge from the user. Information requirements may include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Information on the nature, rate of production and Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) of the operation(s) carried out by the user; 
(2)  Information on wastewater discharge volume and variation; 
(3)  Information on wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not limited to those specifically regulated by this article, as determined by chemical and biological analyses; 
(4)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and/or plumbing plans of the users property and facilities showing sewers, sewer connections, control manholes or sampling facilities, and pretreatment facility locations as applicable; 
(5)  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; 
(6)  Information relative to the type and volume of toxic or hazardous materials produced, handled, stored, or used in what quantity and rate these materials are discharged or potentially discharged to the sewage works; 
(7)  Details of spill prevention or containment practices and facilities; 
(8)  A statement, signed by an authorized representative of the user, regarding whether or not the user's discharge is in compliance on a consistent basis with any applicable categorical pretreatment standard or other limitation of this article and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance procedures and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable standards; 
(9)  When a discharge is not in compliance the user may be required to detail the necessary changes in operation and/or additional pretreatment facilities required to achieve compliance and the shortest schedule for their implementation; 
(10)  Number of employees, hours of operation of plant and hours of operation of pretreatment facilities and discharge therefrom; 
(b)  Changes. All industrial users are required to notify the public services director prior to the discharge of any new wastewater constituents, or any substantial change in the volume or characteristics of the wastewater constituents being discharged, or any substantial change in the basic data reported under subsection (a). 
(c)  Self-monitoring reports. The public services director may require any industrial user to submit self-monitoring reports on waste discharge volume, specific pollutant analyses, and other information as necessary to assure compliance with federal categorical pretreatment standards and local limitations. At a minimum all Class I users shall be required to submit self-monitoring reports at least once every six (6) months unless all the information required in the report is obtained directly by the city. Such self-monitoring reports shall be based on data obtained through appropriate and representative sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report. If the user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using procedures conforming to section 34-172 (measurements and tests), then the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(d)  Additional reporting requirements for categorical industrial users. Industrial users subject to federal categorical pretreatment standards shall be required to comply with the reporting requirements of 40 CFR 403.12. 
(e)  Compliance schedules and reporting thereon. 
(1)  If additional pretreatment facilities or operation and maintenance efforts are required of an industrial user to meet federal categorical pretreatment standards and/or local limits, [the] public services director may require the development and submission of a compliance schedule by the industrial user. The schedule shall detail the proposed commencement and completion dates of major elements leading to the construction and/or operation of the necessary pretreatment facilities with final completion by the date required by the federal categorical pretreatment standards or as approved by the director, whichever is sooner. No incremental step in the compliance schedule shall exceed nine (9) months. Upon review and approval by the public services director, the compliance schedule may be incorporated into an order of determination, consent order or other enforceable document issued to the user pursuant to this article. 
(2)  Not later than fourteen (14) days following the completion of each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the public services director. The report shall include a statement as to whether or not the user complied with the increment of progress as set forth in the compliance schedule. If the schedule was not met, the user shall report the reason(s) for failing to meet the schedule, the date the user expects to complete the increment of progress, and the steps being taken by the user to return to the established compliance schedule. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.73), 6-3-85; Ord. No. 490, § 1, 4-20-92) 
Sec. 34-205. - Recordkeeping requirements. 
(a)  Any industrial user shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities required of the user by or pursuant to this article. Such records shall include for all samples: 
(1)  The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the names of the person or persons taking the samples; 
(2)  The dates analyses were performed; 
(3)  Who performed the analyses; 
(4)  The analytical techniques/methods used; and 
(5)  The results of the analyses. 
(b)  Any industrial user subject to the self-monitoring and/or reporting requirements established by or pursuant to this article shall retain for a minimum of three (3) years any records of such self-monitoring and/or reporting activities and results. The industrial user shall make such records available for inspection and copying by the director of public services. This period of records retention may be extended during any litigation concerning compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.74), 6-3-85; Ord. No. 490, § 1, 4-20-92) 
Sec. 34-206. - Right of entry. 
    The public services director and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharges to storm drains, public sewers, natural outlets, watercourses and wastewater facilities in accordance with the provisions of this article. Such entry shall normally be made during regular business hours, but in an emergency at any time. The public services director shall have access to control manholes or monitoring facilities installed pursuant to section 34-171(5) at any time. The city shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.75), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-207. - Indemnification. 
    While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 34-206, the public services director or duly authorized employee of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death of the city employee and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by the city employees or property damage claims asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 34-171(5). 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.76), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-208. - Confidential information. 
    Information and data furnished to the city with respect to the nature and frequency of discharge shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the discharger specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets or proprietary information of the discharger. When requested by a discharger furnishing a report, the portions of a report which may disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the discharger furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the city until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the discharger. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.77), 6-3-85) 
Sec. 34-209. - Fees. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this section to provide for the payment of fees from nondomestic users of the city's wastewater system to compensate the city for the cost of administration of the wastewater pretreatment and control program established herein. 
(b)  The city shall adopt by council resolution charges and fees which may include: 
(1)  Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures; 
(2)  Fees for reimbursement of cost to establish and administer the city's wastewater pretreatment and control program. 
(Ord. No. 433, § 1(2.78), 6-3-85) 
Secs. 34-210-34-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ENFORCEMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 711, § 1, adopted May 4, 2009, amended division 7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 7, §§ 34-221-34-230, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 433, adopted June 3, 1985; and Ord. No. 490, adopted April 20, 1992. 

Sec. 34-221. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article may be served by the public services director with a written notice stating the nature of the violation and either providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof, or requiring the user to submit an action plan for the correction and prevention of such violation(s). Within the period of time stated in such notice, or in conformance with a compliance schedule in a subsequent order to implement a corrective action plan, the person shall permanently cease all violations. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the public services director to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)  A violation of the provisions of this article shall be considered a public nuisance per se and any action authorized or permitted by law for the abatement of public nuisances may be instituted by the city in regard to such violation. 
(c)  Whenever a person has violated any provision of this article, the city may take any legal action necessary to recover damages sustained by the city as a result thereof. Such damages shall include, but are not limited to, lost revenues from the federal or state government and any fines or other penalties which are the result of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 1, 5-4-09) 
Sec. 34-222. - Emergency suspension of service. 
(a)  In the case of discharges which present or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, or cause interference with the operation of the sewage works, or otherwise constitutes a public nuisance or emergency, the city sewer service of any person causing or threatening to cause such discharge may be terminated by order of the public services director, pending further investigation and hearing under section 34-223. 
(b)  Any person so notified of the suspension of the city's sewer service shall, within the time specified in such notice, cease all discharges. 
(c)  In the event of failure of the person to voluntarily comply with the suspension order within the specified time, the city may commence an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel the person's compliance with such order. 
(d)  The city shall reinstate the sewer service and terminate any judicial proceedings upon proof by the user to the satisfaction of the public services director of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge or conditions creating the threat of imminent or substantial danger as set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 1, 5-4-09) 
Sec. 34-223. - Termination of service. 
(a)  Authority to terminate. The public services director shall have the authority to terminate wastewater service to any user who attempts to violate or violates any provision of this article, or who in any way attempts to avoid, delay, prevent, or interfere with the execution or enforcement of any provision of this article, or who fails to pay any charges, levied against the user, whether regulator or extraordinary, under this article, or who attempts to violate or violates or attempts to avoid, delay, prevent or interfere with the execution or enforcement of any order, rule or regulation promulgated by the director for compliance with or in execution of this article, or who fails to appear at a hearing to meet a charge against him, her or it under this article. 
(b)  Hearing procedures. 
(1)  In addition to any remedies provided elsewhere in this article, whenever the public services director has reason to believe that any user has committed or is committing an offense covered by subsection (a) he or she may serve upon the user a written notice stating the nature of the alleged violation and describing the time for and the nature of required correction. 
(2)  If the violation is not corrected as prescribed in the notice, the director may issue an order to the user to appear for a hearing and show cause why service should not be terminated. 
(3)  The notice and order to show cause shall be served upon the user by personal service, or in lieu thereof by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the user's last known address. 
(4)  The hearing shall be conducted by the city manager or a hearing officer appointed by him or her, who shall render a written decision determining whether the user's service shall be terminated and stating reasons therefor. Admissibility of evidence at the hearing shall be within the discretion of the city manager or hearing officer. 
(5)  The user shall be entitled to be represented at the hearing in person or by an attorney at his or her own expense and shall be entitled to examine witnesses for the city and present evidence on his or her own behalf. A record shall be made of the proceedings, but such record need not be verbatim. 
(6)  The user whose service is terminated without prior hearing may request such a hearing as described in subsections (b)(4) and (5), to permit him to show why his or her service should not have been terminated and should be resumed. Such requests shall be granted but service will not be resumed unless so ordered by the city manager or hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 1, 5-4-09) 
Sec. 34-224. - Publication of enforcement actions. 
    The public services director shall publish, at least annually in the largest daily newspaper published in the service area of the wastewater system, a public notification of industrial users which are found to be in significant noncompliance, as defined in section 34-102, with applicable pretreatment requirements during the period since the previous publication. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 1, 5-4-09) 
Sec. 34-225. - Right of appeal. 
    Any discharger or any interested party shall have the right to request in writing an interpretation or ruling by the city on any matter covered by this article, and shall be entitled to a prompt written reply. If such inquiry is by a discharger and deals with matters of performance or compliance with this article for which enforcement activity relating to an alleged violation which is the subject, receipt of a discharger's request, shall stay all enforcement proceedings pending receipt of the written reply. Appeal of any final judicial order entered pursuant to this article may be taken in accordance with local and state law. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 1, 5-4-09) 
Sec. 34-226. - Temporary noncompliance; upset provisions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (c) are met. 
(c)  An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures. 
(3)  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the public services director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days): 
a.  A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(d)  In any enforcement proceeding the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(e)  The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 1, 5-4-09) 
Sec. 34-227. - Recovery of costs incurred by city. 
    Any user violating any of the provisions of this article, or who discharges or causes a discharge producing a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to or interference with city's wastewater system shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage caused by such violation or discharge. The city shall bill the user for the costs incurred by the city for any cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the violation or discharge. Refusal to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a violation of this article enforceable under the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 1, 5-4-09) 
Sec. 34-228. - Enforcement cost recovery. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other section of this article, any user who is found to have violated any provision under this article, or orders issued under this article, may be charged costs associated with: investigation of the violation; issuance of notices and orders; follow-up inspections, sampling and analyses by the city; unplugging sewers and removal and disposal of wastes improperly discharged to the sewers. A schedule of standard charges may be established, and revised as appropriate, by resolution of the city council. Where the standard charges are not appropriate, costs shall be charged in accordance with established city labor, material and equipment rental rates with labor charged at an overtime rate. 
(b)  Such charges shall be added to user's next scheduled sewer service billing, and subject to other collection rights and remedies as designated by law and this article to collect said service charges. Unpaid charges shall constitute a lien against the individual user's property. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 1, 5-4-09) 
Sec. 34-229. - Consent orders. 
    The public services director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders establishing an agreement with an industrial user which is subject to enforcement action for noncompliance with this article. Consent orders may include compliance schedules, stipulated fines or penalties, remedial actions, other provisions agreed to by the parties, and signatures of the public services director and an authorized representative of the industrial user. Consent orders shall be considered a part of this article for the specific user and shall be enforceable in the same manner as this article. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 1, 5-4-09) 
Sec. 34-230. - Show cause order. 
    In the event of a proposed enforcement action, other than termination of wastewater service under section 34-223, the public services director may order any user which causes or contributes to violation of this article to appear and show cause at a meeting with the director why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served on the user personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting. Whether or not a duly notified industrial user appears as noticed, enforcement action may be pursued as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 1, 5-4-09) 
Sec. 34-231. - Misdemeanor. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of this chapter that is listed in subsection (b) below shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. Such misdemeanors are subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or the maximum allowable under state law, plus costs and other sanctions, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both. 
(b)  Misdemeanor violations include: 
(1)  Intentional unpermitted discharge, including but not limited to intentional unpermitted dumping of wastes or wastewater to any manhole, any sewer, drain or natural outlet; 
(2)  Making any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or falsification, tampering with, or rendering inaccurate any monitoring device or analytical test method required under this article; 
(3)  Improper sampling, with evidence of intent to falsify or mislead; 
(4)  Intentional introduction of any substances into the wastewater system that causes personal injury or property damage; 
(5)  Any recurring violation that results in a determination of significant noncompliance that continues after application of administrative enforcement remedies; and 
(6)  Illegal discharge when the discharge causes interference with the wastewater system and there is evidence of intent. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 1, 5-4-09) 
Sec. 34-232. - Municipal civil infraction. 
(a)  Except for a violation which is specifically designated in this article as a misdemeanor subject to criminal prosecution, any person, firm or corporation who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and is subject to the civil fines set forth below and costs and other sanctions that may be imposed by the court. Each act of violation and each day upon which such violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation. 
(b)  The public services director, utilities director and industrial pretreatment coordinator are hereby designated as authorized city officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations and notices under this article. 
(c)  The penalty for a violation of this article that is a municipal civil infraction is a civil fine in accordance with the schedule that follows, plus costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions that may be imposed by the court. A category I violation is a major violation by any person or firm that causes interference with the wastewater system, or endangers the health and safety of city personnel or the general public, or otherwise necessitates an emergency termination of wastewater service to halt or prevent such a discharge. A category II violation is any noncategory I violation, by any person or firm classified as a significant industrial user pursuant to section 34-201. A category III violation is any noncategory I violation by a person or firm other than a significant industrial user. 
Violation 
Type First 
Offense First 
Repeat 
Offense Subsequent 
Repeat 
Offense Category I $1,000 $2,500 $5,000 Category II $250 $500 $1,000 Category III $100 $250 $500  
(Ord. No. 711, § 1, 5-4-09) 
Sec. 34-233. - Injunctive relief. 
    At the request of the public services director, the city attorney may petition any court of competent jurisdiction for the abatement of any nuisance, and to seek relief for any violations of this article, or order issued under this article. The city attorney may seek, and the court may impose, temporary or permanent injunctive relief, damages, civil penalties as provided in section 34-234, costs and such other relief as the court may order. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 1, 5-4-09) 
Sec. 34-234. - Judicial civil penalties. 
    In an action brought by the city against a person for violation of this article, or order issued under this article, a court of competent jurisdiction may impose a civil penalty of up to $5,000.00 per day per violation. In calculating the amount of the penalty, the court may consider the frequency, magnitude and duration of violation(s) by the person, the impact of the violation(s) on public health and the environment, the economic benefit to the person gained by the violation(s), the compliance history of the person, and other factors deemed appropriate by the court. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 1, 5-4-09) 
Sec. 34-235. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
    The remedies provided for in this division are not exclusive. The director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant person. Prosecution of a criminal offense against a person shall not be dependent upon or held in abeyance during any civil proceeding regarding such person. 
(Ord. No. 711, § 1, 5-4-09) 
Secs. 34-236-34-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WATER AND SEWER RATES 

Sec. 34-246. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this article, the word "premises" shall mean each lot or parcel of land, building or premises having any connection to the water distribution system of the city or the sewage disposal system of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 2.91) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-247. - Basis of rates and charges. 
(a)  The water supply and sanitary sewer systems of the city shall, as far as possible, be operated and maintained on a public utility basis as authorized by law. Each customer connected to and using facilities of the system shall pay user rates and charges as fixed and established from time to time by resolution of the council. The city shall annually review the user rates and charges as required by public law. 
(b)  Water service shall be charged for on the basis of the user's demand potential, which shall be proportioned to the size of the user's water meter or service line, and on the basis of water used as determined by the water meter installed in the user's service line by the public services department. No free water service shall be furnished to any person. 
(c)  Sewer service shall be charged for on the basis of the user's demand potential, which shall be proportioned to the size of the user's water meter or water service line, and on the basis of water used as determined by the user's water meter. 
(d)  Where sewer service is furnished to users not connected to the water system or in cases where users make use of large quantities of water which may be discharged into storm sewers or approved outlets other than the sanitary sewer system, or for other miscellaneous users of water for which special consideration should be given, special rates may be fixed by the city, and the city may require class I and/or class II users to install metering equipment to actually determine the flow. Class III residential users shall be charged on the basis of the average class III metered charges on the system or required to install a meter on their water supply. 
(e)  Surcharges may be set by ordinance or council resolution to meet the requirements of Public Law 92-500 or to recover extra costs attributable to a certain user or user class. 
(f)  No free sewer service shall be furnished to any person. 
(g)  All unallocated wastewater treatment works capacity must conform with the requirements of section 204(a)(5) of the act. Cost-effectiveness guidelines are published as Appendix A to this subpart to furnish additional advisory information concerning the implementation of section 212(2)(c) of the act. 
(Code 1977, § 2.92; Ord. No. 363, § 2.92, 10-6-80) 
Sec. 34-248. - Water rates. 
    The rates to be charged for water service in effect in the city on the date of the adoption of this Code, shall remain in effect until changed by the council by resolution, which resolution may thereafter be modified or revised from time to time. 
(Code 1977, § 2.93) 
Sec. 34-249. - Sewer rates. 
(a)  Charges for sewer service shall be levied upon all premises having any sewer connection with the public sewers. Such charges shall be established by resolution of the council, which resolution may thereafter be modified or revised from time to time by resolution of the council. 
(b)  Charges for wastewater treatment service outside the city corporate limits shall be in accordance with contractual agreements. 
(c)  Extra strength surcharges shall be set by resolution of the council and shall apply to those users approved for discharge of extra strength wastewater in accordance with section 34-170 of this Code and who have installed an approved control manhole as required in section 34-171 of this Code. Extra strength surcharges shall be based on twenty-four-hour composite samples. 
(Code 1977, § 2.94; Ord. No. 363, § 2.94, 10-6-80) 
Sec. 34-250. - Billing. 
(a)  Charges for water and sewer service may be billed and collected monthly, or on a quarterly basis. 
(b)  Sewer service surcharges shall be billed and collected concurrently with the sewer service charge. 
(c)  Billing and collection of sewer service charges to persons outside the city corporate limits shall be in accordance with the contractual agreement for that service. 
(Code 1977, § 2.95; Ord. No. 363, § 2.95, 10-6-80; Ord. No. 702, § 1, 9-15-08) 
Sec. 34-251. - Collection. 
    The public services department is hereby authorized to enforce the payment of charges for water service to any premises by discontinuing the water service to such premises and the payment of charges for sewage disposal service to any premises may be enforced by discontinuing either the water service or the sewage disposal service to such premises or both and an action of assumpsit may be instituted by the city against the customer. The charges for water service and sewage disposal service, which, under the provisions of Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), as amended, are made a lien on the premises to which furnished, are hereby recognized to constitute such lien; and the public services director shall, annually, on May first, certify all unpaid charges for such services furnished to any premises which, on the thirty-first day of March preceding, have remained unpaid for a period of three (3) months, to the council, who shall place the same on the next tax roll of the city after notification as provided for in the city charter. Such charges so assessed shall be collected in the same manner as general city taxes. In cases where the city is properly notified in accordance with Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), as amended, that a tenant is responsible for water or sewage disposal service charges, no such service shall be commenced or continued to such premises until there has been deposited with the public services department, a sum sufficient as estimated by the director, such deposit to be as prescribed by resolution of the council. Where the water service to any premises is turned off to enforce the payment of water service charges or sewage disposal service charges, the water service shall not be recommenced until all delinquent charges have been paid and a deposit as in the case of tenants is made. In any other case where, in the discretion of the public services director, the collection of charges for water or sewage disposal service may be difficult or uncertain, the director may require a similar deposit. Such deposits may be applied against any delinquent water or sewage disposal service charges and the application thereof shall not affect the right of the public services department to turn off the water service and/or sewer service, to any premises for any delinquency thereby satisfied. No such deposit shall bear interest and such deposit, or any remaining balance thereof, shall be returned to the customer making the same when he or she shall discontinue receiving water and sewage disposal service. 
(Code 1977, § 2.96) 
Sec. 34-252. - Revenue bond ordinance. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to alter or repeal any of the provisions of any ordinance providing for the issuance of water supply system revenue bonds or sewage disposal system revenue bonds with respect to the obligations of the city and the security of the bondholders thereunder. This chapter is intended to be in conformity with all such bond ordinances, and should there by any conflict whereby the security of the bondholders or the obligations of such bonds is impaired, then with respect to such conflict, the provisions of such bond ordinances shall prevail. 
(Code 1977, § 2.97) 
Sec. 34-253. - Wastewater treatment system; allocation of revenues. 
    The revenues and income derived from the collection of rates and charges as authorized under the August 17, 1977 Sewer Service Agreement between the Cities of Owosso and Corunna, and Townships of Owosso and Caledonia shall be deposited in funds set up for such revenues specified as follows: 
(1)  Operation and maintenance fund. There shall be established a fund or account to be designated operation and maintenance fund from the revenues received from the users or such purpose. Out of these revenues, payments will be made for current expenses of operation, maintenance, scheduled replacement, and administration of the wastewater treatment system of the city. 
(2)  Replacement fund. A replacement fund shall be established for the purpose of maintaining the capacity and performance of the wastewater treatment plant. Annual payments shall be made to the fund. 
(3)  Improvement fund. An improvement fund may be established for the purpose of making replacements, renewals and improvements to the plant as determined by the plant review board. The moneys to fund the depreciation on the plant included in the operation and maintenance charge, may be transferred to the improvement fund. 
(Ord. No. 363, § 2.98, 10-6-80) 
Sec. 34-254. - Definitions. 
    Whenever used in this section, except when otherwise indicated by the context, the following terms when capitalized shall have the following meanings: 
    Act 94 means Act 94, Public Acts of Michigan, 1933, as amended. 
    Bonds shall mean any bonds which may be issued by the city for the purpose of making repairs, extensions, enlargements and improvements to the system, for the payment of which the city intends to use net revenues. 
    City means the City of Owosso, Shiawassee county, Michigan. 
    General obligation bond payment fund means the general obligation bond payment fund created under section 34-259. 
    Improvement fund means the improvement fund created under section 34-259. 
    LTGO bonds means the city's general obligation limited tax bonds to be issued in one or more series to construct the project as described in a notice of intent to issue bonds published by the city on February 6, 2008. 
    Operation fund means the operation and maintenance fund created under section 34-259. 
    Project means improving and extending the city's sanitary sewage disposal system, including but not limited to requiring rehabilitation of the city's sanitary sewage system and manholes, together with any appurtenances and attachments thereto and any related site acquisition or improvements. 
    Receiving fund means the sanitary sewage disposal system receiving fund created under section 34-259. 
    Revenue bond redemption fund means the revenue bond and interest redemption fund created under section section 34-259. 
    Revenue bonds shall mean any revenue bonds which might be issued by the city in the future pursuant to Act 94 which are payable from a statutory first lien on the net revenues. 
    Revenues and net revenues mean the revenues and net revenues of the system and shall be construed as defined in Section 3 of Act 94, including, with respect to "revenues", the earnings derived from the investment of moneys in the various funds and accounts established by this section. 
    System means the entire sanitary sewage disposal system of the city including such facilities thereof as are now existing and as shall be acquired and constructed as the project, including all appurtenances, enlargements, extensions, repairs and improvements thereto hereafter made. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 1, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 34-255. - Construction of project and payment of costs. 
    It is hereby determined to be a necessary public purpose of the city to acquire and construct the project. The total cost of the project is estimated to be not-to-exceed $2,750,000 including the payment of costs incidental to the issuance, sale and delivery of the LTGO bonds, which estimate of cost is hereby approved and confirmed. The period of usefulness of the project is estimated to be not less than thirty (30) years. To pay part of the cost of acquiring and constructing the project, including payment of legal, engineering, financial and other expenses incident thereto and incident to the issuance and sale of the LTGO bonds, the city shall borrow a sum not-to-exceed $2,750,000 and issue one or more series of limited tax general obligation bonds herefore pursuant to the provisions of Part 43 of Act 451, Public Acts of Michigan, 1994, as amended, and a bond authorizing resolution of the city council. The remaining costs of the project shall be defrayed from city funds on hand and legally available for such use. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 1, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 34-256. - Management; fiscal year. 
    The operation, repair and management of the system shall continue to be under the supervision and control of the city council. The city council may employ such person or persons in such capacity or capacities as it deems advisable to carry on the efficient management and operation of the system. The city council may make such rules and regulations as it deems advisable and necessary to assure the efficient management and operation of the system. The fiscal year for the system shall run concurrently with the fiscal year of the city. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 1, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 34-257. - No free service or use. 
    No free service or use of the system, or service or use of the system at less than cost, shall be furnished by the system to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality, including the city. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 1, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 34-258. - Rates and charges; fixing and revising rates; rate covenant. 
    The rates and charges for service furnished by and the use of the system and the methods of collection and enforcement of the collection of the rates and charges for service furnished by and the use of the system shall be those in effect on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives, which, in the opinion of the city council, are currently sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the system as are necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order, to provide for the payment of the principal of and interest on the LTGO bonds as the same become due and payable, and to provide for all other obligations, expenditures and funds for the system required under this section. It is hereby covenanted and agreed to fix and maintain rates for services furnished by the system at all times sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation and such expenses for maintenance of the system as are necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order, and to provide for all other obligations, expenditures and funds for the system required by law including, specifically to provide for payment of principal of, interest, and premium, if any, on the LTGO bonds. 
    The rates and charges for operation, maintenance, replacement and administration hereby established shall be based upon a methodology which complies with the applicable federal and state statutes and regulations. The amount of the rates and charges shall be sufficient to provide for debt service and for the expenses of operation, maintenance, replacement and administration of the system as necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order. The amount of the rates and charges shall be reviewed annually and revised when necessary to ensure system expenses are met and that all users pay their proportionate share of operation, maintenance, equipment replacement and administration expenses. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 1, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 34-259. - Funds and accounts; flow of funds. 
    Commencing on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, all funds belonging to the system shall be transferred as herein indicated and all revenues of the system shall be set aside as collected and credited to a separate depository account to be designated as the sanitary sewage disposal system receiving fund ("receiving fund"). In addition, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, all revenues in any accounts of the system shall be transferred to the receiving fund and credited to the funds and accounts as provided in this section. The revenues credited to the receiving fund are pledged for the purpose of the following funds and shall be transferred or debited from the receiving fund periodically in the manner, at the times, and in the order of priority hereinafter specified, provided that no transfer shall be required to be made to a fund on any date if the amount on deposit in the fund is sufficient to meet the requirements of this section. 
(1)  Operation and maintenance fund. There shall next be established and maintained a separate account designated as the operation and maintenance fund. Out of the revenues credited to the receiving fund there shall be first set aside in the operation and maintenance fund the amounts necessary to provide for the payment of expenses of administration and operation of the system and such current expenses for the maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order. 
(2)  Revenue bond and interest redemption fund. In the event the city issues revenue bonds pursuant to Act 94 which are payable from a statutory first lien on the net revenues, there shall be established and maintained a separate depository account designated as the revenue bond redemption fund, the moneys on deposit therein from time to time to be used solely for the purpose of paying the principal of, redemption premiums (if any) and interest on the revenue bonds. Out of the revenues remaining in the receiving fund after provision for the operation and maintenance fund, there shall be set aside in the revenue bond redemption fund prior to each date principal or interest on the revenue bonds is due, the amount necessary to provide for the payment when due of the principal of and interest on the revenue bonds including any amounts necessary to maintain any revenue bond reserve account established within the revenue bond redemption fund by the ordinance authorizing issuance of revenue bonds. 
(3)  General obligation bond payment fund. There shall next be established a fund designated the general obligation bond payment fund, the money credited thereto to be used solely for payment of principal of, interest and premium, if any, on the LTGO bonds and any other general obligation bonds issued by the city for improvements to the system. Out of the revenues remaining in the receiving fund after meeting the requirements of the operation and maintenance fund and the revenue bond redemption fund, there shall be next set aside in, or credited to, the general obligation bond payment fund, amounts which shall be proportionately sufficient to provide for payment of principal, interest and premiums, if any, on the LTGO bonds and any other general obligation bonds as the same become due. Amounts in the general obligation bond payment fund shall be withdrawn as necessary to pay the principal of and interest and premium on the LTGO bonds and any other general obligation bonds as the same become due; the moneys withdrawn for payment of the LTGO bonds shall be deposited in the debt retirement fund created for the LTGO bonds. 
(4)  Improvement fund. There shall next be established and maintained a separate account, pursuant to section 34-261, designated as the improvement fund, the money credited thereto to be used solely for the purpose of making improvements, additions, extensions, repairs, and replacements to the system. The improvement fund may have several subaccounts therein. On the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, there shall be credited to the improvement fund a sum, if any, as shall be determined by the city manager. Out of the revenues and moneys of the system remaining in the receiving fund, after provision has been made for the transfer of moneys in the operation and maintenance fund, the revenue bond redemption fund (including any bond reserve account which may be established on a future date) and the general obligation bond payment fund, there shall be transferred to the improvement fund such additional funds as shall be necessary to keep the system in proper repair and working order. If at any time it shall be necessary to use moneys in the improvement fund for the purpose for which the improvement fund was established, the moneys so used shall be replaced from any moneys in the receiving fund which are not required by this section to be used for the operation and maintenance fund, the revenue bond redemption fund (including any bond reserve account which may be established on a future date) or the general obligation bond payment fund. 
(5)  Surplus moneys. Thereafter, any revenues in the receiving fund after satisfying all the foregoing requirements of this section may, at the discretion of the city, be transferred to the improvement fund or used for any other purpose permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 1, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 34-260. - Priority of funds. 
    In the event the moneys in the receiving fund are insufficient to provide for the current requirements of the operation and maintenance fund, the revenue bond redemption fund or the general obligation bond payment fund, any moneys or securities in other funds of the system, except the proceeds of sale of any bonds, shall be credited or transferred, first, to the operation and maintenance fund, and second, if the moneys on deposit in the operation and maintenance fund are sufficient to meet the requirements of the operation and maintenance fund, shall be credited or transferred to the revenue bond redemption fund (including any bond reserve account which may be established on a future date) or the general obligation bond payment fund and finally to the improvement fund. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 1, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 34-261. - Depository and funds on hand. 
    Moneys in the several funds and the accounts established pursuant to this section, except moneys in the revenue bond redemption fund (including any bond reserve account which may be established on a future date) and the generalobligation bond payment fund and moneys derived from the proceeds of sale of any bonds, may be kept in one bank account at a bank or banks designated by resolution of the city, and if kept in one bank account the moneys shall be allocated among the several funds on the books and records of the city in the manner and at the times provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 1, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 34-262. - Investments. 
    Moneys in the funds and accounts established herein may be invested by the city in United States of America obligations or in obligations the principal of and interest on which is fully guaranteed by the United States of America and any other investments hereafter permitted by law. If the moneys invested are kept in one account, as provided in sec. 34-261 of this Code, then the monies shall be allocated among the several funds on the books and records of the city in the manner and at the times provided in this section. Investment of moneys in the revenue bond redemption fund or the general obligation bond payment fund being accumulated for payment of the next maturing principal or interest payment of bonds shall be limited to obligations bearing maturity dates prior to the date of the next maturing principal or interest payment on the bonds. 
    In the event investments are made, any securities representing the same shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company having on deposit the fund or funds or account from which the purchase was made. Gains realized or interest income earned on investment of funds in the receiving fund, the operation and maintenance fund, and the improvement fund shall be deposited in or credited to the receiving fund at the end of each fiscal year. Gains realized on interest income earned on investment of moneys in the revenue bond redemption fund (including income derived from any bond reserve account which may be established on a future date) or the general obligation bond payment fund, shall be credited as received to the such fund, provided that any bond reserve account therein is fully funded. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 1, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 34-263. - Covenants. 
    The city covenants and agrees with the holders of the bonds as follows as long as any of the bonds remain outstanding and unpaid as to either principal or interest: 
(1)  The city will maintain the system in good repair and working order and will operate the same efficiently and will faithfully and punctually perform all duties with reference to the system required by the Constitution, Michigan state law, and the city's charter and ordinances. 
(2)  The city will keep proper books of record and account separate from all other records and accounts of the city, in which shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the system in accordance with state law. The city shall have an annual audit (or, if permitted by state law, an audit every two years) of the books of record and accounts of the system for the preceding operating year made each year by an independent certified public accountant. 
(3)  The city will maintain and carry, for the benefit of the holders of the bonds, insurance on all physical properties of the system and liability insurance, of the kinds and in the amounts normally carried by municipalities engaged in the operation of similar sanitary sewage disposal systems, including self-insurance. 
(4)  The city will not sell, lease or dispose of the system, or any substantial part of the system, until all of the principal and interest on bonds have been paid in full or provision made therefor as herein provided. The city will operate the system as economically as possible, will make all repairs and replacements necessary to keep the system in good repair and working order, and will not do or suffer to be done any act which would affect the system in such a way as to have a material adverse effect on the security for the bonds. 
(5)  The city will not grant any franchise or other rights to any person, firm or corporation to operate a system that will compete with the system. 
(6)  The city will cause the project to be acquired and constructed promptly and in accordance with the plans and specification therefor. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 1, 6-2-08) 
Sec. 34-264. - Revenue bonds. 
    The right is reserved to issue revenue bonds payable from the revenues of the system in accordance with the provisions of Act 94, which shall have a statutory lien on the net revenues of the system. 
(Ord. No. 697, § 1, 6-2-08) 
Secs. 34-265-34-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GAS FRANCHISE 

Sec. 34-300. - Grant, term. 
    The city hereby grants to the Consumers Energy Company, a Michigan corporation, its successors and assigns, hereinafter called "grantee," the right, power and authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and services on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges, waterways, and other public places, and to do a local gas business in the city for a period of thirty (30) years. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 12-6-04) 
Sec. 34-301. - Consideration. 
    In consideration of the rights, power and authority hereby granted, said grantee shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 12-6-04) 
Sec. 34-302. - Conditions. 
    No highway, street, alley, bridge, waterway or other public place used by said grantee shall be obstructed longer than necessary during the work of construction or repair, and shall be restored to the same order and condition as when said work was commenced. All of grantee's pipes and mains shall be so placed in the highways and other public places as not to unnecessarily interfere with the use thereof for highway purposes. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 12-6-04) 
Sec. 34-303. - Hold harmless. 
    Said grantee shall at all times keep and save the city free and harmless from all loss, costs and expense to which it may be subject by reason of the negligent construction and maintenance of the structures and equipment hereby authorized. In case any action is commenced against the city on account of the permission herein given, said grantee shall, upon notice, defend the city and save it free and harmless from all loss, cost and damage arising out of such negligent construction and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 12-6-04) 
Sec. 34-304. - Extensions. 
    Said grantee shall construct and extend its gas distribution system within said city and shall furnish gas to applicants residing therein in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 12-6-04) 
Sec. 34-305. - Franchise not exclusive. 
    The rights, power and authority herein granted are not exclusive. Either manufactured or natural gas may be furnished hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 12-6-04) 
Sec. 34-306. - Rates. 
    Said grantee shall be entitled to charge the inhabitants of said city for gas furnished therein, the rates as approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission, to which commission or its successors authority and jurisdiction to fix and regulate gas rates and rules regulating such service in said city, are hereby granted for the term of this franchise. Such rates and rules shall be subject to review and change at any time upon petition therefor being made by either said city, acting by its city council, or by said grantee. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 12-6-04) 
Sec. 34-307. - Revocation. 
    The franchise granted by this article is subject to revocation upon sixty (60) days' written notice by the party desiring such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 12-6-04) 
Sec. 34-308. - Michigan public service commission; jurisdiction. 
    Said grantee shall, as to all other conditions and elements of service not herein fixed, be and remain subject to the reasonable rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission or its successors, applicable to gas service in said city. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 12-6-04) 
Sec. 34-309. - Repealer. 
    This article, when accepted and published as herein provided, shall repeal and supersede the provisions of a gas ordinance adopted by the city on December 16, 1974 entitled: 
AN ORDINANCE, granting to CONSUMERS POWER COMPANY, its successors and assigns, the right, power and authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and services on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges and other public places, and to do a local gas business in the CITY OF OWOSSO, SHIAWASSEE COUNTY, MICHIGAN, for a period of thirty years. 
and amendments, if any, to such ordinance whereby a gas franchise was granted to Consumers Energy Company. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 12-6-04) 
Sec. 34-310. - Assignment. 
    Grantee shall not assign this franchise to any other person, firm or corporation without the prior written approval of the city. The city shall not unreasonably withhold its consent to an assignment if the assignee is financially able to carry out grantee's obligation under this franchise. This assignment of this franchise to a subsidiary, division or affiliated corporation of grantee or its parent corporation shall not be considered an assignment requiring the consent of city. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 12-6-04) 
Sec. 34-311. - Compliance with Charter and ordinances. 
    During the term of this franchise, grantee shall comply with all applicable City Charter provisions and ordinances, provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as a waiver by grantee of any of its existing or future rights under state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 12-6-04) 
Sec. 34-312. - Effective date. 
    This article shall take effect twenty (20) days after the date of its adoption; provided, however, it shall cease and be of no effect after thirty (30) days from its adoption unless within said period grantee shall accept the same in writing filed with the city clerk. Upon acceptance and publication hereof, this article shall constitute a contract between said city and said grantee. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 12-6-04) 
Chapter 35 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Grass and noxious weeds, § 18-121 et seq.; plant materials, § 38-384. 
State Law reference- Care of trees and shrubs, MCL 247.241 et seq., MSA 9.361 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 35-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Park shall include all public parks having individual names, and all area owned by the city, or to which the public has free access as a park. 
    Prohibited species shall mean any tree of poplar ( Populus Sp. ), willow ( Salix Sp. ), box elder ( Acer Negundo ), silver maple ( Acer Saccharium ), locust ( Robina Sp. ), tree of heaven ( Ailanthus Altissima ), catalpa ( Catalpa Sp. ), mulberry ( Morus Sp. ) and Siberian elm ( Ulmus pumilia ). 
    Public utility shall mean any person, owning or operating any pole, line, pipe or conduit located in any public street or over or along any public easement or right of way for the transmission of electricity, gas, telephone service or telegraph service. 
    Street shall mean all the land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, highways and boulevards in the city. 
    Tree, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation. 
(Code 1977, § 3.31) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 35-2. - Application. 
    The provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise specifically stated herein, shall apply only to public streets, parkways, parks and other land publicly owned or controlled by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 3.31(7)) 
Sec. 35-3. - Responsibility. 
    The public services director shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 3.32) 
Sec. 35-4. - Rules and regulations. 
    The city manager shall make such rules and regulations supplementary to this chapter and not in conflict herewith, as he or she may from time to time deem necessary, to be effective upon approval by the council. Until changed pursuant to this section, the rules and regulations in effect at the adoption of this Code, shall continue in effect. No person shall fail to obey any rule or regulation effective hereunder. 
(Code 1977, § 3.46) 
Sec. 35-5. - Permits for tree planting, care, removal. 
    The public services director shall have control over all trees located within the street rights-of-way and parks in the city and the planting, care and removal thereof, subject to the regulations contained in this chapter. The owner of land abutting on any street may, upon obtaining prior written permission of the director, prune, spray, plant or remove trees in that part of the street abutting his land not used for public travel, but no person shall otherwise prune, spray, plant or remove any tree in any street or park. Every such permit shall specify the extent of the authorization and the conditions to which it is subject. Where an owner of abutting property requests the removal of a tree, the public services director is authorized, in his or her discretion, to require as a condition to granting of approval for such removal, that such property owner make the removal in accordance with regulations established by the public services department and assume all or any part of the costs of removing such tree. 
(Code 1977, § 3.33) 
Sec. 35-6. - Public tree removal. 
    The public services department shall have the right to plant, trim, spray, preserve, and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure safety or to preserve the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The public services director may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition, or which is of a prohibited species, or is affected with any injurious disease, fungus, insect or other pest. Whenever the department shall remove any tree, plant or shrub, solely for the purpose of constructing any public work, the director shall, if practicable, replace the same at public expense, at some nearby location by planting another tree, plant or shrub, not necessarily of the same type. 
(Code 1977, § 3.34) 
Sec. 35-7. - Spacing of shade trees. 
    Future plantings of shade and ornamental trees in the streets and parks of the city will be done by the public services department in accordance with prescribed tree planting practices. Elm trees shall be spaced not less than sixty (60) feet, oak trees not less than fifty (50) feet, and other shade and ornamental trees not less than forty-five (45) feet. No trees shall be planted in the parkway between the curb and sidewalk when that area is less than three (3) feet wide. No tree shall be planted nearer to the intersection of any streets than twenty-five (25) feet from the corner of such intersection. 
(Code 1977, § 3.35) 
Sec. 35-8. - Tree protection. 
    No person shall break, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or shrub, or set any fire within twenty-five (25) feet of any tree, or permit any fire, or the heat therefrom, to injure any portion of any tree. No toxic chemicals or other injurious materials shall be allowed to seep, drain or be emptied on, near or about any tree. No electric wires or any other lines or wires shall be permitted to come in contact with any tree or shrub in any manner that shall cause damage thereto, and no person shall attach any electric insulation to any tree. No person shall use any tree as an anchor except by special written permit from the public services director, and no material shall be fastened to or hung on any tree. All persons having under their care, custody or control, facilities which may interfere with the trimming or removal of any tree, shall after notice thereof by the public services department, promptly abate such interference in such manner as shall permit the trimming or removal of such tree by the department. The director of the department shall certify all city permits for construction, installation, altering, moving or razing of all buildings, utilities, sidewalks, sewers or other operations where trees or shrubs, or parts thereof, are involved. 
(Code 1977, § 3.36) 
Sec. 35-9. - Excavations near trees. 
    Excavations and driveways shall not be placed within five (5) feet of any tree without written permission from the public services director. Any person making such excavation or construction shall guard any tree within six (6) feet thereof with a good substantial frame box to be approved by the public services department. All building material or other debris shall be kept at least four (4) feet from any tree. 
(Code 1977, § 3.37) 
Sec. 35-10. - Covering surface near trees. 
    No person shall place within the street right-of-way, any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other material which will in any way impede the full and free passage of water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any tree, except a sidewalk of authorized width and location. 
(Code 1977, § 3.38) 
Sec. 35-11. - Gas main leakage. 
    Gas pipes or mains within any public rights of way or on any public property shall be so maintained as to avoid any leakage therefrom. If a leak exists or occurs, it shall be reported to the owner of such pipe and main, and the leak shall be repaired within twenty-four (24) hours. Any damage to trees, shrubbery or grass resulting from the escape of gas from a pipe or main shall be repaired, and the cost of the work including the cost of removal and the replacement of any trees, shall be levied against the owner of the pipe or main causing the damage. 
(Code 1977, § 3.39) 
Sec. 35-12. - Lawn extensions. 
    On residential streets, the abutting owner or occupant may maintain a planting strip on the lawn extension between the sidewalk and curb and may plant flowers, trees and shrubbery therein in conformity with this chapter. No person shall wilfully injure or destroy any grass, flower, tree or shrub, upon any such planting strip or throw any papers, refuse or other thing thereon. No person shall drive an automobile, bicycle or other vehicle upon or over any such planting strip. 
(Code 1977, § 3.44) 
Sec. 35-13. - Overhead lines; trimming permits. 
    The public services director shall grant permission to public utilities to trim and keep trimmed all trees within the streets, alleys, parks and public places of the city, in such a manner as shall keep the overhead lines of such public utilities safe and accessible. Such trimming shall be done in accordance with approved practices and under the general direction of the public services department. Permission, as provided for in this section, shall require reasonable prior notice to the city before any work is commenced thereunder. Provided, however, that in the event of an emergency requiring immediate maintenance work on the overhead lines of public utilities, prior notice of commencing work under said permit shall not be required. The word "emergency" as used in this section shall be defined to mean the occurrence or happening of an event which could not be foreseen by the exercise of reasonable care and foresight, which might cause damage to the overhead lines of the public utilities. 
(Code 1977, § 3.45) 
Secs. 35-14-35-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRIVATE TREES 

Sec. 35-31. - Clearance. 
    Every owner of any tree on private property overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall trim the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of ten (10) feet above the surface of the street or right-of-way. The owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to trim any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light, or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign, such trimming to be confined to the area immediately above the right-of-way. 
(Code 1977, § 3.40) 
Sec. 35-32. - Diseases and infestations. 
    When the public services director shall discover that any tree growing on private property within the city is afflicted with any dangerous and infectious insect infestation or tree disease, he or she shall forthwith serve written notice upon the owner or his or her agent, or the occupant of the property, in the manner specified in section 1-9, describing the tree, its location and the nature of the infestation or tree disease and ordering the owner, agent and occupant to take such measures as may be reasonably necessary to curb such infestation or disease and to prevent the spreading thereof, specifying the measures required to be taken. Such order may require the pruning, spraying or destruction of trees as may be reasonably necessary. Every such notice shall be complied with within ten (10) days after service thereof, upon the owner, agent or occupant of the property on which the afflicted tree is located, or within such additional time as may be stipulated in such notice. 
(Code 1977, § 3.41) 
Sec. 35-33. - Owners failure to comply. 
    In case the owner, agent or occupant of the property refuse to carry out the order of the public services director within the time limited, or in case of an appeal, within five (5) days after the council shall have affirmed such order, the director shall carry out the pruning, spraying, or destruction of the trees as deemed necessary by him or her and shall bill the owner, agent or occupant of the property for the cost thereof. In case the owner of such property shall fail to pay such bill within sixty (60) days after the same has been rendered, the director shall report the same to the council for collection as a single lot assessment against the property in accordance with the Charter. The director may, without serving the above notice, when the owner or occupant of any private property shall consent thereto and pay the reasonable cost thereof, cause trees growing on private property to be sprayed when he or she deems the same necessary on account of any infestation or disease or threat thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 3.42) 
Sec. 35-34. - Inspection. 
    The public services director and his or her assistants and employees shall have authority to enter upon private premises for the purpose of examining any trees, shrubs, plants, or vines for the presence of destructive insects or plant diseases. No damages shall be awarded for the destruction of any tree, shrub, or plant or fruit or injury to the same, if done by the director or under his or her direction, in accordance with this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 3.43) 
Chapter 37 - WATERWAYS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Flood protection, Ch. 14; litter in lakes, streams and fountains, § 18-54; public bathing beaches at outdoor assemblies, § 20-29(8); parks and recreation, Ch. 21; motorboats on Hopkins Lake, § 21-4; planning, Ch. 23; soil erosion control, Ch. 27; subdivision regulations, Ch. 30; swimming pools, Ch. 31; zoning, Ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Marine safety act, MCL 281.1001 et seq., MSA 18.1287(1) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 37-1. - Definition. 
    In the interpretation of this chapter "waterway" shall mean any lake, river, canal or connecting waters within the boundaries of the city, and under its jurisdiction. 
(Code 1977, § 9.191) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 37-2. - Pollution. 
    No person shall put into the waters of any waterway or on the ice covering any such waters, any filth of any description or throw or deposit or permit to be deposited or placed in any of the waters of any waterway, or on ice covering said waters, any glass, cans or bottles, any metal object, rubbish, garbage, refuse, sewage, or any other substance likely to injure any person, fish, bird or animal, or cause any unsightly or unsanitary conditions, either in or upon such waters or on the shoreline adjacent thereto. 
(Code 1977, § 9.192) 
Sec. 37-3. - Obstructions. 
    No person shall place any obstruction, or permit the placing of any obstruction, within any waterway which would tend to endanger or impede navigation. Any person offending against the provisions of this section shall be liable to the city for all costs and expense incurred by it in the removal of such obstruction. 
(Code 1977, § 9.193) 
Sec. 37-4. - Encroachment. 
    No person shall fill any land or place any structure beyond the established dock lines of the city. The established dock lines of the Shiawassee River shall be as set forth in Ordinance No. 52 of the city, approved February 5, 1923, until otherwise provided by the council. Encroachments may be removed and the expense of such removal charged to the abutting land owner when made or permitted by him or her or suffered to remain by him or her, otherwise than in accordance with the terms and conditions of this chapter. The expense of such removal shall be charged against the owner as a special assessment in accordance with section 10.7 of the Charter. 
(Code 1977, § 9.194) 
Sec. 37-5. - Cleanliness of docks. 
    Persons in charge of or occupying boats shall at all times keep the docks, seawalls and premises adjacent to such watercraft in a neat and orderly manner and free from trash, rubbish, repair parts, machinery, equipment and debris of all kinds. 
(Code 1977, § 9.195) 
Secs. 37-6-37-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY WATERFRONT PROPERTY 

Sec. 37-26. - Recreational use restricted. 
    No person shall bathe, swim, dive, ice skate, launch any boat or make any other recreational use of any water adjacent to city-owned land except in such areas where the activity engaged in is specifically permitted and signs authorizing such activity are erected, nor shall any person use any city-owned land to gain access to adjacent waters for the purpose of engaging in such activities in such prohibited areas. 
(Code 1977, § 9.196) 
Sec. 37-27. - Posting signs. 
    The city manager is directed to post suitable signs conspicuously on all city-owned property where any recreational use or activity is allowed under the provisions of this chapter, giving notice to the public of what recreational activities may be authorized in the particular area. The city manager is also authorized to erect signs conspicuously on city-owned property where such recreational use or activity is not authorized, which signs may specify the particular recreational activities prohibited. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the absence of any sign shall not constitute a defense to any charge of violation of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 9.196) 
Sec. 37-28. - Regulations. 
    The city manager is authorized to adopt regulations designating the particular city-owned property on which all or certain recreational activities are prohibited or specifically permitted, which regulations shall be effective upon approval by the council. The city manager is authorized to amend such regulations from time to time subject to approval of the council. 
(Code 1977, § 9.196) 
Chapter 38 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance pertaining to rezoning, § 1-6(11); flood protection, Ch. 14; mobile homes and recreational vehicles, Ch. 17; signs, Ch. 26; subdivision regulations, Ch. 30; swimming pools, Ch. 31; waterways, Ch. 37. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate land use, MCL 125.581 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Title. 
    An ordinance enacted under Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2931 et seq.), as amended, governing the incorporated portions of the city to regulate and restrict the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence and for public and semi-public or other specified uses; and to regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings, and other structures; to regulate and to determine the size of yards, courts, and open spaces; to regulate and limit the density of population; and for such purposes to divide the city into districts and establish the boundaries thereof; providing for changes in the regulations, restrictions and boundaries of such districts; defining certain terms used herein; providing for enforcement; establishing a board of appeals; and imposing penalties for the violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 5.00) 
Sec. 38-2. - Preamble. 
    Pursuant to the authority conferred by the public acts of the state in such case, made and provided and for the purpose of promoting and protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city, by protecting and conserving the character and social and economic stability of the residential, commercial, industrial and other use areas; by securing the most appropriate use of land; preventing overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population; providing adequate light, air and reasonable access; and facilitating adequate and economical provisions of transportation, water, sewers, schools, recreation and other public requirements, and by other means, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan this chapter is adopted. 
(Code 1977, § 5.01) 
Sec. 38-3. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of Owosso Zoning Ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 5.02) 
Sec. 38-4. - Construction of language. 
    The following rules of construction apply to the text of this chapter: 
(1)  The particular shall control the general. 
(2)  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
(3)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
(4)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(5)  A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. 
(6)  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," or "occupied for." 
(7)  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
(8)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," "either ... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(a)  "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(b)  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(c)  "Either ... or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(9)  Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
(Code 1977, § 5.03) 
Sec. 38-5. - Definitions. 
    Accessory building. A building detached from a principal building on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use. 
    Accessory use, or accessory. A use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and (except in the case of accessory off-street parking spaces or loading) located on the same zoning lot as the principal use to which it is related. 
    When "accessory" is used in this text, it shall have the same meaning as accessory use. 
    An accessory use includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Residential accommodations for servants and/or caretakers. 
(2)  Swimming pools for the use of the occupants of a residence or their guests. 
(3)  Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, tool room, or similar accessory building or other structure. 
(4)  A newsstand primarily for the convenience of the occupants of a building, which is located wholly within such building and has no exterior signs or displays. 
(5)  Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in connection with a business or industrial use, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations. 
(6)  Storage of goods used in or produced by industrial uses or related activities, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations. 
(7)  Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, subject to the accessory off-street parking regulations. 
(8)  Uses clearly incidental to a main use such as, but not limited to, offices of an industrial or commercial complex located on the site of the commercial or industrial complex. 
(9)  Accessory off-street loading, subject to the off-street loading regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
(10)  Accessory signs, subject to the sign regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
(11)  Satellite receiving antennae. An apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit. 
(12)  Usable satellite signal. A satellite signal which when received on a conventional television set is at least equal in picture quality to that received from local commercial television stations or by way of cable television. 
    Adult foster care facility. A governmental or non-governmental establishment having as its principal function the receiving of adults for foster care. It includes facilities and foster care family homes for adults who are aged, emotionally disturbed, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing basis but who do not require continuous nursing care. Beginning March 27, 1984, adult foster care facility shall include home for the aged. 
    Adult foster care small group home. An adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive at least seven (7) but not more than twelve (12) adults shall be provided with foster care. 
    Alley. Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alterations. Any change, addition or modification in construction or type of occupancy, or in the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed." 
    Apartment. A suite of rooms or a room in a multiple-family building arranged and intended for a place of residence of a single family or a group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Auto repair station. A place where, along with the sale of engine fuels, the following services may be carried out: general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, collision service, such as body, frame, or fender straightening and repair; overall painting and undercoating of automobiles. 
    Basement. That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
_____

Basement and Story
_____
    Bed and breakfast operations. A use which is subordinate to the principal use of a dwelling unit as a single-family dwelling unit and a use in which transient guests are provided a sleeping room and board in return for payment. 
    Block. The property abutting one (1) side of a street and lying between the two (2) nearest intersecting streets, (crossing or terminating) or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, lake, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development, or corporate boundary lines of the city. 
    Building. Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns or walls, and intended for the shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    Building height. The vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. 

Building Height
    Building line. A line formed by the face of the building, and for the purposes of this chapter, a minimum building line is the same as a front setback line. See article XVIII for porches and horizontal projections such as eaves and bay windows. 

Building Line
    Child or adult care center. A facility other than a private home where one (1) or more persons are received for care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day and for four (4) weeks during a calendar year. 
    Club. An organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics or the like, but not operated for profit. 
    Convalescent or nursing home. A structure with sleeping rooms, where persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing and medical care. 
    Drive-in. A business establishment so developed that its retail or service character is dependent on providing a drive-way approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle rather than within a building or structure. 
    Dwelling unit. A building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one (1) family for residential purposes and having cooking facilities. 
    Dwelling, one-family. A building designed exclusively for and occupied by one (1) family. 
    Dwelling, two-family. A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two (2) families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family. A building, or a portion thereof, designed exclusively for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently of each other. 
    Development. The construction of a new building or other structure on a zoning lot, the relocation of an existing building on another zoning lot, or the use of open land for a new use. 
    District. A portion of the incorporated area of the city within which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Erected. Built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises which are required for construction, excavation, fill, drainage, and the like, shall be considered a part of erection. 
    Essential services. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or city departments of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar equipment in connection herewith, but not including buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or city departments for the general health, safety or welfare. 
    Excavation. Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care. 
    Family. One (1) or two (2) persons or parents, with their direct lineal descendants and adopted children (and including the domestic employees thereof) together with not more than two (2) persons not so related, living together in the whole or part of a dwelling comprising a single housekeeping unit. Every additional group of two (2) or less persons living in such housekeeping unit shall be considered a separate family for the purpose of this chapter. 
    Family day care home. A private home in which one (1) to six (6) children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day and for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year. 
    Farm. The carrying on of any agricultural activity or the raising of livestock or small animals as a source of income. 
    Floor area, residential. For the purpose of computing the minimum allowable floor area in a residential dwelling unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of such story of the building shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two (2) dwellings. The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways and enclosed and unenclosed porches. 
    Floor area, usable. (For the purposes of computing parking.) That area used for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients, or customers. Such floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, hallways, or for the utilities or sanitary facilities, shall be excluded from this computation of "usable floor area": Measurement of usable floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls. 
_____

Floor Area
_____
    Floor area ratio. A volume control wherein a building ratio of 1.0 means that the floor area may equal the lot area. An F.A.R. of 5.0 means that the floor area may be up to five (5) times as large as the lot area: and an F.A.R. of 0.5 means that the floor area shall be no more than one-half of the lot area. 
    Foster family group home. A private home in which more than four (4) but less than seven (7) children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage or adoption, are provided care for twenty-four (24) hours a day for four (4) or more days a week, for two (2) or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
    Foster family home. A private home in which one (1) but not more than four (4) minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage or adoption, are given care and supervision for twenty-four (24) hours a day, for four (4) or more days a week, for two (2) or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
    Garage, private. An accessory building or portion of a main building designed or used solely for the storage of motor-driven vehicles, boats and similar vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. 
    Garage, service. Any premises used for the storage or care of motor-driven vehicles, or where any such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired, or kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
    Gasoline service station. A place for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles, together with the sale of minor accessories and services for motor vehicles, but not including major automobile repair. 
    Grade. The ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating the number of stories and the height of buildings. The building grade shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished grade is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the building. 
    Group day care home. A private home where seven (7) to twelve (12) children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day and for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year. 
    Grower. A licensee that is a commercial entity doing business in this state that cultivates, dries, trims, or cures and packages marihuana for sale to a processor or provisioning center. 
    Hotel. A building or part of a building, with a common entrance or entrances, in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily for transient occupancy, and in which one (1) or more of the following services are offered: Mail service, furnishing of linen, telephone, secretarial, or desk service, and bellboy service. A hotel may include restaurant or cocktail lounge, public banquet halls, ballrooms or meeting rooms. 
    Junkyard. An area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled including, but not limited to: Scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A "junkyard" includes automobile wrecking yards and includes any open area of more than two hundred (200) square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk. 
    Kennel, commercial. Any lot or premises on which three (3) or more dogs, cats or other household pets are either permanently or temporarily boarded. Kennel shall also include any lot or premises where household pets are bred or sold. 
    Licensee. A person holding a state operating license issued under the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq. 
    Loading space. An off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Local street. A street that provides frontage and access residential lots but also carries some through traffic to lower ordered cul-de-sac streets and lanes. 
    Lot. A parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions of this chapter. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. 

Interior, Through and Corner Lots
    Lot, corner. A lot where the interior angle of two (2) adjacent sides at the intersection of two (2) streets is less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this chapter if the arc is of less radius than one hundred fifty (150) feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two (2) points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended from an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
    Lot, interior. Any lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot, through. Any interior lot having frontage on two (2) more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, all yards of said lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yard setbacks shall be provided as required. 
    Lot, zoning. A single tract of land, located within a single block, which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. 
A zoning lot shall satisfy this chapter with respect to area, size, dimensions and frontage as required in the district in which the zoning lot is located. A zoning lot, therefore, may not coincide with a lot of record as filed with the county register of deeds, but may include one (1) or more lots of record. 
    Lot area. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. 
    Lot coverage. The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings including accessory buildings. 
    Lot depth. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines. 
    Lot lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein: 
(1)  Front lot line. In the case of an interior lot, is that line separating said lot from the street. In the case of a through lot, is that line separating said lot from either street. In the case of a corner lot, is that line as designated on the building plans filed for approval with the building inspector. 
(2)  Rear lot line. That lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten (10) feet long lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. 
(3)  Side lot line. Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 
    Lot of record. A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a document or map on file with the county register of deeds or in common use by city or county officials, and which actually exists as so shown, or any part of such parcel held in a record ownership separate from that of the remainder thereof. 
    Lot width. The horizontal straight line distance between the side lot lines, measured between the two (2) points where the front setback line intersects the side lot lines. 
    Main building. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated. 
    Major thoroughfare. An arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume traffic way for both the immediate municipal area and the region beyond, and is designated as a major thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, expressway or equivalent term on the major thoroughfare plan to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the major thoroughfare plan. 
    Marijuana or marihuana. That term as defined in the Public Health Code, MCL 333.1101 et seq.; the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq.; the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq.; and the Marihuana Tracking Act, MCL 333.27901 et seq. 
    Marihuana facility. An enterprise at a specific location at which a licensee is licensed to operate under the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, MCL 333.27101 et seq., including a marihuana grower, marihuana processor, marihuana provisioning center, marihuana secure transporter, or marihuana safety compliance facility. The term does not include or apply to a "primary caregiver" or "caregiver" as that term is defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq. 
    Master plan. The comprehensive community plan, including graphic and written proposals indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings and all physical development of the city, and includes any unit or part of such plan, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. Such plan may or may not be adopted by the planning commission and/or the council. 
    Medical marihuana dispensary (or clinic) means any retail store, store front, office building or other structure or any type of mobile unit or entity that dispenses, facilitates, sells, or provides, in any manner, marihuana or cannabis, any product containing marihuana or cannabis, or medical marihuana paraphernalia as described herein. This definition does not apply to patients or caregivers operating pursuant to subsection 38-52(9). 
    Medical marihuana growing facility means any building, or portion thereof, that allows cultivation, growing, processing or distribution of medical marihuana, excluding the cultivation, growing or processing allowed inside a qualifying patient's primary, legal residence. 
    Mezzanine. An intermediate floor in any story occupying not to exceed one-third ( 1/3 ) of the floor area of such story. 
    Mobile home (trailer coach). Any vehicle designed, used, or so constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways and duly licensable as such, and constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one (1) or more persons. 
    Mobile home park (trailer court). Any plot of ground upon which two (2) or more trailer coaches, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located. 
    Motel. A series of attached, semi-detached or detached rental units containing a bedroom, bathroom and closet space. Units shall provide for overnight lodging and are offered to the public for compensation, and shall cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle. 
    Nonconforming building. A building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived (December 6, 1970), or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the provisions of the chapter in the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use. A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived (December 6, 1970), or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nursery, plant materials. A space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail sale on the premises including products used for gardening or landscaping. The definition of nursery within the meaning of this chapter does not include any space, building or structure used for the sale of fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees. 
    Nuisance factors. An offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such as, but not limited to: 
(1)  Noise; 
(2)  Dust; 
(3)  Smoke; 
(4)  Odor; 
(5)  Glare; 
(6)  Fumes; 
(7)  Flashes; 
(8)  Vibration; 
(9)  Shock waves; 
(10)  Heat; 
(11)  Electronic or atomic radiation; 
(12)  Objectionable effluent; 
(13)  Noise of congregation of people, particularly at night; 
(14)  Passenger traffic; 
(15)  Invasion of nonabutting street frontage by traffic. 
    Off-street parking lot. A facility providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles, for maneuvering, so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than three (3) vehicles. 
    Open front store. A business establishment so developed that service to the patron may be extended beyond the walls of the structure, not requiring the patron to enter the structure. The term "open front store" shall not include automobile repair stations or automobile service stations. 
    Outdoor production . Growing marihuana in an expanse of open or cleared ground or in a greenhouse, hoop house, or similar non-rigid structure that does not utilize any artificial lighting, including but not limited to electrical lighting sources. 
    Parking space. An area of definite length and width, said area shall be exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be fully accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles. 
    Plaza. An open area accessible to the public which is either: 
(1)  An open area along the front lot line not less than five (5) feet deep, measured perpendicular to the front lot line; or 
(2)  An open area on a through lot, extending from street to street and not less than forty (40) feet wide. Such plaza shall not at any point be more than five (5) feet above the curb level of the nearest adjoining street, and shall be unobstructed from its lowest level up, except for covered pedestrian walks. 
    Principal use. The main use to which the premises are developed and the principal purpose for which the premises exist. 
    Processor. A licensee that is a commercial entity doing business in this state that purchases marihuana from a grower and that extracts resin from the marihuana or creates a marihuana-infused product for sale and transfer in packaged form to a provisioning center. 
    Provisioning center. A licensee that is a commercial entity doing business in this state that purchases marihuana from a grower or processor and sells, supplies, or provides marihuana to registered qualifying patients, directly or through the patients' registered primary caregivers. Provisioning center includes any commercial property where marihuana is sold at retail to registered qualifying patients or registered primary caregivers. A noncommercial location used by a primary caregiver to assist a qualifying patient connected to the caregiver in accordance with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq., is not a provisioning center for purposes of this article. 
    Public utility. A person, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state or city regulations to the public: Gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water. 
    Room. For the purpose of determining lot area requirements and density in a multi-family district, a room is a living room, dining room or bedroom, equal to at least eighty (80) square feet in area. A room shall not include the area in kitchen, sanitary facilities, utility provisions, corridors, hallways, and storage. Plans presented showing one (1), two (2), or three (3) bedroom units and including a "den," "library" or other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density. 
    Safety compliance facility. A licensee that is a commercial entity that receives marihuana from a marihuana facility or registered primary caregiver, tests it for contaminants and for tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids, returns the test results, and may return the marihuana to the marihuana facility. 
    Secondary thoroughfare. A principal artery within residential or commercial areas that carries relatively high traffic volumes and connects lower ordered streets with major thoroughfares. Its primary function is to promote the free flow of traffic. 
    Secure transporter . A licensee that is a commercial entity doing business in this state that stores marihuana and transports marihuana between marihuana facilities for a fee. 
    Setback. The distance required to obtain minimum front, side or rear yard open space provisions of this chapter. 
    Shadow flicker. The moving shadow, created by the sun or other permanent light source shining through the rotating blades of a wind energy system (WES). The amount or degree of shadow flicker is calculated and quantified by computer models. 
    Sign. Any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, announce the purposes of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind to the public. 
    Small structure-mounted wind energy system (SSWES). A structure-mounted small wind energy system that converts wind energy into electricity by using equipment that includes any base, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformers, vane, wire, inverter, batteries, or other components ancillary to such use in the system. This structure [is] an accessory building that is permanently affixed to a structure's roof, walls, or other elevated surface. The SSWES does not exceed ten (10) kilowatts or fifteen (15) [feet] in height as measured from the highest point of the roof, excluding chimneys, antennae, and similar protuberances. 
    Small tower-mounted wind energy system (STWES). A tower-mounted small wind energy system that converts wind energy into electricity by using equipment that includes any base, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformers, vane, wire, inverter, batteries, or other components ancillary to such use in the system. The SWES is an accessory building that does not exceed fifty (50) kilowatts or one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
    Small wind energy system (SWES) represent all SSWES and STWES systems. 
    Smoking lounge shall mean an establishment, which has a state-issued smoking ban exemption certificate, and that allows smoking of tobacco products or non-tobacco products or substances on the premises. The term "smoking lounge" includes, but is not limited to, facilities commonly described as tobacco retail specialty stores, cigar bars and lounges, hookah cafes and lounges, tobacco bars and lounges, tobacco clubs or zero (0) percent nicotine establishments. 
    Story. That part of a building, except a mezzanine as defined herein, included between the surface of one (1) floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above. A story thus defined shall not be counted as a story when more than fifty (50) percent, by cubic content, is below the height level of the adjoining ground. 
    Story, half. An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof having an area of at least two hundred (200) square feet with a clear height of seven (7) feet six (6) inches. For the purposes of this chapter, the usable floor area is only that area having at least four (4) feet clear height between floor and ceiling. 
    Street. A public dedicated right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. 
    Temporary structure. Any structure erected for the purpose of temporarily housing displaced persons or permitting occupancy for construction related functions related to an ongoing construction or building project. 
    Temporary use. Any use, event, or display of a temporary, seasonal, or portable nature that is customary and incidental to the primary permitted use, providing that such use is not otherwise regulated or permitted by this article or a valid site plan. 
    Use. The principal purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied. 
    Wall. A structure of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this chapter. 
    Yards. The open spaces on the same lot with a main building unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this chapter (see sections 38-418 and 38-419) and as defined herein: 
(1)  Front yard. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main building. 
(2)  Rear yard. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the main building. In the case of a corner lot, the rear yard may be opposite either street frontage. 
(3)  Side yard. An open space between the main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building. 

(Code 1977, § 5.04; Ord. No. 424, § 5.04, 6-18-84; Ord. No. 428, § 1, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 439, § 1, 1-6-86; Ord. No. 477, § 1(1), 11-19-90; Ord. No. 499, 2-16-93; Ord. No. 502, § 1, 3-15-93; Ord. No. 520, § 1, 3-21-94; Ord. No. 721, § 1, 4-18-11; Ord. No. 728, § 1, 2-6-12; Ord. No. 744, §§ 1, 4, 8-19-13; Ord. No. 762, § 1, 3-16-15; Ord. No. 793, § 2, 7-2-18) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-6. - Minimal requirements. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance other than the above described zoning ordinance, or with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to the law relating to the use of buildings or premises; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is required by existing ordinance or by rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Code 1977, § 5.125) 
Sec. 38-7. - Vestment of rights. 
    Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification or any permissible activities therein; and, they are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1977, § 5.127) 
Secs. 38-8-38-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP 

Sec. 38-26. - Districts established. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into the following districts: 
Residential districts. 
R-1 one-family residential district 
R-2 two-family residential district 
RT attached one-family residential district 
RM-1 multiple-family residential district-Low rise 
RM-2 multiple-family residential district-High rise 
Nonresidential districts. 
OS-1 office service district 
B-1 local business district 
B-2 planned shopping center district 
B-3 central business district 
B-4 general business district 
I-1 light industrial district 
I-2 general industrial district 
P-1 vehicular parking district 
C-OS conservation-open space district 
Combination districts. 
PUD planned unit development district 
(Code 1977, § 5.05; Ord. No. 626, § 1, 3-17-03; Ord. No. 700, § 1, 7-21-08) 
Sec. 38-27. - District boundaries. 
    The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the zoning map, city of Owosso, zoning ordinance, which is on file in the office of the city clerk, and which map with all notations, references, and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully described herein. 
(Code 1977, § 5.06; Ord. No. 707, § 1, 4-20-09; Ord. No. 708, § 1, 4-20-09; Ord. No. 709, § 1, 4-20-09; Ord. No. 789, § 1, 11-6-17) 
Sec. 38-28. - District boundaries interpreted. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits. 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be the midway between the main tracks. 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of streams, rivers, canals, lakes or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such center lines. 
(6)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1) through (5) above shall be so construed. 
(7)  Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map or where distances are not specifically indicated on the zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (1) through (6) above, the board of appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(8)  Insofar as some or all of the various districts may be indicated on the zoning map by patterns which, for the sake of map clarity, do not cover public rights-of-way, it is intended that such district boundaries do extend to the center of any public right-of-way. 
(Code 1977, § 5.07) 
Sec. 38-29. - Zoning of annexed areas. 
    Whenever any area is annexed to the city it shall immediately upon such annexation, be automatically classified as an R-1 district until a zoning map for the area has been adopted by the council. The planning commission shall recommend the appropriate zoning districts for such area within three (3) months after the matter is referred to it by the council. 
(Code 1977, § 5.08) 
Sec. 38-30. - Zoning of vacated areas. 
    Whenever any street, alley or other public way, within the city shall be vacated, such street, alley or other public way or portion thereof, shall automatically be classified in the same zone district as the property to which it attaches. 
(Code 1977, § 5.09) 
Sec. 38-31. - District purposes, uses. 
    All purposes and uses in any districts shall be subject to the provisions of article XVII, General Provisions, article XVIII, General Exceptions, and article XIX, Special Use Permits. In order to ensure all possible benefits and protection for the zone districts in this chapter, the land uses have been classified in three (3) categories: 
(1)  Principal uses permitted. The primary uses and structures specified for which the zone district has been established. 
(2)  Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. Such use shall be allowed, subject to the specific conditions imposed for such use in the chapter. 
(3)  Uses permitted by issuance of a special use permit. Uses and structures which have been generally accepted as reasonably compatible with the primary uses and structures within the zone district, but could present potential injurious effects upon the primary uses and structures within the zone district and therefore require special consideration in relation to the welfare of adjacent properties and to the community as a whole. All such proposes uses shall be subject to a public hearing following review by the city planning commission. Refer to article XIX. 
(Code 1977, § 5.1; Ord. No. 424, § 5.1, 6-18-84) 
Sec. 38-32. - Historic overlay districts. 
(a)  Statement of purpose. The purpose of establishing historic overlay districts within the city is to: 
(1)  Safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving historic districts as well as the individual buildings, structures, sites and objects within the districts in the city which reflect elements of the city's cultural social, economic, political or architectural history. 
(2)  To stabilize and improve property values in the districts. 
(3)  To strengthen the local economy. 
(4)  To promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens of the city and of the state. 
(b)  As used in this chapter: 
(1)  Alter and alteration mean work that changes the detail of a resource but does not change the basic size or shape. Alteration includes any action requiring a building permit or site modification under all current city ordinances. 
(2)  Destruction means the razing or demolition, whether entirely or in part, of a resource, and includes, but is not limited to, destruction by neglect. 
(3)  Destruction by neglect means neglect in maintaining, repairing or securing a resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource or the loss of structural integrity of the resource. 
(4)  Historic resource means a publicly or privately owned building, structure, site, object, feature or open space that is significant in the history, architecture, culture, or beauty of the city. 
(c)  The city historic overlay districts shall be those areas already designated as national historic districts within the city. The districts are identified on maps maintained in the office of the city clerk and include: 
(1)  The Oliver Street Historic District; 
(2)  The Westown Historic District; 
(3)  The Michigan Avenue Historic District; and 
(4)  The Mason Street Historic District. 
(d)  Although it is not officially registered as a national historic district, downtown Owosso shall also constitute a historic overlay district for the purposes of this section. The downtown historic overlay district is described below: 
Beginning at the intersection of the south line of Mason Street and the west line of Washington Street, thence westerly to the east bank of the Shiawassee River, thence southwesterly along the east bank of the river to a point two hundred fifty (250) feet southerly of the Main Street right-of-way, thence northeasterly on a line perpendicular to Water Street and extended to the centerline at Water Street, thence southwesterly along the centerline of Water Street to the intersection of the north line of Comstock Street, thence east to the intersection of the west line of Park Street, thence north to the intersection of the north line of East Exchange Street, thence west to the west line of Washington Street, thence north to the point of beginning. 
(e)  Whenever this chapter directs the planning commission, city council or zoning board of appeals to engage in a review and approval process of any proposed action to a structure, building or site, whether publicly or privately owned, within the city, the aforementioned public bodies shall consider whether the proposed action poses an adverse impact upon a historic resource located within the historic overlay district or whether the proposed action poses an adverse impact upon the historic overlay district itself. This section specifically includes any review and approval process necessary or ancillary to an expenditure of public funds or capital improvements. 
(1)  The standards for judging adverse impact shall include: 
a.  Whether the proposed action involves the destruction or alteration of all or any significant part of the historic resource. 
b.  Whether the proposed action involves the alteration of the surrounding environment when the significance of the historic resource is derived from its relationship to its site. 
c.  Whether the proposed action involves the introduction of visual or audio elements that are out of character with the property and its setting. 
d.  Whether the proposed action would destroy or erode the integrity or the significance that was the basis for the historic resources designation as a historic resource. 
(Ord. No. 584, § 1, 6-21-99) 
Secs. 38-33-38-50. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 753, adopted July 7, 2014, repealed § 38-33 which pertained to the Main Street office overlay district, and derived from Ord. No. 610, § 1, adopted Feb. 19, 2002. 
ARTICLE III. - R-1 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 38-51. - Intent. 
    The R-1 one-family residential districts are designed to be the most restrictive of the residential districts. The intent of this article is to provide for an environment of predominantly low-density, one-family detached dwellings along with other residentially related facilities which serve the residents in the district. 
(Code 1977, § 5.2) 
Sec. 38-52. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an R-1 district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  One-family detached dwellings; 
(2)  Farms on those parcels of land separately owned outside the boundaries of either a proprietary or supervisor's plat, having an area of not less than five (5) acres, all subject to the health and sanitation provisions of the city and provided further that no farms shall be operated as piggeries, or for the disposal of garbage, sewage, rubbish, offal or rendering plants, or for the slaughtering of animals except such animals as have been raised on the premises or have been maintained on the premises for at least a period of one (1) year immediately prior thereto and for the use and consumption by persons residing on the premises; 
(3)  Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways and recreational facilities; 
(4)  Public, parochial and other private elementary schools offering courses in general education, and not operated for profit; 
(5)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses and subject to the conditions of section 38-379; 
(6)  Private pools shall be permitted as an accessory use within the rear yard only, provided they meet the following requirements: 
a.  There shall be a minimum distance of not less than ten (10) feet, between the adjoining property line, or alley right-of-way and the outside of the pool wall. 
b.  There shall be a distance of not less than four (4) feet between the outside pool wall and any building located on the same lot. 
c.  No swimming pool shall be located less than twenty-five (25) feet from any street line. 
d.  No swimming pool shall be located in an easement. 
(7)  Bed and breakfast operations as a subordinate use to single-family dwelling units subject to city licensing provisions and a determination by the city planning commission that the applicant has shown proof of historic significance of the dwelling unit. In making the determination, the planning commission shall reference the historic criteria developed and adopted by the commission. 
(8)  Family day care home, foster family group homes and foster family homes shall be permitted subject to the following provisions: 
a.  For family day care homes only, a minimum of four hundred (400) square feet of usable outdoor play area in the rear or side yard shall be available on the premises. 
b.  Such uses are duly licensed by the state department of social services or other equivalent public agencies authorized to license these uses. 
c.  Building and lots so used shall conform to all state and local code requirements, except that such uses or structures shall be permitted in buildings and lots which are nonconforming uses or structures as defined in this chapter. 
(9)  The establishment and operation of no more than two primary caregivers as defined by the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq., provided that the dwelling is the primary residence of the caregivers and that the caregivers are in full compliance with said Act. "Primary residence" as used in this subsection means the one (1) family dwelling in which the primary caregiver normally resides. The establishment and operation of more than two (2) primary caregivers in the same dwelling is prohibited. The establishment of more than one (1) primary care giver in a primary residence in R-2, R-T, RM-1 and RM-2 zoning districts is prohibited, Code sections 38-72(1), 38-122(1) and 38-147(1) notwithstanding. 
(Code 1977, § 5.3; Ord. No. 428, § 2, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 477, § 1(3), 11-19-90; Ord. No. 721, § 2, 4-18-11) 
Sec. 38-53. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in R-1 districts, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission in accordance with section 38-390: 
(1)  Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto provided that: buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in article XVI, Schedule of Regulations, may be allowed provided front, side and rear yards are increased above the minimum required yards by one (1) foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed; 
(2)  Public, parochial and private intermediate and/or secondary schools offering courses in general education, not operated for profit. Access to the site shall be in accordance with section 38-392; 
(3)  Utility and public service buildings and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate the locating of the building within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity; 
(4)  Reserved; 
(5)  Private noncommercial recreational areas: institutional or community recreation centers; nonprofit swimming pool clubs, all subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The proposed site for any of the uses permitted herein which would attract persons from, or are intended to serve, areas beyond the immediate neighborhood shall have at least one (1) property line abutting a major thoroughfare as designated on the major thoroughfare plan, and the site shall be so planned as to provide all access in accordance with section 38-392. 
b.  Front, side and rear yards shall be at least eighty (80) feet wide, and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs, and grass. All such landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition. There shall be no parking or structures permitted in these yards, except required entrance drives and those walls used to obscure the use from abutting residential districts. 
c.  Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate not less than one-half of the member families and/or individual members. The planning commission may modify the off-street parking requirements in those instances wherein it is specifically determined that the users will originate from the immediately adjacent areas, and will therefore be pedestrian. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or zoning compliance permit, by-laws of the organization shall be provided in order to establish the membership involved for computing the off-street parking requirements. In those cases wherein the proposed use or organization does not have by-laws or formal membership, the off-street parking requirements shall be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. 
(6)  Golf courses, which may or may not be operated for profit, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The site shall be so planned as to provide all access in accordance with section 38-392. 
b.  The site plan shall be laid out to achieve a relationship between the major thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, entrances, driveways and parking areas which will encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety. 
c.  Development features including the principal and accessory buildings and structures shall be so located and related as to minimize the possibilities of any adverse effects upon adjacent property. This shall mean that all principal or accessory buildings shall be not less than two hundred (200) feet from any property lines abutting residentially zoned lands; provided that where topographic conditions are such that buildings would be screened from view, the planning commission may modify this requirement. 
(7)  Colleges, universities and other such institutions of higher learning, public and private, offering courses in general, technical or religious education and not operated for profit, all subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Any use permitted herein shall be developed only on sites of at least twenty (20) acres in area. 
b.  All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 38-392. 
c.  No building shall be closer than eighty (80) feet to any property line. 
d.  Off-street parking lots shall be set back eighty (80) feet from a major or secondary thoroughfare, fifty (50) feet from a local street and twenty (20) feet from an adjoining residential lot. 
(8)  Cemeteries provided that all access to the site is in accordance with section 38-392; 
(9)  General hospitals, with no maximum height restrictions, when the following conditions are met: 
a.  All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of at least five (5) acres in area. 
b.  All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 38-392. 
c.  The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from bounding lot lines or streets shall be at least eighty (80) feet for front, rear and side yards for all two (2) story structures. 
d.  Off-street parking lots shall be set back eighty (80) feet from a major or secondary thoroughfare, fifty (50) feet from a local street and twenty (20) feet from an adjoining residential lot. 
(10)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses; 
(11)  Attached one-family dwelling units will be permitted subject to the following conditions following approval by the council. The council, following receipt of a request for attached one family designation, shall direct the petitioner to prepare and submit a formal site plan to the city planning commission in accordance with section 38-390. Following adoption of the final site plan by the commission, the council shall give legal notice to all property owners whose property lies within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed site, and conduct a public hearing on the designation of the site for attached one family development in accordance with the approved site plan. If designation is denied, the site plan shall be null and void. 
a.  The maximum number of dwelling units that may be contained within any one (1) building or structure, and joined in any manner, shall not exceed four (4) dwelling units. 
b.  The minimum site area required for the attached one family option as herein described and conditioned shall not be less than three (3) acres. 
c.  Under this provision, the number of dwelling units per acre that could be built shall not exceed the number of dwelling units that normally could be built in the R-1 one family residential district. For purposes of computing the permitted number of dwelling units, a dwelling unit shall consist of at least one (1) living room, one (1) kitchen, one (1) bedroom, one (1) bathroom and one (1) fully enclosed garage and have a minimum of nine hundred fifty (950) square feet on one (1) floor exclusive of the garage. 
Any land area which is not made a part of the land area assigned to a building or structure shall be devoted to open space and recreational purposes for the common use of all owners or tenants in the project area. The planning commission shall require assurances that the common open space areas shall be perpetually maintained. Such assurances may take the form of a homeowners association or other cooperative association with an annual dues assessment sufficient to provide for perpetual maintenance as a precondition to occupancy. 
d.  Minimum spacing requirements and setbacks of any one (1) building or structure shall be as follows: 
Front yard\25' 
Rear yard\40' 
Side yard\15' 
Side yard next to street\25' 
Platted lots of lesser width may be combined to establish adequate setbacks for attached one family dwelling units under this section. 
e.  Because these provisions permit the developer to take a more cost-effective approach to land development (and are only conditionally permitted), the planning commission as part of its responsibility pursuant to section 38-390, site plan review, is hereby authorized to exercise a high degree of concern with landscaping improvements and screening techniques. The planning commission shall exercise due concern for the following landscaping features: 
1.  The planning commission may require landscaping, fences, and walls in pursuance of the objectives of the zoning ordinance and same shall be provided and maintained as a condition of the establishment and the continued maintenance of any use to which they are appurtenant. 
2.  The planning commission shall assess the adequacy of location and number of plant materials shown on the landscape plan which shall include details of planting requirements. 
3.  Other landscaping treatment shall likewise be depicted on the plan including hard surface or aggregate material used in the landscaping plan. 
f.  All improvements shall be completed within eighteen (18) months of the issuance of a building permit. The plans as submitted and approved shall not be otherwise modified unless after application for reconsideration the planning commission agrees to such modifications. Failure to comply with the approved plan is cause for the city to cause said plan to be implemented except as otherwise provided in subsection (11)c., and to make such assessments as are required to pay for the costs of the improvements against the owner. 
g.  Phased development: In addition to the above requirements and in the event of expiration of approval with only partial site development completed, the legal applicant-developer shall complete all of the improvements, with the exception of proposed buildings and structures shown on the approved overall development plan and shall landscape the locations where other buildings were to be located. 
h.  Site plan revisions: Any substantial modification, revision or change in the site plan from the site plan approved by the planning commission shall be subject to review and reapproval in accordance with the same procedure as required herein. 
i.  The maximum height requirement of any building or structure shall be twenty-four (24) feet. 
j.  No television receiving antennas shall be located outside the premises. 
(Code 1977, § 5.4; Ord. No. 365, § 1, 12-15-80; Ord. No. 447, § 1, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 477, § 1(2), 11-19-90; Ord. No. 516, § 1, 3-14-94) 
Sec. 38-54. - Uses permitted by issuance of a special use permit. 
    The following uses are permitted in an R-1 district by issuance of a special use permit: 
(1)  Adult foster care small group home, in accordance with the provisions of section 38-454(a); 
(2)  Child or adult care center, in accordance with provisions of sections 38-454(b); 
(3)  Conversion of single family units, in accordance with the provisions of section 38-454(c); 
(4)  Private clubs, fraternal organizations, lodge halls, and union halls, in accordance with provisions of section 38-454(d). 
(5)  Conversion of school and church buildings to office use in accordance with section 38-454(g). 
(6)  Group day care home, in accordance with section 38-454(f). 
(Ord. No. 424, § 5.4A, 6-18-84; Ord. No. 444, § 2, 12-1-86; Ord. No. 445, § 1, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 446, § 1, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 447, § 1, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 477, § 1(4), 11-19-90; Ord. No. 512, § 2, 11-15-93; Ord. No. 560, § 1, 12-12-96; Ord. No. 568, § 1, 5-10-98) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 560, § 1, adopted December 12, 1996, which amended § 38-54 by adding a subsection (6), was repealed by voters May 6, 1997. 
Sec. 38-55. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVI, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for R-1 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.5) 
Sec. 38-56. - General provisions. 
    See article XVII, general provisions, for requirements governing off-street parking, signs, walks and other provisions for R-1 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.6) 
Secs. 38-57-38-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - R-2 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 38-71. - Intent. 
    The R-2 two-family residential districts are designed to afford a transition of use in existing housing areas by permitting new construction or conversion of existing structures between adjacent residential and commercial, office, thoroughfares or other uses which would affect residential character. This district also recognizes the existence of older residential areas of the city where larger houses have been or can be converted from single-family to two-family residences in order to extend the economic life of these structures and allow the owners to justify the expenditures for repairs and modernization. This district also allows the construction of new two-family residences where slightly greater densities are permitted, and new semi-detached dwellings. A semi-detached dwelling is a dwelling with no side yard set back on one side lot line. Approval of the site plan by the planning commission is required. 
(Code 1977, § 5.7) 
Sec. 38-72. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an R-2 district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  All uses permitted and as regulated in the one-family residential districts. The standards of the "schedule of regulations" applicable to the R-1 one-family residential district shall apply as minimum standards when one-family detached dwellings are erected; 
(2)  Two-family dwellings; 
(3)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses and subject to the conditions of section 38-379, accessory buildings; 
(4)  A dwelling constituting the home for not more than three (3) aged and physically handicapped persons provided such use is in accordance with all state and local requirements; 
(5)  Bed and breakfast operations as a subordinate use to single-family dwelling units subject to city licensing provisions and a determination by the city planning commission that the applicant has shown proof of historic significance of the dwelling unit. In making the determination, the planning commission shall reference the historic criteria developed and adopted by the commission. 
(6)  Family day care home, foster family group homes and foster family homes shall be permitted subject to the following provisions: 
a.  For family day care homes only, a minimum of four hundred (400) square feet of usable outdoor play area in the rear or side yard shall be available on the premises. 
b.  Such uses are duly licensed by the state department of social services or other equivalent public agencies authorized to license these uses. 
c.  Building and lots so used shall conform to all state and local code requirements, except that such uses or structures shall be permitted in buildings and lots which are nonconforming uses or structures as defined in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 5.8; Ord. No. 428, § 3, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 477, § 1(3), 11-19-90) 
Sec. 38-73. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVI, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for R-2 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.9) 
Sec. 38-74. - General provisions. 
    See article XVII, general provisions, for requirements governing off-street parking, signs, walls and other provisions for R-2 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.10) 
Sec. 38-75. - Uses permitted by issuance of a special use permit. 
    The following uses are permitted in an R-2 district by issuance of a special use permit: 
(1)  Adult foster care small group home, in accordance with section 38-454(a); 
(2)  Child or adult care center, in accordance with provisions of section 38-454(b). 
(3)  Conversion of school and church buildings to office use in accordance with section 38-454(g). 
(4)  Group day care home, in accordance with section 38-454(f). 
(Ord. No. 424, § 5.10A, 6-18-84; Ord. No. 446, § 1, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 477, § 1(4), 11-19-90; Ord. No. 512, § 3, 11-15-93; Ord. No. 568, § 1, 5-10-98) 
Secs. 38-76-38-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - R-T ATTACHED ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 38-96. - Intent. 
    The R-T attached one-family residential district is designed to permit flexibility in the layout and design of single-family units while at the same time maintaining the density of the R-1 one-family residential district so that it is consistent with the plan for single-family areas. The district is specifically intended to prohibit multiple-family buildings where entry to individual dwelling units is from an interior common area or where individual dwelling units are attached in any way other than by their sidewalls. 
(Code 1977, § 5.11) 
Sec. 38-97. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an R-T district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  One-family attached dwellings (townhouses) with not less than three (3) attached units: 
(2)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses; 
(3)  Bed and breakfast operations as a subordinate use to single- family dwelling units subject to city licensing provisions and a determination by the city planning commission that the applicant has shown proof of historic significance of the dwelling unit. In making the determination, the planning commission shall reference the historic criteria developed and adopted by the commission. 
(4)  Family day care home, foster family group homes and foster family homes shall be permitted subject to the following provisions: 
a.  For family day care homes only, a minimum of four hundred (400) square feet of usable outdoor play area in the rear or side yard shall be available on the premises. 
b.  Such uses are duly licensed by the state department of social services or other equivalent public agencies authorized to license these uses. 
c.  Building and lots so used shall conform to all state and local code requirements, except that such uses or structures shall be permitted in buildings and lots which are nonconforming uses or structures as defined in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 5.12; Ord. No. 428, § 4, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 477, § 1(3), 11-19-90) 
Sec. 38-98. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    In an R-T district the board of appeals may, after a recommendation from the planning commission, permit one-family detached dwellings and one-family attached dwellings of less than three (3) attached units when they are found to be: 
(1)  Reasonably necessary or convenient for the satisfactory and efficient development of a complete townhouse district; and 
(2)  Necessary for the creation of an effective density development; and 
(3)  Necessary for the extension of a single-family character in a single-family residential area. 
(Code 1977, § 5.13) 
Sec. 38-99. - Required conditions. 
(a)  All development in an R-T district shall be subject to the review and approval of a site plan by the planning commission in accordance with section 38-390. 
(b)  The entire area of the site shall be treated to service the residents of the development and any accessory buildings, uses or services shall be developed solely for the use of the residents. Uses considered herein as accessory uses include: swimming pools, recreation areas, pavilions, cabanas and other similar uses. 
(Code 1977, § 5.14) 
Sec. 38-100. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVI, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for R-T districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.15) 
Sec. 38-101. - General provisions. 
    See article XVII, general provisions, for requirements governing off-street parking, signs, walls and other provisions for R-T districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.16) 
Secs. 38-102-38-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RM-1 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 38-121. - Intent. 
    The RM-1 multiple-family residential districts are designed to provide sites for multiple-family dwelling structures, and related uses, which will generally serve as zones of transition between the nonresidential districts and lower density one-family districts. The multiple-family district is further provided to serve the needs for the apartment type of unit in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 5.17) 
Sec. 38-122. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an RM-1 district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  All uses permitted and as regulated in the R-2 two-family residential district; 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings; 
(3)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses; 
(4)  Bed and breakfast operations as a subordinate use to single-family dwelling units subject to city licensing provisions and a determination by the city planning commission that the applicant has shown proof of historic significance of the dwelling unit. In making the determination, the planning commission shall reference the historic criteria developed and adopted by the commission. 
(5)  Family day care home, foster family group homes and foster family homes shall be permitted subject to the following provisions: 
a.  For family day care homes only, a minimum of four hundred (400) square feet of usable outdoor play area in the rear or side yard shall be available on the premises. 
b.  Such uses are duly licensed by the state department of social services or other equivalent public agencies authorized to license these uses. 
c.  Building and lots so used shall conform to all state and local code requirements, except that such uses or structures shall be permitted in buildings and lots which are nonconforming uses or structures as defined in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 5.18; Ord. No. 428, § 5, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 477, § 1(3), 11-19-90) 
Sec. 38-123. - Required conditions. 
(a)  In the case of multiple dwelling developments in an RM-1 district involving more than one (1) building, all site plans shall be submitted to the planning commission for its review and approval prior to issuance of a building permit in accordance with section 38-390. 
(b)  All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 38-392. 
(c)  A minimum area of two hundred (200) square feet per dwelling unit shall be provided as open space suitable for recreation, landscaping or similar use area and shall not be located in a front yard. The shape of the area shall be suitable for use by the residents. Residential units in the area described in section 38-380(11) may substitute alternatives to the open space requirement in section 38-243(1). 
(Code 1977, § 5.19; Ord. No. 576, § 1, 1-19-99) 
Sec. 38-124. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in an RM-1 district, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission in accordance with section 38-390: 
(1)  Housing for the elderly when the following conditions are met: 
a.  All dwellings shall consist of at least three hundred fifty (350) square feet per unit. 
b.  Total coverage of all buildings (including dwelling units and related service buildings) shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total site exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way. 
(2)  Convalescent homes and orphanages when the following conditions are met: 
a.  There shall be provided on the site, not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of open space for each bed in the home. The one thousand (1,000) square feet of land area shall provide for landscape setting, off-street parking, service drives, loading space, yard requirement and accessory uses, but shall not include the area covered by main or accessory buildings. 
b.  No building shall be closer than forty (40) feet to any property line. 
(3)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
(Code 1977, § 5.20) 
Sec. 38-125. - Uses permitted by issuance of a special use permit. 
    The following uses are permitted in an RM-1 district by issuance of a special use permit: 
(1)  Adult foster care small group home, in accordance with section 38-454(a); 
(2)  Child or adult care center, in accordance with provisions of section 38-454(b). 
(3)  Private clubs, fraternal organizations, lodge halls, and union halls in accordance with provisions of section 38-454(d). 
(4)  Conversion of school and church buildings to office use in accordance with section 38-454(g). 
(5)  Group day care home, in accordance with section 38-454(f). 
(Ord. No. 424, § 5.20A, 6-18-84; Ord. No. 446, § 1, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 477, § 1(4), 11-19-90; Ord. No. 512, § 4, 11-15-93; Ord. No. 568, § 1, 5-10-98) 
Sec. 38-126. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVI, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, maximum density permitted and providing minimum yard setback requirements for RM-1 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.21) 
Sec. 38-127. - General provisions. 
    See article XVII, general provisions, for requirements governing off-street parking, signs, walls and other provisions for RM-1 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.22) 
Secs. 38-128-38-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RM-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS-HIGH RISE 

Sec. 38-146. - Intent. 
    The RM-2 multiple-family residential districts (high rise) are designed to provide sites for high density multiple dwelling structures adjacent to high traffic generators commonly found in the proximity of central business districts and areas abutting major thoroughfares. The district is further designed to provide for the convenience needs of persons living in the apartments with central services. This district is further designed so as to provide a zone of transition between these major thoroughfares and high traffic generators and other residential districts through the requirements of lower coverage which, in turn, will result in more open space. 
(Code 1977, § 5.23) 
Sec. 38-147. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an RM-2 district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  All principal uses permitted in an RM-1 district meeting the requirements as set forth in the district with the exception of single-family dwellings which shall be expressly prohibited from this district; 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings in structures in excess of two (2) stories; 
(3)  Retail and service uses accessory to the principal use in accordance with section 38-148(b); 
(4)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses; 
(5)  Bed and breakfast operations as a subordinate use to single-family dwelling units subject to city licensing provisions and a determination by the city planning commission that the applicant has shown proof of historic significance of the dwelling unit. In making the determination, the planning commission shall reference the historic criteria developed and adopted by the commission. 
(6)  Family day care home, foster family group homes and foster family homes shall be permitted subject to the following provisions: 
a.  For family day care homes only, a minimum of four hundred (400) square feet of usable outdoor play area in the rear or side yard shall be available on the premises. 
b.  Such uses are duly licensed by the state department of social services or other equivalent public agencies authorized to license these uses. 
c.  Building and lots so used shall conform to all state and local code requirements, except that such uses or structures shall be permitted in buildings and lots which are nonconforming uses or structures as defined in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 5.24; Ord. No. 428, § 6, 9-17-84; Ord. No. 477, § 1(3), 11-19-90) 
Sec. 38-148. - Required conditions. 
(a)  A site plan shall be submitted for all uses permitted under this article in accordance with section 38-390 only when more than one (1) building is to be constructed. 
(b)  Any business uses on the site shall be developed as retail or service uses within the walls of the main structure. Such business uses shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the floor area at grade level and shall be prohibited on all floors above the first floor, or grade level. 
(c)  The entire area of the site shall be treated to service the residents of the apartment and any accessory buildings, uses, or services shall be developed solely for the use of residents of the main building. Uses considered herein as accessory uses include: swimming pools, recreation areas, pavilions, cabanas and other similar uses. 
(d)  An open space area shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 38-123(c). 
(Code 1977, § 5.25) 
Sec. 38-149. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVI, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for RM-2 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.26) 
Sec. 38-150. - General provisions. 
    See article XVII, general provisions, for requirements governing off-street parking, signs, walls and other provisions for RM-2 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.27) 
Sec. 38-151. - Uses permitted by issuance of a special use permit. 
    The following uses are permitted in an RM-2 district by issuance of a special use permit: 
(1)  Adult foster care small group home, in accordance with section 38-454(a); 
(2)  Child or adult care center, in accordance with provisions of section 38-454(b). 
(3)  Private clubs, fraternal organizations, lodge halls, and union halls in accordance with provisions of section 38-454(d). 
(4)  Conversion of school and church buildings to office use in accordance with section 38-454(g). 
(5)  Group day care home, in accordance with section 38-454(f). 
(Ord. No. 424, § 5.27A, 6-18-84; Ord. No. 446, § 1, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 477, § 1(4), 11-19-90; Ord. No. 512, § 5, 11-15-93; Ord. No. 568, § 1, 5-10-98) 
Secs. 38-152-38-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OS-1 OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICTS 

Sec. 38-171. - Intent. 
    The OS-1 districts are designed to accommodate uses such as offices, banks and personal services which can serve as transitional areas between residential and commercial districts and to provide a transition between major thoroughfares and residential districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.28) 
Sec. 38-172. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an OS-1 office service district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Office buildings for any of the following occupations: executive, administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic, drafting and sales subject to the limitations contained in section 38-174; 
(2)  Professional services, including the following: offices of doctors, dentists, osteopaths and similar or allied professions including clinics; 
(3)  Facilities for human care such as hospitals, sanitariums, rest and convalescent homes; 
(4)  Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations and similar uses; drive-in facilities as an accessory use only; 
(5)  Personal service establishments including barber shops, beauty shops and health salons; 
(6)  Photographic studios and interior decorating studios; 
(7)  Off-street parking lots; 
(8)  Churches; 
(9)  Other uses similar to the above uses; 
(10)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses; 
(11)  Residential structures existing as of January 1, 2012. 
(Code 1977, § 5.29; Ord. No. 729, § 1, 2-6-12) 
Sec. 38-173. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in an OS-1 district, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission in accordance with section 38-390: 
(1)  An accessory use customarily related to a principal use authorized by this section, such as, but not limited to: a pharmacy or apothecary shop, stores limited to corrective garments or bandages, or optical service, may be permitted; 
(2)  Mortuary establishments, when adequate assembly area is provided off-street for vehicles to be used in funeral processions, provided further that such assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area; 
(3)  Publicly owned buildings, telephone exchange buildings, and public utility offices, but not including storage yards, transformer stations, substations, or gas regulator stations; 
(4)  One-, two- and multiple-family residential units within an office building subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Dwelling units shall not be located below the second floor. 
b.  Off-street parking shall be provided for each unit in accordance with section 38-380. 
c.  Except for residential units in the downtown area described in section 38-380(11) that also comply with section 38-243(1), a minimum rear yard setback of thirty (30) feet shall be provided. 
d.  An open space area shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 38-123(c). 
(Code 1977, § 5.30; Ord. No. 576, § 1, 1-19-99) 
Sec. 38-174. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions are required in an OS-1 district: 
(1)  No interior display shall be visible from the exterior of the building. 
(2)  The outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material, beyond that normally incident to the above permitted uses, shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 5.31) 
Sec. 38-175. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVI, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for OS-1 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.32) 
Sec. 38-176. - General provisions. 
    See article XVII, general provisions, for requirements governing off-street parking signs, walls and other provisions for OS-1 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.33) 
Secs. 38-177-38-195. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - B-1 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-196. - Intent. 
    The B-1 local business districts are designed to meet the day-to-day convenience shopping and service needs of persons residing in adjacent residential areas. 
(Code 1977, § 5.34) 
Sec. 38-197. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a B-1 district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Generally recognized retail businesses which supply commodities on the premises, such as but not limited to, groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing and notions or hardware; 
(2)  Personal service establishments which perform services on the premises, such as but not limited to, repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe, etc.), tailor shops, beauty parlors or barber shops, photographic or interior decorating studios and self-service laundries and drycleaners; 
(3)  Office buildings for any of the following occupations: executive, administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic, drafting and sales; 
(4)  Dry cleaning establishments, or pickup stations, dealing directly with the consumer. Central dry cleaning plants serving more than one (1) retail outlet shall be prohibited; 
(5)  Business establishments which perform services on the premises, such as but not limited to: banks, loan companies, insurance offices, and real estate offices; 
(6)  Professional services including the following: offices of doctors, dentists, osteopaths and similar or allied professions, including clinics; 
(7)  Off-street parking; 
(8)  Other uses similar to the above uses; 
(9)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses; 
(10)  Residential structures existing as of January 1, 2012. 
(11)  A marihuana provisioning center as authorized by the city's medical marihuana facilities licensing - police power ordinance, chapter 16.5. 
a.  Provisioning centers shall be subject to the following standards: 
1.  Hours. A provisioning center may only sell to consumers or allow consumers to be present in the building space occupied by the provisioning center between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
2.  Indoor activities. All activities of a provisioning center, including all transfers of marihuana, shall be conducted within the structure and out of public view. A provisioning center shall not have a walk-up window or drive-thru window service. 
3.  Other activities. Marihuana and tobacco products shall not be smoked, ingested, or otherwise consumed inside or outside of the building space occupied by the provisioning center. 
4.  Nonconforming uses. A provisioning center may not locate in a building in which a nonconforming retail use has been established in any district. 
5.  Physical appearance. The exterior appearance of the structure shall remain compatible with the exterior appearance of structures already constructed or under construction within the immediate area, and shall be maintained so as to prevent blight or deterioration or substantial diminishment or impairment of property values within the immediate area. 
6.  Buffer zones. A provisioning center may not be located within the distance specified from the uses below as determined by the city. Distance shall be measured as stipulated in the Michigan Liquor Control Act as follows: 
The distance between the school building and the contemplated location must be measured along the center line of the street or streets of address between two (2) fixed points on the center line determined by projecting straight lines, at right angles to the center line, from the part of the school building nearest to the contemplated location and from the part of the contemplated location nearest to the school building. 
i.  A provisioning center may not be located within two hundred (200) feet of the real property comprising or used by a public or private elementary, vocational, or secondary school. 
ii.  A provisioning center may not be located within one hundred (100) feet of a residentially zoned property. 
7.  Odor. As used in this subsection, building means the building, or portion thereof, used for a provisioning center. 
i.  The building shall be equipped with an activated carbon filtration system for odor control to ensure that air leaving the building through an exhaust vent first passes through an activated carbon filter. 
ii.  The filtration system shall consist of one (1) or more fans and activated carbon filters. At a minimum, the fan(s) shall be sized for cubic feet per minute (CFM) equivalent to the volume of the building (length multiplied by width multiplied by height) divided by three (3). The filter(s) shall be rated for the applicable CFM. 
iii.  The filtration system shall be maintained in working order and shall be in use. The filters shall be changed a minimum of once every three hundred sixty-five (365) days. 
iv.  Negative air pressure shall be maintained inside the building. 
v.  Doors and windows shall remain closed, except for the minimum time length needed to allow people to ingress or egress the building. 
vi.  An alternative odor control system is permitted if the special use applicant submits and the municipality accepts a report by a mechanical engineer licensed in the state demonstrating that the alternative system will control odor as well or better than the activated carbon filtration system otherwise required. The municipality may hire an outside expert to review the alternative system design and advise as to its comparability and whether in the opinion of the expert it should be accepted. 
(Code 1977, § 5.35; Ord. No. 729, § 1, 2-6-12; Ord. No. 793, § 3, 7-2-18) 
Sec. 38-198. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions are required in a B-1 district: 
(1)  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with customers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. 
(2)  All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(Code 1977, § 5.36) 
Sec. 38-199. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission in accordance with section 38-390: 
(1)  Gasoline service station for the sale of gasoline, oil and minor accessories only, and where no repair work is done, other than incidental service, but not including steam cleaning or undercoating, vehicle body repair, painting, tire recapping, engine rebuilding, auto dismantling, upholstering, auto glass work, and such other activities whose external effects could adversely extend beyond the property line. 
a.  The curb cuts for access to a service station shall not be permitted at such locations that will tend to create traffic hazards in the streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be no less than twenty-five (25) feet from a street intersection (measured from the road right-of-way) or from adjacent residential districts. 
b.  The minimum lot area shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, and so arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are required to wait. Gasoline service stations which are intended solely for the sale of gasoline, oil and minor accessories and having no facilities for repair or servicing of automobiles (including lubricating facilities) may be permitted on lots of ten thousand (10,000) square feet, subject to all other provisions herein required. 
(2)  Publicly owned buildings, public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings; electric transformer stations and substations; gas regulator stations with service yards, but without storage yards; water and sewage pumping stations; 
(3)  Mortuary establishments subject to the conditions of section 38-173; 
(4)  One-, two- and multiple-family residential dwellings within a business structure, subject to the conditions of section 38-173(4). 
(Code 1977, § 5.37) 

X = Minimum distance a driveway or curb cut, for access, can be located from a street intersection. 
Y = Minimum distance a driveway or curb cut, for access, can be located from an adjoining property line. 
LOCATIONS OF DRIVEWAYS FOR GASOLINE SERVICE STATION 
Sec. 38-200. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVI, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for B-1 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.38) 
Sec. 38-201. - General provisions. 
    See article XVII, general provisions, for requirements governing off-street parking, signs, walls and other provisions for B-1 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.39) 
Secs. 38-202-38-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - B-2 PLANNED SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICTS 

Sec. 38-216. - Intent. 
    The B-2 planned shopping center districts are designed to cater to the needs of a larger consumer population than is served by the local business districts, and are generally characterized by an integrated or planned cluster of establishments served by a common parking area and generating large volumes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1977, § 5.40) 
Sec. 38-217. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a B-2 district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Any retail business or service establishment permitted in B-1 districts as principal uses permitted; 
(2)  All retail business, service establishments or processing uses as follows: 
a.  Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale of merchandise in an enclosed building; 
b.  Any service establishment of an office, showroom or workshop nature of a decorator, dressmaker, tailor, baker, painter, upholsterer or an establishment doing radio or home appliance repair, photographic reproduction, and similar service establishments that require a retail adjunct; 
c.  Private clubs, fraternal organizations and lodge halls; 
d.  Restaurants or other places serving food or beverage, except those having the character of a drive-in; 
e.  Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls or similar places of assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings; 
f.  Business schools and colleges or private schools operated for profit; 
g.  Other uses similar to the above uses; 
h.  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses. 
i.  Smoking lounges shall not be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another smoking lounge, any park identified and so signed by the city, or any public or private school, college, or university property, nor shall any smoking lounge be located within five hundred (500) feet of the following uses, as defined and measured by the Michigan Liquor Control Act, MCL 436.15031: 
1.  Any house of worship; 
2.  Any parcel zoned and used for residential purposes; 
3.  Any licensed day care facility; 
4.  Any public library. 
(3)  Residential structures existing as of January 1, 2012. 
(4)  A marihuana provisioning center as authorized by the city's medical marihuana facilities licensing - police power authorizing ordinance. 
a.  Provisioning centers shall be subject to the following standards: 
1.  Hours. A provisioning center may only sell to consumers or allow consumers to be present in the building space occupied by the provisioning center between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
2.  Indoor activities. All activities of a provisioning center, including all transfers of marihuana, shall be conducted within the structure and out of public view. A provisioning center shall not have a walk-up window or drive-thru window service. 
3.  Other activities. Marihuana and tobacco products shall not be smoked, ingested, or otherwise consumed in the building space occupied by the provisioning center. 
4.  Nonconforming uses. A provisioning center may not locate in a building in which a nonconforming retail use has been established in any district. 
5.  Physical appearance. The exterior appearance of the structure shall remain compatible with the exterior appearance of structures already constructed or under construction within the immediate area, and shall be maintained so as to prevent blight or deterioration or substantial diminishment or impairment of property values within the immediate area. 
6.  Buffer zones. A provisioning center may not be located within the distance specified from the uses below as determined by the city. Distance shall be measured as stipulated in the Michigan Liquor Control Act as follows: 
The distance between the school building and the contemplated location must be measured along the center line of the street or streets of address between two (2) fixed points on the center line determined by projecting straight lines, at right angles to the center line, from the part of the school building nearest to the contemplated location and from the part of the contemplated location nearest to the school building. 
i.  A provisioning center may not be located within two hundred (200) feet of the real property comprising or used by a public or private elementary, vocational, or secondary school. 
ii.  A provisioning center may not be located within one hundred (100) feet of a residentially zoned property. 
7.  Odor. As used in this subsection, building means the building, or portion thereof, used for a provisioning center. 
i.  The building shall be equipped with an activated carbon filtration system for odor control to ensure that air leaving the building through an exhaust vent first passes through an activated carbon filter. 
ii.  The filtration system shall consist of one (1) or more fans and activated carbon filters. At a minimum, the fan(s) shall be sized for cubic feet per minute (CFM) equivalent to the volume of the building (length multiplied by width multiplied by height) divided by three (3). The filter(s) shall be rated for the applicable CFM. 
iii.  The filtration system shall be maintained in working order and shall be in use. The filters shall be changed a minimum of once every three hundred sixty-five (365) days. 
iv.  Negative air pressure shall be maintained inside the building. 
v.  Doors and windows shall remain closed, except for the minimum time length needed to allow people to ingress or egress the building. 
vi.  An alternative odor control system is permitted if the special use applicant submits and the municipality accepts a report by a mechanical engineer licensed in the state demonstrating that the alternative system will control odor as well or better than the activated carbon filtration system otherwise required. The municipality may hire an outside expert to review the alternative system design and advise as to its comparability and whether in the opinion of the expert it should be accepted. 
(Code 1977, § 5.41; Ord. No. 721, §§ 3, 4, 4-18-11; Ord. No. 729, § 1, 2-6-12; Ord. No. 762, § 2, 3-16-15; Ord. No. 793, § 4, 7-2-18) 
Sec. 38-218. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions are required in a B-2 district: 
(1)  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods provided on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. 
(2)  All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking, loading and those open air uses indicated as being subject to special conditions in section 38-219 below, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(3)  All uses permitted in the B-2 district shall be subject to the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission in accordance with section 38-390. 
(Code 1977, § 5.42) 
Sec. 38-219. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission in accordance with section 38-390: 
(1)  Open air business uses when developed in planned relationship with the B-2 district as follows: 
a.  Retail sales of plant material not grown on the site, and sales of lawn furniture, playground equipment and garden supplies provided further that such uses shall be located at the exterior of the building mass located in a B-2 district; 
b.  Recreational space providing children's amusement park and other similar recreation when part of a planned development, provided further that such use be located at the exterior end of the building mass located in a B-2 district, but not at the intersection of two major thoroughfares. Such recreation space shall be fenced on all sides with a four (4) foot chain link type fence; provided further that such uses shall not be located closer than four hundred (400) feet to a residential district. 
(2)  Bowling alley, billiard hall, indoor archery range, indoor tennis courts, indoor skating rink, or similar forms of indoor commercial recreation when located at least one hundred (100) feet from any front, rear or side yard of any residential lot in an adjacent residential district; 
(3)  Automobile service centers, when developed as part of a larger planned shopping center designed so as to integrate the automobile service center within the site plan and architecture of the total shopping center, and provided further that a building permit shall not be issued separately for the construction of any automobile service center within the B-2 district; 
(4)  Publicly owned buildings, telephone exchange buildings and public utility offices, but not including storage yards, transformer stations, substations or gas regulator stations. 
(Code 1977, § 5.43) 
Sec. 38-220. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVI, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for B-2 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.44) 
Sec. 38-221. - General provisions. 
    See article XVII, general provisions, for requirements governing off-street parking, signs, walls and other provisions for B-2 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.45) 
Secs. 38-222-38-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - B-3 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-241. - Intent. 
    The B-3 central business district is designed to provide for office buildings and the great variety of retail stores and related activities which occupy the prime retail frontage by serving the comparison, convenience and service needs of the entire municipal area as well as a substantial area of the adjacent and surrounding residential developments beyond the limits of the municipality. The district regulations are designed to promote convenient pedestrian shopping and stability of retail development by encouraging a continuous retail frontage and by prohibiting automobile related services and nonretail uses which tend to break up such continuity. 
(Code 1977, § 5.46) 
Sec. 38-242. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a B-3 district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Any retail business or service establishment permitted in the B-2 district as principal uses permitted; 
(2)  Offices and showrooms of plumbers, electricians, decorator or similar trades, in connection with which not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area of the building or part of the building occupied by said establishment is used for making, assembling, remodeling, repairing, altering, finishing or refinishing its product or merchandise, and provided that, the ground floor premises facing upon, and visible from, any abutting street shall be used only for entrances, offices, or display. All storage of materials of any kind shall be within the confines of the building or part thereof occupied by said establishment; 
(3)  Newspaper offices and printing plants; 
(4)  Storage facilities when incident to and physically connected with any principal use permitted, provided that such facility be within the confines of the building or part thereof occupied by said establishment; 
(5)  Hotels; 
(6)  Other uses similar to the above uses; 
(7)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses; 
(8)  Residential structures existing as of January 1, 2012. 
(9)  A marihuana provisioning center as authorized by the city's medical marihuana facilities licensing - police power authorizing ordinance. 
a.  Provisioning centers shall be subject to the following standards: 
1.  Hours. A provisioning center may only sell to consumers or allow consumers to be present in the building space occupied by the provisioning center between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
2.  Indoor activities. All activities of a provisioning center, including all transfers of marihuana, shall be conducted within the structure and out of public view. A provisioning center shall not have a walk-up window or drive-thru window service. 
3.  Other activities. Marihuana and tobacco products shall not be smoked, ingested, or otherwise consumed in the building space occupied by the provisioning center. 
4.  Nonconforming uses. A provisioning center may not locate in a building in which a nonconforming retail use has been established in any district. 
5.  Physical appearance. The exterior appearance of the structure shall remain compatible with the exterior appearance of structures already constructed or under construction within the immediate area, and shall be maintained so as to prevent blight or deterioration or substantial diminishment or impairment of property values within the immediate area. 
6.  Buffer zones. A provisioning center may not be located within the distance specified from the uses below as determined by the city. Distance shall be measured as stipulated in the Michigan Liquor Control Act as follows: The distance between the school building and the contemplated location must be measured along the center line of the street or streets of address between two (2) fixed points on the center line determined by projecting straight lines, at right angles to the center line, from the part of the school building nearest to the contemplated location and from the part of the contemplated location nearest to the school building. 
i.  A provisioning center may not be located within two hundred (200) feet of the real property comprising or used by a public or private elementary, vocational, or secondary school. 
ii.  A provisioning center may not be located within one hundred (100) feet of a residentially zoned property. 
7.  Odor. As used in this subsection, building means the building, or portion thereof, used for a provisioning center. 
i.  The building shall be equipped with an activated carbon filtration system for odor control to ensure that air leaving the building through an exhaust vent first passes through an activated carbon filter. 
ii.  The filtration system shall consist of one (1) or more fans and activated carbon filters. At a minimum, the fan(s) shall be sized for cubic feet per minute (CFM) equivalent to the volume of the building (length multiplied by width multiplied by height) divided by three (3). The filter(s) shall be rated for the applicable CFM. 
iii.  The filtration system shall be maintained in working order and shall be in use. The filters shall be changed a minimum of once every three hundred sixty-five (365) days. 
iv.  Negative air pressure shall be maintained inside the building. 
v.  Doors and windows shall remain closed, except for the minimum time length needed to allow people to ingress or egress the building. 
vi.  An alternative odor control system is permitted if the special use applicant submits and the municipality accepts a report by a mechanical engineer licensed in the state demonstrating that the alternative system will control odor as well or better than the activated carbon filtration system otherwise required. The municipality may hire an outside expert to review the alternative system design and advise as to its comparability and whether in the opinion of the expert it should be accepted. 
(Code 1977, § 5.47; Ord. No. 729, § 1, 2-6-12; Ord. No. 793, § 5, 7-2-18) 
Sec. 38-243. - Uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in a B-3 district subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission in accordance with section 38-390: 
(1)  One-, two- and multiple-family residential dwelling units within a business structure subject to the conditions of section 38-173(4). For dwelling units located in the area described in section 38-380(11), these additional development standards shall apply: 
a.  The owner of the dwelling unit shall be responsible for providing area for trash disposal adequate to service each dwelling unit. 
b.  If the open space standard for dwelling units specified in section 38-123(c) are not met, the owner of the dwelling unit may substitute any combination of these open space equivalents per unit to meet the section 38-123(c) standard: 
1.  Ground floor bicycle storage at twenty-five (25) square foot per apartment, fifty (50) square foot credit. 
2.  Central air conditioning, one hundred fifty (150) square foot credit per unit. 
3.  Laundry hook-ups/laundry room, fifty (50) square foot credit. 
4.  Rooftop garden or patio (minimum one hundred fifty (150) square feet), two hundred (200) square foot credit. 
5.  Indoor stove top grill, fifty (50) square foot credit. 
6.  Minimum eight (8) square feet of skylight windows, fifty (50) square foot credit. 
7.  Minimum four-foot by ten-foot rear yard balcony with wrought iron railing, two hundred (200) square foot credit. 
8.  Whirlpool or Jacuzzi tub, one hundred fifty (150) square foot credit. 
(Code 1977, § 5.48; Ord. No. 576, § 1, 1-19-99) 
Sec. 38-244. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions are required in a B-3 district: 
(1)  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods provided on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. 
(2)  All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking, or loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(Code 1977, § 5.49) 
Sec. 38-245. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVI, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for B-3 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.50) 
Sec. 38-246. - General provisions. 
    See article XVII, general provisions, for requirements governing off-street parking, signs, walls and other provisions for B-3 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.51) 
Sec. 38-247. - Uses requiring a special use permit. 
    The following uses are permitted in the B-3 District by issuance of a special use permit: 
(1)  Commercial recreation operations in upper stories of commercial buildings in accordance with section 38-454(i). 
(Ord. No. 553, § 1, 3-18-96) 
Secs. 38-248-38-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - B-4 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 38-266. - Intent. 
    The B-4 general business districts are designed to provide sites for more diversified business types which would often be incompatible with the pedestrian movement to the local planned shopping center or central business districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.52) 
Sec. 38-267. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a B-4 district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Any retail business or service establishment permitted in the B-1, B-2 and B-3 districts as principal uses permitted; 
(2)  Mortuary establishments subject to the conditions of section 38-173; 
(3)  Bowling alley, billiard hall, indoor archery range, indoor tennis courts, or other commercial recreation operation when completely enclosed in a building; 
(4)  New and used motor vehicle salesroom, showroom, or office; 
(5)  Public utility offices, exchanges, transformer stations and substations, pump stations but not including outdoor storage; 
(6)  Establishments of plumbers, heating contractors, decorators and electricians or similar trades; 
(7)  Other uses similar to the above uses; 
(8)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses; 
(9)  Residential structures existing as of January 1, 2012. 
(10)  A marihuana provisioning center as authorized by the city's medical marihuana facilities licensing - police power authorizing ordinance. 
a.  Provisioning centers shall be subject to the following standards: 
1.  Hours. A provisioning center may only sell to consumers or allow consumers to be present in the building space occupied by the provisioning center between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
2.  Indoor activities. All activities of a provisioning center, including all transfers of marihuana, shall be conducted within the structure and out of public view. A provisioning center shall not have a walk-up window or drive-thru window service. 
3.  Other activities. Marihuana and tobacco products shall not be smoked, ingested, or otherwise consumed in the building space occupied by the provisioning center. 
4.  Nonconforming uses. A provisioning center may not locate in a building in which a nonconforming retail use has been established in any district. 
5.  Physical appearance. The exterior appearance of the structure shall remain compatible with the exterior appearance of structures already constructed or under construction within the immediate area, and shall be maintained so as to prevent blight or deterioration or substantial diminishment or impairment of property values within the immediate area. 
6.  Buffer zones. A provisioning center may not be located within the distance specified from the uses below as determined by the city. Distance shall be measured as stipulated in the Michigan Liquor Control Act as follows: The distance between the school building and the contemplated location must be measured along the center line of the street or streets of address between two (2) fixed points on the center line determined by projecting straight lines, at right angles to the center line, from the part of the school building nearest to the contemplated location and from the part of the contemplated location nearest to the school building. 
i.  A provisioning center may not be located within two hundred (200) feet of the real property comprising or used by a public or private elementary, vocational, or secondary school. 
ii.  A provisioning center may not be located within one hundred (100) feet of a residentially zoned property. 
7.  Odor. As used in this subsection, building means the building, or portion thereof, used for a provisioning center. 
i.  The building shall be equipped with an activated carbon filtration system for odor control to ensure that air leaving the building through an exhaust vent first passes through an activated carbon filter. 
ii.  The filtration system shall consist of one (1) or more fans and activated carbon filters. At a minimum, the fan(s) shall be sized for cubic feet per minute (CFM) equivalent to the volume of the building (length multiplied by width multiplied by height) divided by three (3). The filter(s) shall be rated for the applicable CFM. 
iii.  The filtration system shall be maintained in working order and shall be in use. The filters shall be changed a minimum of once every three hundred sixty-five (365) days. 
iv.  Negative air pressure shall be maintained inside the building. 
v.  Doors and windows shall remain closed, except for the minimum time length needed to allow people to ingress or egress the building. 
vi.  An alternative odor control system is permitted if the special use applicant submits and the municipality accepts a report by a mechanical engineer licensed in the state demonstrating that the alternative system will control odor as well or better than the activated carbon filtration system otherwise required. The municipality may hire an outside expert to review the alternative system design and advise as to its comparability and whether in the opinion of the expert it should be accepted. 
(Code 1977, § 5.53; Ord. No. 729, § 1, 2-6-12; Ord. No. 793, § 6, 7-2-18) 
Sec. 38-268. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in a B-4 district subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission in accordance with section 38-390: 
(1)  Gasoline service stations including rustproofing/undercoating as an incidental use, subject further to the conditions of section 38-199; 
(2)  Outdoor sales for exclusive sale of new and secondhand automobiles, housetrailers, or rental of trailers and/or automobiles, and undercoating/rustproofing as an incidental use, all subject to the following: 
a.  The lot or area used for sales or display shall be provided with a permanent, durable and dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area in such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property or toward buildings. 
b.  Access to the outdoor sales area shall be at least sixty (60) feet from the intersection of any two (2) streets. 
c.  No major repair or major refinishing shall be done on the lot. 
d.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
(3)  Motel, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Access shall be provided so as not to conflict with the adjacent business uses or adversely affect traffic flow on a major thoroughfare. 
b.  Each unit shall contain not less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area. 
c.  No guest shall establish residence at a motel for more than thirty (30) days within any calendar year. 
(4)  Business in the character of a drive-in or open front store, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  A setback of at least sixty (60) feet from the right-of-way of any existing or proposed street must be maintained. 
b.  Access points shall be located at least sixty (60) feet from the intersection of any two (2) streets. 
c.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
d.  A six-foot high, completely obscuring wall shall be provided when abutting or adjacent districts are zoned for any residential, OS-1, B-1, B-2, B-3 or B-4 districts. The wall shall further meet the requirements of article XVII, general provisions. 
(5)  Veterinary hospitals or clinics, provided all activities are conducted within a totally enclosed main building and provided further that all buildings are set back at least two hundred (200) feet from abutting residential districts on the same side of the street; 
(6)  Plant materials nursery for the retail sale of plant materials not grown on the site, and sales of lawn furniture, playground equipment and garden supplies subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The storage and/or display of any materials and/or products shall meet all setback requirements of a structure. 
b.  All loading and parking shall be provided off-street. 
c.  The storage of any soil, fertilizer, or other loose unpackaged materials shall be contained so as to prevent any effects on adjacent uses. 
(7)  Auto wash when completely enclosed in a building. Drainage of water onto adjacent property or toward buildings shall be precluded through the proper grading of the site; 
(8)  Bus passenger station; 
(9)  Public buildings; 
(10)  One-, two-, and multiple-family dwelling units within a business structure with frontage on Main Street from Chipman Street intersection east to Water Street and the Dutchtown area for land within Stewart Street, Chipman Street, and the Huron Eastern Railroad and subject to conditions of section 38-173. 
(Code 1977, § 5.54; Ord. No. 395, § 1, 8-16-82; Ord. No. 507, § 1, 4-19-93; Ord. No. 677, § 1, 8-21-06) 
Sec. 38-269. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVI, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for B-4 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.55) 
Sec. 38-270. - General provisions. 
    See article XVII, general provisions, for requirements governing off-street parking, signs, walls and other provisions for B-4 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.56) 
Sec. 38-271. - Uses permitted by issuance of a special use permit. 
    The following uses are permitted in a B-4 District by issuance of a special use permit: 
(1)  Ground floor apartments in accordance with section 38-454(h). 
(Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-19-95) 
Secs. 38-272-38-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 38-291. - Intent. 
    The I-1 light industrial districts are designed so as to primarily accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses and industrial operations whose external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. The I-1 districts are so structured as to permit, along with any specified uses, the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly and/or treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously prepared material. It is further intended that the processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form, to be used in an industrial operation at another location, not be permitted. The general goals of these use districts include, among others, the following specific purposes: 
(1)  To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the city's expected future economy for all types of manufacturing and related uses; 
(2)  To protect abutting residential districts by separating them from manufacturing activities, and by prohibiting the use of such industrial areas for new residential development; 
(3)  To promote manufacturing development which is free from danger of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation and other hazards, and from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor and other objectionable influences; 
(4)  To promote the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well considered plan. To protect the character and established pattern of adjacent development, and in each area to conserve the value of land and buildings and other structures, and to protect the city's tax revenue. 
(Code 1977, § 5.57) 
Sec. 38-292. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an I-1 district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter and subject further to the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission in accordance with section 38-390: 
(1)  Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design and pilot or experimental product development when conducted within a completely enclosed building; 
(2)  Any of the following uses when the manufacturing, compounding or processing is conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. That portion of the land used for open storage facilities for materials or equipment used in the manufacturing, compounding, or processing shall be totally obscured by a wall on those sides abutting any residential, office or business districts, and on any front yard abutting a public thoroughfare except as otherwise provided in section 38-289. In I-1 districts, the extent of such a wall may be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. Such a wall shall not be less than four (4) feet six (6) inches in height and may, depending upon land usage, be required to be eight (8) feet in height, and shall be subject further to the requirements of article XVII, general provisions. A chain link fence, with intense evergreen shrub planting, shall be considered an obscuring wall. The height shall be determined in the same manner as the wall height as above set forth. 
a.  Warehousing and wholesale establishments, and trucking facilities; 
b.  The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products such as, but not limited to, bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products, hardware and cutlery, tool, die, gauge and machine shops; 
c.  The manufacture, compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles or merchandise from previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, elastomers, feathers, felt, fibre [fiber], fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, rubber, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, sheet metal, shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood and yarns; 
d.  The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas; 
e.  Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties and metal or rubber stamps, or other molded rubber products; 
f.  Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios and phonographs; 
g.  Laboratories-Experimental, film or testing; 
h.  Manufacturing and repair of electric or neon signs, light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves and the like; 
i.  Central dry cleaning plants or laundries provided that such plants shall not deal directly with consumer at retail; 
j.  All public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards and other related uses. 
(3)  Warehouses, storage and transfer and electric and gas service buildings and yards; public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electrical transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations; water supply and sewage disposal plants; water and gas tank holders; railroad transfer and storage tracks; railroad rights-of-way; freight terminals; 
(4)  Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, storage of contractor's equipment and supplies, provided such is enclosed within a building or within an obscuring wall or fence on those sides abutting all residential, office, or business districts, and on any yard abutting a public thoroughfare. In any "I-1" district, the extent of such fence or wall may be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. Such fence or wall shall not be less than five (5) feet in height, and may, depending on land usage, be required to be eight (8) feet in height. A chain link type fence, with heavy evergreen shrubbery inside of said fence, shall be considered to be an obscuring fence; 
(5)  Municipal uses such as water treatment plants, and reservoirs, sewage treatment plants, and all other municipal buildings and uses, including outdoor storage; 
(6)  Commercial kennels; 
(7)  Greenhouses; 
(8)  Other uses of a similar and no more objectionable character to the above uses; 
(9)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses; 
(10)  Residential structures existing as of January 1, 2012. 
(11)  A marihuana provisioning center, grower, processor, safety compliance facility or secure transporter as authorized by the city's medical marihuana facilities licensing - police power authorizing ordinance. 
a.  Any uses or activities found by the state or a court with jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise not permitted by state law may not be permitted by the city. In the event that a court with jurisdiction declares some or this entire article invalid, then the city may suspend the acceptance of applications for medical marihuana facilities licenses pending the resolution of the legal issue in question. 
b.  The use or facility must be at all times in compliance with all other applicable laws and ordinances of the city and state. 
c.  The city may suspend or revoke a medical marihuana facilities license based on the finding that the provisions of the Medical Marihuana Facilities Licensing Act, all other applicable provisions of this zoning ordinance, the city's police power authorizing ordinance, or the approved site plan are not met. 
d.  A marihuana facility, or activities associated with the licensed growing, processing, testing, transporting, or sales of marihuana, may not be permitted as a home business or accessory use nor may they include accessory uses except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
e.  Signage requirements for marihuana facilities, unless otherwise specified, are as provided in chapter 26 - signs. 
(12)  Marihuana growers and marihuana processors shall be subject to the following standards: 
a.  Minimum yard depth/distance from lot lines. Minimum yard depth/distance from lot lines shall adhere to measurement requirements as listed in article XVI - schedule of regulations for each zoning designation as listed. 
b.  Indoor growing and processing. In the I-1 light industrial district, marihuana growing shall be located entirely within a fully enclosed, secure, indoor facility or greenhouse with rigid walls, a roof, and doors. Marihuana processing shall be located entirely within one (1) or more completely enclosed buildings. 
c.  Maximum building floor space. The following maximum building floor space shall apply in the I-1 light industrial district: 
1.  If only a portion of a building is authorized for use in marihuana growing or processing, a partition wall at least seven (7) feet in height, or a height as required by the applicable building codes, whichever is greater, shall separate the marihuana growing or processing space from the remainder of the building. A partition wall must include a door, capable of being closed and locked, for ingress and egress between the marihuana growing or processing space and the remainder of the building. 
d.  Lighting. Lighting shall be regulated as follows: 
1.  Light cast by light fixtures inside any building used for marihuana growing or marihuana processing shall not be visible outside the building from 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. the following day. 
2.  Outdoor marihuana grow lights shall not be illuminated from 7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. the following day. 
e.  Odor. As used in this subsection, building means the building, or portion thereof, used for marihuana growing or marihuana processing. 
1.  The building shall be equipped with an activated carbon filtration system for odor control to ensure that air leaving the building through an exhaust vent first passes through an activated carbon filter. 
2.  The filtration system shall consist of one (1) or more fans and activated carbon filters. At a minimum, the fan(s) shall be sized for cubic feet per minute (CFM) equivalent to the volume of the building (length multiplied by width multiplied by height) divided by three (3). The filter(s) shall be rated for the applicable CFM. 
3.  The filtration system shall be maintained in working order and shall be in use. The filters shall be changed a minimum of once every three hundred sixty-five (365) days. 
4.  Negative air pressure shall be maintained inside the building. 
5.  Doors and windows shall remain closed, except for the minimum length of time needed to allow people to ingress or egress the building. 
6.  An alternative odor control system is permitted if the applicant submits and the municipality accepts a report by a mechanical engineer licensed in the state of Michigan demonstrating that the alternative system will control odor as well or better than the activated carbon filtration system otherwise required. The municipality may hire an outside expert to review the alternative system design and advise as to its comparability and whether in the opinion of the expert it should be accepted. 
f.  Security cameras. Security cameras must be used and shall be directed to record only the subject property and may not be directed to public rights-of-way as applicable, except as required to comply with licensing requirements of the state. Recordings shall be kept for ninety (90) days. 
(Code 1977, § 5.58; Ord. No. 499, 2-16-93; Ord. No. 721, § 5, 4-18-11; Ord. No. 729, § 1, 2-6-12; Ord. No. 793, § 7, 7-2-18) 
Sec. 38-293. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in an I-1 district, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the council: 
(1)  Auto engine and body repair, and undercoating shops when completely enclosed; 
(2)  Lumber and planing mills when completely enclosed and when located in the interior of the district so that no property line shall form the exterior boundary of the I-1 district; 
(3)  Metal plating, buffing and polishing, subject to appropriate measures to control the type of process to prevent noxious results and/or nuisances; 
(4)  Business uses which have an industrial character in terms of either their outdoor storage requirements or activities (such as, but not limited to, lumber yard, building materials, outlet, upholsterer, cabinet maker, outdoor boat, house trailer, automobile garage or agricultural implement sales) or serve convenience needs of the industrial district (such as, but not limited to, eating and drinking establishments, bank, savings and loan association, credit union, automobile service station, motel or bowling alley, trade or industrial school or industrial clinic); 
(5)  Other uses of a similar character to the above uses. 
(Code 1977, § 5.59) 
Sec. 38-294. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVI, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use and providing minimum yard setback requirements for I-1 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.60) 
Sec. 38-295. - General provisions. 
    See article XVII, general provisions, for requirements governing off-street parking, signs, walls and other provisions for I-1 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.61) 
Secs. 38-296-38-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 38-311. - Intent. 
    General industrial districts are designed primarily for manufacturing, assembling, and fabrication activities including large scale or specialized industrial operations, whose external physical effects will be felt to some degree by surrounding districts. The I-2 districts are so structured as to permit the manufacturing, processing and composing of semifinished or finished products from raw materials as well as from previously prepared material. 
(Code 1977, § 5.62) 
Sec. 38-312. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an I-2 district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Any principal use first permitted in an I-1 district; 
(2)  Onsite heating and electric power generating plants using conventional fuels or renewable resources; 
(3)  Gasoline or petroleum storage; 
(4)  Railroad yards; 
(5)  Any of the following production or manufacturing uses (not including storage of finished products) provided that they are located not less than eight hundred (800) feet distant from any residential district and not less than three hundred (300) feet distant from any other district: 
a.  Junkyards, provided such are entirely enclosed within a building or within an eight (8) foot obscuring wall and provided further that one property line abuts a railroad right-of-way. 
(6)  Foundry operations within a closed building; 
(7)  Any other use which shall be determined by the council after recommendation from the planning commission, to be of the same general character as the above permitted uses in this section. The council may impose any required setbacks and/or performance standards so as to ensure public health, safety and general welfare; 
(8)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
    Additional uses allowed by special use permit: 
(1)  Grain elevators; 
(2)  Any of the following production or manufacturing uses (not including storage of finished products) provided that they are located not less than eight hundred (800) feet distant from any residential district and not less than three hundred (300) feet distant from any other district: 
a.  Incineration of garbage or refuse when conducted within an approved and enclosed incinerator plant; 
b.  Blast furnace, steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill; 
c.  Manufacture of corrosive acid or alkali, cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris; 
d.  Petroleum or other inflammable liquids, production or refining; 
e.  Smelting of copper, iron or zinc ore. 
(Code 1977, § 5.63; Ord. No. 768, § 1, 6-15-15) 
Sec. 38-313. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVI, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for I-2 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.64) 
Sec. 38-314. - General provisions. 
    See article XVII, general provisions, for requirements governing off-street parking, signs, walls and other provisions for I-2 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.65) 
Secs. 38-315-38-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - P-1 VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Parking, stopping and standing generally, § 33-36 et seq. 

Sec. 38-331. - Intent. 
    The P-1 vehicular parking districts are intended to permit the establishment of areas to be used solely for off-street parking of private passenger vehicles as a use incidental to a principal use. These districts will generally be provided by petition or request to serve a use district which has developed without adequate off-street parking facilities. 
(Code 1977, § 5.66) 
Sec. 38-332. - Principal uses permitted. 
    Premises in P-1 districts shall be used only for an off-street vehicular parking area and shall be developed and maintained subject to such regulations as are provided in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 5.67) 
Sec. 38-333. - Required conditions. 
    The following conditions are required in a P-1 district: 
(1)  The parking area shall be accessory to, and for use in connection with one (1) or more businesses, or industrial establishments, located in adjoining business or industrial districts, or in connection with one (1) or more existing professional or institutional office buildings or institutions. 
(2)  Such parking lots shall be contiguous to a multiple-family residential or nonresidential district. Parking areas may be approved when adjacent to the districts, or on the end of a block where such areas front on a street which is perpendicular to that street servicing the district. There may be a private driveway or public street or public alley between such P-1 district and above listed districts. 
(3)  Parking areas shall be used solely for parking of private passenger vehicles, for periods of less than one (1) day and shall not be used as an off-street loading area. 
(4)  No commercial repair work or service of any kind, or sale or display thereof, shall be conducted in such parking area. 
(5)  No signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits and conditions of use, shall be maintained on such parking area. 
(6)  No building other than those for shelter or attendants shall be erected upon the premises and they shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. 
(7)  Applications for P-1 district rezoning shall be made by submitting to the planning commission a dimensional layout of the area requested showing the intended parking plans in accordance with sections 38-381 and 38-390. 
(Code 1977, § 5.68) 
Sec. 38-334. - Minimum distances and setbacks. 
(a)  Side and rear yards. Where the P-1 district is contiguous to the side and/or rear lot lines of premises within a residentially zoned district, the required wall shall be located along the lot line. 
(b)  Front yards. Where the P-1 district is contiguous to a residentially zoned district which has a common frontage in the same block with residential structures, or wherein no residential structures have been yet erected, there shall be a setback equal to the required residential setback for the residential district, or a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet, or whichever is the greater. The required wall shall be located on this minimum setback line unless, under unusual circumstances, the planning commission finds that no good purpose would be served. The land between setback and street right-of-way line shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be planted with shrubs, trees or lawn and shall be maintained in a healthy-growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
(Code 1977, § 5.69) 
Sec. 38-335. - Parking space layout, standards, construction and maintenance. 
    P-1 vehicular parking districts shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of Article XVII, general provisions for P-1 districts. 
(Code 1977, § 5.70) 
ARTICLE XV.1. - C-OS CONSERVATION/OPEN SPACE DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-336. - Intent. 
    The C-OS conservation/open space districts are intended to permit maintenance and management of natural areas, to protect lands under public ownership, under permanent conservation organization or of high public value due either to their uniqueness or to their potential hazards to the public. 
(Ord. No. 626, § 1, 3-17-03) 
Sec. 38-337. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In the C-OS district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one (1) or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Farms on those parcels of land separately owned outside the boundaries of either a proprietary or supervisor's plat, having an area of not less than five (5) acres, all subject to the health and sanitation provisions of the city and provided further that no farms shall be operated as piggeries, or for the disposal of garbage, sewage, rubbish, offal or rendering plants, or for the slaughtering of animals except such animals as have been raised on the premises or have been maintained on the premises for at least a period of one (1) year immediately prior thereto and for the use and consumption by persons residing on the premises. 
(2)  Forestry. 
(3)  Natural areas. 
(4)  Public outdoor recreation facilities over one (1) acre. 
(5)  Stormwater management and water supply facilities. 
(Ord. No. 626, § 1, 3-17-03) 
Sec. 38-338. - Permitted uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in the C-OS districts, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission in accordance with section 38-390. 
(1)  Park structures and playground facilities. 
(2)  Service roads. 
(3)  Parking lots not associated with a structure. 
(4)  Private recreation areas. 
(5)  Plant nurseries and horticultural activities. 
(Ord. No. 626, § 1, 3-17-03) 
Sec. 38-339. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVI, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for the C-OS districts. 
(Ord. No. 626, § 1, 3-17-03) 
Sec. 38-340. - General provisions. 
(a)  See article XVII, general provisions, for requirements governing off-street parking, signs, walls and other provisions for C-OS districts. 
(b)  Lots that are zoned C-OS district are exempt from the provisions of section 18-122(2) and (3). 
(Ord. No. 626, § 1, 3-17-03) 
ARTICLE XV.2. - PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 38-341. - Intent. 
    The purpose of this district is to permit flexibility in the regulation of land development; to encourage innovation in land use and variety in design, layout and type of structures constructed; to achieve economy and efficiency in the use of land, natural resources, energy and the provision of public services and utilities; to encourage provision of usable open space and protection of natural features; to provide adequate housing, employment and shopping opportunities particularly suited to the needs of the residents of the city; and to encourage the use, reuse and improvement of existing sites and buildings which will be developed in a compatible way with surrounding uses but where the uniform regulations contained in other zoning districts do not provide adequate protections and safeguards for the site or surrounding area. The district is intended to accommodate developments with one (1) or more land uses, sites with unusual topography or unique settings within the community or sites that exhibit difficult or costly development problems or any combination of these factors. This zoning district shall not be allowed where this zoning classification is sought primarily to avoid the imposition of standards and requirements of other zoning classifications or other city regulations rather than to achieve the stated purposes above. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-342. - Principle uses permitted. 
    Any use or combination of uses and accessory uses permitted in the supplemental regulations for the PUD zoning district adopted pursuant to section 38-395. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-343. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVI, schedule of regulations, limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements for the PUD district. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-344. - General provisions. 
(a)  See article XVII, general provisions, for requirements governing off-street parking, signs, walls, and other provisions for PUD Districts. 
(b)  See article XVII, section 38-395, planned unit development regulations and standards for approval. 
(c)  See article XVII, section 38-390, for specific procedures for site plan review of planned unit developments. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Secs. 38-345-38-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 38-351. - Schedule limiting height, bulk, density and area by zoning district. 
    The following is a schedule limiting height, bulk, density and area by zoning district: 
MINIMUM ZONING MAXIMUM MINIMUM MAXIMUM % LOT SIZE PER HEIGHT OF MINIMUM YARD SETBACK FLOOR OF LOT AREA DWELLING UNIT STRUCTURES (PER LOT IN FEET) AREA COVERED (BY AREA IN WIDTH EACH PER UNIT ALL BUILDINGS) ZONING DISTRICT SQ. FT. IN FEET IN FEET FRONT SIDE REAR (SQ. FT.) R-1 One-Family Res. 7,200(a) 60 30 25(b, t) 8(b, c) 35(b) 864(u, v) 25% R-2 Two-Family Res. 4,000 33 30 25(b, t) 8(b, c) 35(b) 750 25% RT-1 Attached One-Family 4,000 - 30 30(d) 20(d) 35(d) (i) 25% RM-1 Multiple Family (e, f) (e, f) 35 30(d, h) 20(d, h) 30(d, h) (i) 25% RM-2 Multiple Family (f, g) (f, g) 70 30(d, h) 20(d, h) 30(d, h) (i) 25% OS-1 Office Service - - 35 15(j, k) 10(1) 10(m, n) - - B-1 Local Business - - 35 15(k) 10(l) 10(m, n) - - B-2 Planned Shopping Center - - 35 75(k, o) 20(o) 30(m, o) - - B-3 Central Business - - (p) none(p) none none(m) - - B-4 General Business - - 35 15(k) (l) 10(m, n) - - I-1 Light Industrial - - 40 40(q) 20(r) (r, s) - - I-2 General Industrial - - 60 60(q) 30(r) (r, s) - - C-OS Conservation/Open Space 43,560 66 35 50 50 (r) - - PUD Planned Unit Development (w) (w) (w) (w) (w) (w) (w) (w)  
(Code 1977, § 5.71; Ord. No. 454, § 1, 8-15-88; Ord. No. 478, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. 626, § 1, 3-17-03; Ord. No. 662, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-352. - Notes to schedule. 
    The following are notes to the schedule in section 38-351: 
(a)  See section 38-353, average lot size, and section 38-354, subdivision open space plan, regarding reflexibility allowances. 
(b)  For all uses permitted other than one-family residential, the setback shall be governed by the formula in footnote (d) below, or by the setback required in section 38-53 or by 38-351, whichever is greater. 
(c)  In the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard, the side yard setback abutting a street shall not be less than the minimum front yard setback of the district in which located and all regulations applicable to a front yard shall apply. 
(d)  Along those property lines which abut a one-family residential district, the minimum required yard shall be determined by the following formula: 
Y = L + 2H / 4 
    Along those property lines which do not have the above described relationship to property zoned in a one-family residential district classification, the minimum required yard shall be determined by the following formula: 
Y = L + 2H / 6 
    The symbols used above shall be defined as follows: 
Y = required yard. 
L = the total length of that portion of a lot line from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn perpendicular from the lot line will intersect any part of the building other than permitted yard encroachments. 
H = height of building as defined in section 38-5. 
    Where a lot line abuts a street, one-third the width of the right-of-way of the street may be considered as yard setback; but in no instance including the above, shall any yard be less than those indicated in section 38-351. 
    In the RM-2 districts, not more than fifty (50) percent of any required front yard shall be used for vehicular parking or driveways. 
(e)  In the RM-1 district, the total number of rooms of eighty (80) square feet or more (not including kitchen, dining or sanitary facilities) shall not be more than the area of the parcel in square feet, divided by twelve hundred (1200) for any buildings of two (2) stories or less and eight hundred fifty (850) for buildings of two and one-half (21/2) or three (3) stories. 
(f)  The minimum zoning lot in an RM district shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area. In all the RM districts, for the purposes of computing the permitted number of dwelling units per acre, the following room assignments shall control: 
Efficiency = 1 room 
One bedroom = 2 rooms 
Two bedroom = 3 rooms 
Three bedroom = 4 rooms 
Four bedroom = 5 rooms 
Plans presented showing 1, 2 or 3 bedroom units and including a "den," "library" or other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density. 
The area used for computing density shall be the total site area exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way of either interior or bounding roads. All units shall have at least one (1) living room and one (1) bedroom, except that not more than twenty (20) percent of the units may be of an efficiency apartment type. 
(g)  In the RM-2 districts, the total number of rooms of eighty (80) square feet or more (not including kitchen, dining or sanitary facilities) shall not be more than the area of the parcel in square feet divided by seven hundred (700) for any buildings of two and one-half (21/2) to four (4) stories and four hundred (400) for buildings of four and one-half (41/2) or more stories. For buildings of two (2) stories or less in height, the requirements of the RM-1 district shall apply. 
(h)  In all the RM districts, the minimum distance between any two (2) buildings shall be regulated according to the length and height of such buildings, and in no instance shall this distance be less than twenty (20) feet in an RM-1 district and thirty (30) feet in an RM-2 district. Parking may be permitted within a required side or rear yard but shall not cover more than thirty (30) percent of the area of any required yard, or any minimum distance between buildings. A minimum fifteen (15) foot strip of lawns or walks shall be maintained between buildings and parking lots. The formula regulating the required minimum distance between two (2) buildings in all RM-1 and RM-2 districts is as follows: 
S = L A + L B + 2(H A + H B ) , where 
6 
S = Required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of building A and any wall of building B or the vertical prolongation of either. 
L A = Total of building A. 
The total length of building A is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building A from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn perpendicular to building A will intersect any wall of building B. 
L B = Total length of building B. 
The total length of building B is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building B from which, when viewed directly from above, the lines drawn perpendicular to building B will intersect any wall of building A. 
H A = Height of building A. 
The height of building A at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of building A. Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building. 

H B = Height of building B. 
The height of building B at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of building B. Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building. 
(i)  The minimum floor area per unit shall be as follows: 
(1)  Efficiency unit - 350 sq. ft. 
(2)  One bedroom - 450 sq. ft. 
(3)  Two bedroom - 600 sq. ft. 
(4)  Three bedroom - 800 sq. ft. 
(5)  Four bedroom - 1,000 sq. ft. 
(j)  The front yard shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet or fifteen (15) percent of the depth of the lot, whichever is greater, provided that the maximum setback so required shall be sixty (60) feet. 
(k)  Off-street parking shall be permitted within the front yard. 
(l)  No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines of the district, except as otherwise specified in the building code. On a corner lot which borders on a residential district to the rear, there shall be provided a setback of twenty (20) feet on the side or residential street. On an exterior side yard abutting a residential district or abutting a street, there shall be provided a setback of ten (10) feet in width. 
(m)  Loading space shall be provided in the rear yard in the ratio of at least ten (10) square feet per front foot of building and shall be computed separately from the off-street parking requirements; except in the instance of O-1 districts, loading space shall be provided in the ratio of five (5) square feet per front foot of building. Where an alley exists or is provided at the rear of buildings, the rear building setback and loading requirements may be computed from the center of said alley. 
(n)  When adjacent to a R-1, R-2 or RT-1 district, the minimum rear yard setback shall be ten (10) feet or ten (10) percent of the depth of the lot, whichever is greater, provided that the maximum setback so required shall be sixty (60) feet. 
(o)  No building shall be closer than seventy-five (75) feet to any adjacent residential district or to any public street. 
(p)  There shall be no specific height limitation in a CBD district; provided, however, that prior to the issuance of a building permit for any structure over thirty-five (35) feet in height, the council, after recommendation of the planning commission, shall make a finding that any such excessive height will not be detrimental to the light, air or privacy of any other structure or use currently existing or approved for construction and that fire protection can be provided by the city. In approving a height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet, the council may follow the standard in floor area ratio set forth below: 
(1)  In the CBD district, the maximum floor area ratio for a zoning lot shall not exceed 4.0. 
(2)  For each square foot of plaza provided on a zoning lot, the total area permitted by the floor area ratio, set forth above, may be increased by three (3) square feet. 
(q)  Off-street parking for visitors, over and above the number of spaces required under section 38-380, may be permitted within the required front yard provided that such off-street parking spaces are not located within twenty (20) feet of the front lot line. 
(r)  No building shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet to the outer perimeter (property line) of such district when said property line abuts any residential district. 
(s)  All storage shall be in the rear yard and shall be completely screened with an obscuring wall or fence, not less than six (6) feet high, or with a chain link type fence and a greenbelt planting so as to obscure all view from any adjacent residential, office or business district or from a public street. Loading areas shall be provided in accordance with section 38-382. 
(t)  Where there exists in any city block in the R-1 and R-2 districts the setting of over fifty-one (51) percent of the dwelling units with legal nonconforming front yard setbacks less than twenty-five (25) feet, a building permit may be issued for a one-family or two-family dwelling unit or an addition to an existing unit for a proposed setback that is equivalent to the setback of over fifty-one (51) percent of the dwelling units in said city block, provided that no setback on a corner lot will be less than that required for corner clearance as specified in section 38-388. 
(u)  The ground floor area shall not be less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet. 
(v)  In order to compare favorably with existing housing within the city, the minimum width of a new dwelling unit not located in a mobile home park shall be twenty-four (24) feet for a core area of seven hundred twenty (720) square feet; furthermore, said unit shall be placed on a full perimeter foundation. 
(w)  See section 38-395(2) for regulation of height, bulk, setback, density and area. 
(Code 1977, § 5.72; Ord. No. 454, § 2, 8-15-88; Ord. No. 478, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. 662, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-353. - Average lot size. 
    The intent of this section is to permit the subdivider or developer to vary his or her lot sizes and lot widths so as to average the minimum size of lot per unit as required in Article XVI, schedule of regulations, for each R-1 district. If this option is selected, the following conditions shall be met: 
(1)  In meeting the average minimum lot size, the subdivision shall be so designed as not to create lots having an area or width greater than ten (10) percent below that area or width required in the schedule of regulations and shall not create an attendant increase in the number of lots. The following gross densities (including roads) shall be maximum: 
R-1 = 4.4 lots per acre 
(2)  Each final plat submitted as part of a preliminary plat shall average the minimum required for the district in which it is located. 
(3)  All computations showing lot area and the average resulting through this technique shall be indicated on the print of the preliminary plat. 
(Code 1977, § 5.74) 
Sec. 38-354. - Subdivision open space plan. 
(a)  The intent of the subdivision open space plan is to promote the following objectives: 
(1)  Provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the natural character of open fields, stands of trees, brooks, hills and similar natural assets; 
(2)  Encourage developers to use a more creative approach in the development of residential areas; 
(3)  Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic and desirable use of open area while recognizing a reduction in development costs and by allowing the developer to by-pass natural obstacles on the site; 
(4)  Encourage the provision of open space within reasonable distance to all lot development of the subdivision and to further encourage the development of recreational facilities. 
(b)  Modifications to the standards as outlined in Article XVI, schedule of regulations, may be made in the R-1 district when the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The lot area and width in all R-1 districts, which are served by a public sanitary sewer system, may be reduced up to ten (10) percent. These lot area and width reductions shall be permitted, provided that the dwelling unit density shall be no greater than if the land area to be subdivided were developed in the minimum square foot lot areas as required for the one-family district under Article XVI, schedule of regulations. All calculations shall be predicated upon the R-1 districts having the following gross densities (including roads): 
R-1 = 4.4 dwelling units per acre 
(2)  Under the provisions of subsection (b)(1), for each square foot of land gained within a residential subdivision through the reduction of lot size below the minimum requirements as outlined in Article XVI, schedule of regulations, at least equal amounts of land shall be dedicated to the common use of the lot owners of the subdivision or to the city in a manner approved by the city. 
(3)  The area to be dedicated for subdivision open space purposes shall in no instance be less than two (2) acres and shall be in a location and shape approved by the planning commission. 
(4)  The land area necessary to meet the minimum requirements of this section shall not include bodies of water, swamps or land with excessive grades making it unsuitable for recreation. All land dedicated shall be so graded and developed as to have natural drainage. The entire area may, however, be located in a floodplain. 
(5)  This plan, for reduced lot sizes, shall be permitted only if it is mutually agreeable to the council and the subdivider or developer. 
(6)  This plan, for reduced lot sizes, shall be started within six (6) months after having received approval of the final plat, and must be completed in a reasonable time. Failure to start within this period shall void all previous approval. 
(7)  Under this subdivision open space approach, the developer or subdivider shall dedicate the total park area (see subsection (b)(1)) at the time of filing of the final plat on all or any portion of the plat. 
(Code 1977, § 5.75) 
Secs. 38-355-38-375. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 38-376. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Whenever any provision of this chapter imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this chapter, then the provisions of such ordinance shall govern. 
(Code 1977, § 5.76) 
Sec. 38-377. - Scope. 
    No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, constructed or altered and maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 5.77) 
Sec. 38-378. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to permit the continuance of a lawful use of any building or land existing at the effective date of this section, although such use of land or structures may not conform with the provisions of this chapter. 
There are two (2) types of nonconforming uses, Class A and Class B. 
Class A nonconforming uses or structures are those which have been so designated by the zoning board of appeals, after application by the person having interest in the property or the zoning administrator. Where Class A nonconforming uses are identified, it is the intent of this section to provide for their continuance, so long as they fulfill the requirements in this section. 
Class B nonconforming uses or structures are all nonconforming uses or structures not designated as Class A. It is the intent of this section not to encourage the survival of Class B nonconforming uses or structures. Class B nonconforming uses or structures shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other uses or structures prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
The continuance of all nonconforming uses and structures within the city shall be subject to the conditions and requirements set forth in this section. 
(b)  Procedures for obtaining Class A designation. Any application for a Class A designation for a nonconforming use permit for any land or structural use permitted under this article shall be submitted and processed under the following procedures: 
(1)  A written application shall be filed with the zoning board of appeals setting forth the name and address of the applicant, giving a legal description of the property to which the application pertains and including such other information as may be necessary to enable the board of appeals to make a determination of the matter. 
(2)  The zoning board of appeals may require the furnishing of such additional information as it considers necessary. 
(3)  A notice of hearing and subsequent hearing procedures shall be given in accordance with the procedures outlined in section 38-502(e). 
Before an application for Class A designation for a nonconforming use can be processed, the zoning board of appeals shall review each application to ensure, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the following standards are met: 
(4)  That the continuance of the use would not be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or the spirit of this chapter. 
(5)  That the use or structure does not and is not likely to significantly decrease the value of nearby properties. 
(6)  That the use or structure was lawful at the time of its inception and that no useful purpose would be served by strict application of the provisions or requirements of this chapter with which the use or structure does not conform. 
(c)  Approval of Class A designation. The zoning board of appeals shall approve Class A designation for nonconforming uses that comply with the standards and procedures of this section. The decision of the board of appeals shall be in writing and shall set forth the findings and reasons on which it is based. The board of appeals shall attach conditions, where necessary, to assure that the use or structure does not become contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or the spirit and purpose of this chapter. In addition, no vested interest shall arise out of a Class A designation. 
(d)  Revocation of Class A designation. Any Class A designation shall be revoked, following the same procedure required for designation, upon a finding that as a result of any change of conditions or circumstances the use or structure no longer qualifies for Class A designation. 
(e)  Regulations pertaining to Class A nonconforming uses and structures. A Class A nonconforming use or structure shall not be repaired, restored, extended, enlarged, moved or substituted for except in accord with the following requirements: 
(1)  This chapter shall not prohibit the repair, improvement or modernization of a Class A nonconforming structure to correct deterioration, obsolescence, depreciation and wear, provided that such repair does not exceed an aggregate cost of fifty (50) percent of the structure's replacement cost. Repairs, improvements or modernization in excess of fifty (50) percent of the structure's replacement cost may be permitted by the zoning board of appeals, provided the structure will still meet the qualifications of a Class A nonconforming use or structure. 
(2)  Any Class A nonconforming use or structure damaged by fire, explosion, flood, erosion or other means may be restored, rebuilt or repaired, provided that such restoration does not exceed fifty (50) percent of the structure's pre-catastrophe replacement cost as determined by a qualified appraiser. Restoration of a Class A nonconforming use or structure damaged in excess of fifty (50) percent of the structure's pre-catastrophe replacement cost may be permitted by the zoning board of appeals, provided the restored structure would still meet the qualifications of a Class A nonconforming use or structure. However, no Class A nonconforming structure damaged in a floodplain or other areas of recurring natural hazards in excess of fifty (50) percent of the structure's pre-catastrophe replacement shall be rebuilt except in full compliance with this chapter. 
(3)  Structural changes, including enlargement or extension of a Class A nonconforming structure or use, may be permitted by the zoning board of appeals, except when such extension or enlargement would be incompatible with surrounding land uses or when the structural change would be inconsistent with the intent of this chapter. No extension or enlargement of a Class A nonconforming use or structure shall be approved if approval would result in violation of the setback, side yard or bulk requirements of this chapter. 
(4)  A Class A nonconforming use may be substituted for a similar nonconforming use or structure when the zoning board of appeals determines that the substitution would improve the property, would not increase the structure's or use's nonconformity, or when the substitution would not be contrary to the intent of this chapter. 
(f)  Regulations pertaining to Class B nonconforming uses and structures. It is a purpose of this chapter to eliminate Class B nonconforming uses and structures as rapidly as is permitted by law without payment of compensation. A Class B nonconforming use or structure shall not be repaired, restored, extended, enlarged or substituted for except in accord with the following requirements: 
(1)  Minor repairs or maintenance of a Class B nonconforming use or structure in order to keep it structurally safe and sound are permitted. A Class B nonconforming use or structure shall not be repaired, improved or remodeled when such repair or improvement exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the structure's replacement cost. The replacement cost shall be determined, prior to any repairs or improvements, by a qualified appraiser. If a Class B nonconforming use or structure is changed to conform with this chapter, the limitations on repairs or improvements shall not apply. 
(2)  Any Class B nonconforming use or structure damaged by fire, explosion, flood, erosion or other means shall not be rebuilt, repaired or reconstructed if damaged in excess of fifty (50) percent of the structure's pre-catastrophe replacement cost, except when the use or structure would fully comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  No Class B nonconforming use or structure shall be enlarged, extended or structurally altered, nor shall the nonconforming use be changed to a substantially different nonconforming use. 
(4)  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment to this chapter. 
(5)  No Class B nonconforming use or structure shall be permitted to continue in existence if it was unlawful at the time it was established. 
(6)  A Class B nonconforming structure or use may be substituted for by a conforming use or structure, or by a use or structure which meets the requirements of a Class A nonconforming use, when the zoning board of appeals determines that the substitution would not increase the nonconformity of the use or structure or be contrary to the public health, safety and welfare and the intent of this chapter. 
(g)  Determination of replacement cost. The replacement cost of repairing, restoring or improving a Class A or B nonconforming use or structure, excluding contents, damaged by fire, explosion, flood, erosion or other means, shall be made on the basis of an appraisal by a qualified individual designated by the zoning board of appeals. The cost of such determination shall be borne by the zoning administrator after: 
(1)  Receiving an estimate of the structural damage from the city fire chief; 
(2)  Receiving a figure representing the difference between the pre-catastrophe market value of the structure and the post-catastrophe value, as determined by the assessing officer for the city; 
(3)  Dividing the sum of the figures derived in subsection (1) from the fire chief and subsection (2) from the assessing officer by two (2). 
(h)  Nonconforming lots of record. Any nonconforming lot of record or nonconforming lot described in a deed or land contract executed and delivered prior to the effective date of this chapter or an amendment thereto shall be used only for a use permitted in this chapter. If the use of a nonconforming lot requires a variation of the setback or yard requirements of this chapter in excess of fifteen (15) percent of the requirement, then such use shall be permitted after review of a site plan by the zoning board of appeals under the terms of this chapter. The board may amend the site plan to achieve an objective for reasonableness of the fit of the land use on the available land. The zoning board of appeals shall have the authority to amend structural dimensions and site layout to achieve this objective. The standards to be applied by the zoning board of appeals, in reviewing the site plan, shall be the applicable standards stated in section 38-504(3). The reduction by fifteen (15) percent or less of dimensional requirements for lawful nonconforming lots may be granted by the zoning administrator. When the minimum dimensional requirements of this chapter can be met by the combination of two (2) or more nonconforming contiguous lots owned by the same person, said lots may be combined for use and no variance is necessary. 
(i)  Discontinuance or abandonment. Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for twelve (12) consecutive months, or for eighteen (18) months during any three-year period, such discontinuance shall be considered conclusive evidence of an intention to abandonment; the nonconforming use shall not be reestablished, and any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(j)  Changing uses. If no structural alterations are made, the board of appeals may, upon an appeal, authorize a change from one (1) nonconforming use to another nonconforming use, provided the proposed use would be more suitable to the zoning district in which it is located than the nonconforming use which is being replaced. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more nearly conforming use or to a conforming use, such use shall not revert or be changed back to a nonconforming or less conforming use. 
(k)  Termination of nonconforming land use. Class B nonconforming uses of land existing at the effective date of this chapter, where no building is located, may be continued, provided that the nonconforming land use shall be terminated and converted to conform with the provisions of this chapter within three (3) years after the effective date of this section, and provided further that the nonconforming land use shall not in any way be expanded or extended during this three-year interval, either on the same property or adjoining property. 
(l)  Illegal nonconforming uses. Nonconforming uses of buildings or land existing at the effective date of this section established without a building permit, or those nonconforming uses which cannot be proved conclusively as existing prior to the effective date of this section shall be declared illegal nonconforming uses and shall be discontinued within a period of three (3) years following the effective date of this section, subject to the review and approval of the city council. 
(m)  District changes. Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be changed so as to transfer an area from one (1) district to another district of another classification, the provision of this section shall also apply to any existing uses that become nonconforming as a result of the boundary changes. 
(n)  Elimination of nonconforming uses. In accordance with Act 207, Public Acts of the State of Michigan of 1921, as amended, the city council may acquire properties on which nonconforming buildings or uses are located, by condemnation or other means, and may remove such uses or such uses may be used by the city for a public use. The net cost of such acquisition may be assessed against a benefiting district or may be paid from other sources of revenue. 
(o)  Uses under exception provisions not nonconforming uses. Any use for which a special exception is permitted as provided in this chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming use but shall, without further action, be deemed a conforming use in such district. 
(p)  Change of tenancy or ownership. There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, structures and land in combination. 
(Code 1977, § 5.78; Ord. No. 459, § 1, 4-3-89; Ord. No. 619, § 1, 9-16-02) 
State Law reference- Nonconforming uses and structures, MCL 125.583a. 
Sec. 38-379. - Accessory buildings. 
    Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations of this chapter applicable to main building. 
(2)  Accessory buildings shall not be located in any required yard, except a rear yard. 
(3)  An accessory building shall not occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent of a required rear yard, plus forty (40) percent of any nonrequired rear yard, provided that in no instance shall the accessory building(s) exceed the ground floor area of the main building. 
(4)  No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten (10) feet to any main building nor shall it be located closer than three (3) feet to any side or rear lot line. 
In those instances where the rear lot line is coterminous with an alley right-of-way the accessory building shall not be closer than one (1) foot to such rear lot line. In no instance shall an accessory building be located within a dedicated easement right-of-way. 
(5)  No detached accessory building in R-1, R-2, RT-1, RM-1, RM-2, OS-1, B-1 and P-1 districts shall exceed one (1) story or fourteen (14) feet in height. 
Accessory buildings in all other districts may be constructed to equal the permitted maximum height of structures in said districts, subject to board of appeals review and approval if the building exceeds one (1) story or fourteen (14) feet in height. 
(6)  When an accessory building is located on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, the building shall not project beyond the front yard setback required on the lot in rear of such corner lot. In no instance shall an accessory building be located nearer than nineteen (19) feet to a street right-of-way line. 
(7)  On residential lots of less than seventeen thousand five hundred (17,500) square feet, only two (2) accessory buildings shall be permitted. On residential lots seventeen thousand five hundred (17,500) square feet or greater, only three (3) accessory buildings shall be permitted. These limits shall not apply to wind energy systems, satellite dishes, or dog pens. 
(8)  All recreational vehicles, boats, snowmobiles, jet skis and comparable devices along with the trailers for these items stored on individual lots shall respect the requirements of this section applicable to accessory buildings, except that side yard storage is permitted against the wall of a principal structure when these items are beneath a legal conforming carport structure or are setback at least three (3) feet from the property line and eleven (11) feet from a principal building of an adjoining parcel. Storage in a driveway is permitted when the stored item can be placed entirely behind the front wall of the principal structure. 
(9)  Regulations for dish-type satellite receiving antennae and similar structures (hereinafter referred to as satellite dishes): 
a.  Ground mounted: 
1.  In residential districts a satellite dish must be located in the rear yard. If a usable satellite signal cannot be obtained in a rear yard then a side yard location may be selected if all other provisions of this section are able to be enforced. 
2.  In all commercial and industrial districts, a satellite dish may be located on a rear or side lot if all other conditions of the ordinance can be followed, and if the side yard of the commercial or industrial lot is not adjacent to a residential district or detached single family use. 
3.  No satellite dish including its concrete base, slab, a similar substructure or projected portion shall be constructed less than eight (8) feet from any property line or easement of the rear or side yard, or be within twenty-five (25) feet from a right-of-way line of a public street. 
4.  In residential districts no satellite dish shall be constructed without appropriate evergreen landscaping to reasonably conceal said satellite dish from view. The planting shall be completed prior to final approval by the building inspector. Vegetative screening shall not be required where reception of a usable satellite signal would be adversely affected. 
5.  In residential districts a satellite dish shall not exceed a grade height of fourteen (14) feet. In all other districts the grade height limit is twenty (20) feet. 
6.  All structural support shall be of corrosion resistant metal. 
7.  A satellite dish shall be designed to withstand a wind force of seventy-five (75) miles per hour without the use of supporting guy wires. 
8.  The color of the satellite dish cannot be contrasting with its surroundings or setting. A contrasting color is one that does not blend with the background as defined by the normal senses. 
9.  In residential districts a satellite dish cannot be used as a sign. 
10.  The number of satellite dishes over four (4) feet in diameter is limited to one (1) on residential lots under one (1) acre in size. 
11.  No satellite dish (ground or roof mounted) shall be linked physically or electronically to a receiver which is not located on the same lot, premises, or parcel of land as is the satellite dish. 
12.  Wiring beneath a satellite dish and receiver shall be installed according to the specifications of the National Electrical Code. 
13.  A satellite dish must be bonded to a grounding rod. 
14.  Any driving motor exceeding fifty (50) volt power design shall require an electrical permit. 
b.  Roof-mounted: 
1.  In the event that a usable satellite signal cannot be obtained by locating the antennae in the rear or side yard, such antennae may be placed on the roof of a primary or accessory structure. 
2.  Satellite dishes shall be mounted directly upon the roof of a primary or accessory structure or on a ground anchored pole projecting through an eave of the structure. Satellite dishes shall not be mounted upon appurtenances such as chimneys, trees, or spires. 
3.  For residential uses, a satellite dish shall not exceed a height of more than three (3) feet above the roof upon which it is mounted. 
4.  In residential uses, a satellite dish shall not exceed eight (8) feet in diameter. 
5.  A satellite dish shall be designed to withstand a wind force of eighty-five (85) miles per hour without the use of supporting guy wires. 
6.  Any driving motor exceeding fifty (50) volt power design shall require an electrical permit. 
7.  A satellite dish must be bonded to a grounding rod. 
(10)  A small wind energy system shall be an accessory building in all zoning districts subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Setbacks and location, as measured from the furthest outward extension of all moving parts. 
1.  A STWES shall be set back a distance equal to its total height plus an additional five (5) feet from any occupied building, street or highway right-of-way; any overhead utility lines; all property lines; and any existing guy wire, anchor or small wind energy tower on the property. 
2.  A SSWES shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the property line, public right-of-way, public easement, or overhead utility lines if mounted directly on a roof or other elevated surface of a structure. 
3.  A SSWES shall not be affixed to the roof or wall of a structure facing a street. 
4.  A STWES shall not be located in any front yard except for properties zoned and used for industrial purposes. 
5.  The lowest extension of any blade or other exposed moving component of a WES shall be a least fifteen (15) feet above the ground as well as any outdoor surface intended for human use. 
6.  Setbacks may be reduced to not less than twenty (20) feet if the applicant provides a registered engineer's certification that the WES is designed to collapse within a zone smaller than the height of the tower, yet still remain within the owner's property or the applicant acquires an easement to meet the required setback distance. 
b.  Access. 
1.  All ground mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access. 
2.  The tower shall be designed and installed so as to not provide step bolts or a ladder readily accessible to the public for a minimum height of eight (8) feet above the ground. 
c.  Electrical wires. All electrical wires associated with a small wind energy system, other than wires necessary to connect the wind generator to the wind tower wiring, the wind tower wiring to the disconnect junction box, and the grounding wires shall be located underground. 
d.  Lighting. A wind tower and generator shall not be artificially lighted unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Lighting of other parts of the small wind energy systems, such as appurtenant structures, shall be limited to that required for safety purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting properties. 
e.  Appearance, color, and finish. The wind generator and wind tower shall remain painted or finished the color or finish that was originally applied by the manufacturer. 
f.  Signs. All signs, other than the manufacturer's or installer's identification, appropriate warning signs, or owner identification on a wind generator, wind tower, building, or other structure associated with a small wind energy system visible from any public road shall be prohibited. 
g.  Code compliance. A small wind energy system including wind tower shall comply with all applicable construction and electrical codes. 
h.  Utility notification and interconnection. Small wind energy systems that connect to the electric utility shall comply with the public service commission regulations. 
i.  Small wind energy systems may be attached to any building, including guy wires, provided the city approves the submittal of documentation sealed by an engineer licensed by the State of Michigan showing the proposed connection of the system to the structure and whether any additional reinforcing is required. The city may not be found liable for damage caused by noise or vibration created by the system. 
j.  Meteorological towers shall be permitted under the same standards, permit requirements, restoration requirements, and permit procedures as a small wind energy system. 
k.  Each property is eligible for two (2) small wind energy systems only, except properties of at least one (1) contiguous acre may be allowed one (1) additional system for each additional one-half (1/2) acre or portion thereof. 
l.  A small wind energy system that is out-of-service for a continuous six-month period will be deemed to have been abandoned. The zoning administrator may issue a notice of abandonment to the owner of a small wind energy system that is deemed to have been abandoned. The owner shall have the right to respond in writing to the notice of abandonment setting forth the reasons for operational difficulty and providing a reasonable timetable for corrective action, within thirty (30) days from the date of the notice. The administrator shall withdraw the notice of abandonment and notify the owner that the notice has been withdrawn if the owner provides information that demonstrates the wind energy system has not been abandoned. 
m.  If the small wind energy system is determined to be abandoned, the owner of a small wind energy system shall remove the wind generator from the wind tower at the owner's sole expense within ninety (90) days of the date of the notice of abandonment. If the owner fails to remove the wind generator from the wind tower, the administrator may pursue a legal action to have the wind generator removed at the owner's expense. 
o.  Noise emanating from a small wind energy system shall not exceed fifty (50) dB(A) as measured from any offsite habitable structure or fifty-five (55) dB(A) to any lot line. 
p.  Wind energy systems shall not interfere with communication systems such as radio, telephone, television, satellite, emergency communications, or Wi-Fi. 
q.  Shadow flicker created by a STWES shall not exceed thirty (30) hours per year as observed on the windows or outdoor spaces (such as porches, patios, and decks) of any offsite building intended for human habitation or occupation. The zoning administrator may request a study to demonstrate the impact of a WES proposal. 
r.  Public inquires and complaints by an aggrieved property owner that alleges that a STWES or SSWES does not meet noise or shadow flicker requirements shall be processed as follows: 
1.  The property owner shall notify the city in writing regarding the concerns related to noise and/or shadow flicker. 
2.  If the city zoning administrator or engineer deem the complaint sufficient to warrant an investigation, the city will request the aggrieved party to deposit funds in an amount sufficient to pay for a noise level test conducted by a certified acoustic technician and/or a shadow flicker study as performed by a professional. 
3.  If the tests(s) show that the WES does not exceed the noise or shadow flicker requirements of this chapter, the city will use the deposit to pay for the test. 
4.  If the WES is violating this chapter's noise requirements, the owner(s) shall reimburse the city for the testing and take immediate action to bring the WES into compliance, include ceasing operation of the WES till the violations are corrected. The city will refund the deposit to the aggrieved property owner. 
(Code 1977, § 5.79; Ord. No. 435, 9-16-85; Ord. No. 439, § 1, 1-6-86; Ord. No. 503, § 1, 3-15-93; Ord. No. 572, § 1, 9-6-98; Ord. No. 728, §§ 2-4, 2-6-12) 
Sec. 38-380. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    There shall be provided in all districts at the time of erection or enlargement of any main building or structure, automobile off-street space with adequate access to all spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces, in conjunction with all land or building uses shall be provided, prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance and occupancy, as hereinafter prescribed: 
(1)  Off-street parking spaces may be located within a side or rear yard unless otherwise prohibited in this chapter. Off-street parking will not be permitted between the surfaced area of a street and the property line of the street right-of-way. Off-street parking will not be permitted within a front yard setback, or a side yard regulated by the front yard setback provisions of section 38-352(c), unless approval is secured from the building inspector, whose determination shall be made upon the following criteria: 
a.  That an application has been made to the building department with a drawing of the entire front yard area including the home, yard, sidewalk, street, drives, and proposed parking area with dimensions of each. 
b.  The intent being to prohibit parking, parking will be permitted only when no other space is available, and shall be limited to the occupant's licensed and operable vehicles only, and must be adjacent to the main driveway to the premises, and must be surfaced with an approved concrete, asphalt, gravel, or other aggregate. 
c.  The decision of the building inspector to grant or not grant the permit shall be appealable to the board of zoning appeals of the city. 
(2)  Off-street parking for other than residential use shall be either on the same lot or within three hundred (300) feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot. Ownership shall be shown of all lots or parcels intended for use as parking by the applicant. However, in the DDA and Westown districts, as shown in the map in Figure 1, residential parking for downtown residents shall be allowed in any public parking lot with a residential parking permit, according to the terms of the lease agreement. 
(3)  Required residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of a parking strip, parking bay, driveway, garage or combination thereof and shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve. 
(4)  Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this chapter, in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or new use. 
(5)  Two (2) or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking in which case the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses computed separately. 
(6)  In the instance of dual function of off-street parking spaces where operating hours of buildings do not overlap, the board of appeals may grant an exception. 
(7)  The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks, or the repair of vehicles is prohibited in off-street parking area. 
(8)  For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with a use which the building inspector considers is similar in type. 
(9)  When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in the requirements of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half shall require one (1) parking space. 
(10)  For the purpose of computing the number of parking spaces required, the definition of "usable floor area" in section 38-5 shall govern. 
(11)  The requirements of subsection (12) shall not apply to the erection, alteration or extension of any building or structure, with the exception of those to be used for residential purposes, including transients, within the developed portion of the central business district (except as required by the subsection (5) within the following boundary): 

(12)  The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule: 
USE 
NUMBER OF MINIMUM PARKING SPACES PER UNIT OF MEASURE 
a.  Residential: 
1.  Residential, single-family and two-family-Two (2) for each dwelling unit. 
2.  Residential, multiple-family-One and one-half (11/2) for each dwelling unit; one (1) for each dwelling unit located in the area described in section 38-380(11). 
3.  Housing for the Elderly-One (1) for each two (2) units and one (1) for each employee. Should units revert to general occupancy, then one and one-half (11/2) spaces per unit shall be provided. 
4.  Mobile Home Court-Two (2) for each mobile home site (see section 38-383(3)g.). 
b.  Institutional: 
1.  Churches or temples-One (1) for each four (4) seats or seven and one-half (71/2) feet of pews in the main unit of worship. 
2.  Hospitals-One (1) for each one (1) bed. 
3.  Homes for the aged and convalescent homes-One (1) for each four (4) beds. 
4.  Elementary and junior high schools-One (1) for each one (1) teacher, employee or administrator, in addition to requirements of the auditorium. 
5.  Senior high schools-One (1) for each one (1) teacher, employee or administrator, and in addition to the requirements of the auditorium or gymnasium, whichever is greater. 
6.  Private clubs or lodge halls-One (1) for each three (3) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire building or health codes. 
7.  Private golf clubs, tennis clubs or other similar recreational uses-One (1) for each two (2) member families or individuals plus spaces required for each accessory use, such as restaurant or bar. 
8.  Golf courses open to the general public, except miniature or "par-3" courses-Three (3) for each one (1) golf hole. 
9.  Fraternity or sorority-One (1) for each five (5) permitted active members, or one (1) for each two (2) beds, whichever is greater. 
10.  Stadium, sports arena, or similar place of outdoor assembly-One (1) for each five (5) seats or nine (9) feet of benches. 
11.  Theaters, auditoriums and gymnasiums-One (1) for each four (4) seats or seven and one-half (71/2) feet of bleachers or benches. 
12.  Nursery schools-One (1) for each three hundred fifty (350) square feet of usable floor space. 
13.  Private noncommercial recreation areas; institutional or community recreation centers; nonprofit swimming pool clubs-See section 38-53(5)c. 
c.  Business and commercial: 
1.  Planned commercial or shopping center with specific uses not designated-One (1) for each one hundred (100) square feet of usable floor area. 
2.  Auto wash-One (1) for each one (1) employee. In addition, reservoir parking spaces equal in number to five (5) times the maximum capacity of the auto wash. Maximum capacity of the auto wash shall mean the greatest number of automobiles possible undergoing some phase of washing at the same time, which shall be determined by dividing the length in feet of each wash line by twenty (20). 
3.  Beauty parlor or barber shop-Three (3) spaces for each of the first two (2) beauty or barber chairs, and one and one-half (11/2) spaces for each additional chair. 
4.  Bowling alleys-Five (5) for each one (1) bowling lane. 
5.  Dance halls, pool or billiard parlors, roller or skating rinks, exhibition halls, and assembly halls without fixed seats-One (1) for each five (5) persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes. 
6.  Establishments for sale and consumption on the premises, of beverages, food or refreshments-One (1) for each seventy-five (75) square feet of usable floor area. 
7.  Furniture and appliance, household equipment, repair shops, showroom of a plumber, decorator, electrician or similar trade, show repair and other similar uses-One (1) for each eight hundred (800) square feet of usable floor area. (For that floor area used in processing, one (1) additional space shall be provided for each two (2) persons employed therein.) 
8.  Gasoline service stations-Two (2) for each lubrication stall, rack, or pit; and two (2) for each gasoline pump. 
9.  Laundromats and coin operated dry cleaners-One (1) for each two (2) washing and/or dry cleaning machines. 
10.  Miniature or "par-3" golf courses-Three (3) for each one (1) hole. 
11.  Mortuary establishments-One (1) for each fifty (50) square feet of assembly room usable floor space, parlors and slumber rooms. 
12.  Motel, hotel, or other commercial lodging establishments-One (1) for each one (1) occupancy unit plus one (1) for each one (1) employee. 
13.  Motor vehicle sales and service establishments-One (1) for each two hundred (200) square feet of usable floor space of sales room and one (1) for each one (1) auto service stall in the service room. 
14.  Retail stores except as otherwise specified herein-One (1) for each two hundred (200) square feet of usable floor space or a minimum of six (6) spaces. 
d.  Offices: 
1.  Banks-One (1) for each one hundred (100) square feet of usable floor space. 
2.  Drive-in Banks-Same as above plus reservoir parking space of five (5) vehicles per window. 
3.  Business offices or professional offices except as indicated in the following item 4.-One (1) for each two hundred (200) square feet of usable floor space or a minimum of four (4) spaces. 
4.  Professional offices-doctors, dentists, attorneys, or similar professions dealing directly with the public-One (1) for each one hundred (100) square feet of usable floor area or a minimum of four (4) spaces. 
e.  Industrial: 
1.  Industrial or research establishments-A minimum of five (5), plus one (1) for each 1.2 office employees and one (1) for each 2.3 factory employees in the largest working shift or one (1) for every five hundred fifty (550) square feet of usable floor space, or whichever is determined to be the greater. Space on site shall also be provided for all construction workers during periods of plant construction. 
2.  Wholesale establishments-A minimum of five (5) plus one (1) for every one (1) employee in the largest working shift, or one (1) for every seventeen hundred (1700) square feet of usable floor space, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1977, § 5.80; Ord. No. 400, § 1, 1-4-83; Ord. No. 576, § 1, 1-19-99; Ord. No. 787, § 1, 9-5-17) 
Cross reference- Parking requirements for bed and breakfast operations, § 7-6; parking, stopping and standing generally, § 33-36 et seq. 

Sec. 38-381. - Off-street parking space layout, standards, construction and maintenance. 
    Wherever the off-street parking requirements in section 38-380 above require the building of an off-street parking facility, such off-street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards and regulations: 
(1)  No parking lot of more than three thousand (3,000) square feet in area shall be constructed unless and until a permit therefor is issued by the city building inspector and approved by the city engineer. Applications for a permit shall be submitted in such form as may be determined by the city engineer and shall be accompanied with two (2) sets of plans for the development and construction of the parking lot showing that the provisions of this section will be fully complied with. 
(2)  Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with the following minimum requirements. Level of service "A" shall be used except as noted below. Level of service "A" is intended for shorter term uses such as shopping centers, retail services, medical office buildings, hospital visitor parking, restaurant, movies or theater facilities and for hotels/motels and other facilities servicing travelers or others who normally load or unload luggage or packages. Level of service "B" may be used for churches, staff parking areas (as long as an appropriate number of signed visitor spaces are available) and other locations as approved by the planning commission. 
Level of Service A Level of Service B Parking stall width 9'0? 8'6? Parking stall length 1 18'4? 17'5? Parking stripe length 17'0? 16'0? Angle 2 Bay Width 
Between Walls or 
in Parking 
Structure Bay Width 
Multiple Bays Bay Width 
Between Walls or 
in Parking 
Structure Bay Width 
Multiple Bays 90 62'0? 62'0? 60'10? 60'10? 75 60'2? 58'4? 57'5? 55'7? 70 59'0? 56'6? 56'3? 53'9? 65 57'10? 54'10? 55'0? 52'0? 60 56'8? 53'0? 53'10? 50'2? 55 55'0? 50'10? 52'2? 48'0? 50 53'3? 48'7? 50'7? 45'11? 45 51'7? 46'5? 48'11? 43'9? Parallel 9'0? by 22'4? parking space 8'6? by 21'5? 43'0? 43'0? 40'0? 40'0? Two-way end aisles 31'0? 28'0? One-way end aisles 19'0? 17'6?  
1 Bay widths may be reduced by one parking stall length when parking is provided on only one side of the drive aisle. 
2 Gravel parking lots are to meet ninety-degree parking requirements. 
(3)  All spaces shall be provided adequate access to means of maneuvering lanes. Backing directly onto a street or public right-of-way shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly limited and defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles. Ingress and egress to a parking lot lying in an area zoned for other than a single-family residential use shall not be across land zoned for single-family residential use. 
(5)  All maneuvering lane widths shall permit one-way traffic movement except that the ninety (90) degree pattern may permit two-way movement. 
(6)  Each entrance and exit to and from any off-street parking lot located in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet distant from any adjacent property located in any single-family residential district. 
(7)  The off-street parking area shall be provided with a continuous and obscuring wall not less than four (4) feet, six (6) inches in height measured from the surface of the parking area. This wall shall be provided on all sides where the next zoning district is designated as a residential district. 
When a front yard setback is required, all land between said wall and the front property line or street right-of-way line shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be landscaped with deciduous shrubs, evergreen material and ornamental trees. The ground area shall be planted and kept in lawn. All such landscaping and planting shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
(8)  Off-street parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated in the parking area in such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property or toward buildings, and plans shall meet the approval of the city engineer. 
(9)  All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so installed as to be confined within and directed onto the parking area only. 
(10)  In all cases where a wall extends to an alley which is a means of ingress and egress to an off-street parking area, it shall be permissible to end the wall not more than ten (10) feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking area. 
(11)  The board of appeals upon application by the property owner of the off-street parking area, may modify the yard or wall requirements where, in unusual circumstances, no good purpose would be served by compliance with the requirements of this section; provided, however, that where site plan approval of the planning commission is required, the commission may modify these requirements. 
(Code 1977, § 5.81; Ord. No. 575, § 1, 1-19-99) 
Sec. 38-382. - Off-street loading and unloading. 
    On the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot, adequate space for standing, loading and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use of dedicated rights of way. Such space shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  All spaces shall be provided as required in article XVI, schedule of regulations, under minimum rear yards (footnote h), except as hereinafter provided for I districts. 
(2)  Within an I district, all spaces shall be laid out in the dimension of at least ten (10) by fifty (50) feet, or five hundred (500) square feet in area, with a clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet in height. All spaces in I-1 and I-2 districts shall be provided in the following ratio of spaces to floor area. 
GROSS FLOOR AREA (IN SQUARE FEET) LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE REQUIRED 
0-1,400: None 
1,401-20,000: One (1) space 
20,001-100,000: One (1) space plus one (1) space for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in excess of twenty thousand and one (20,001) square feet. 
100,001 and over: Five (5) spaces 
(3)  All loading and unloading in an I district shall be provided off-street in the rear yard or interior side yard, and shall in no instance be permitted in a front yard. In those instances where exterior side yards have a common relationship with an industrial district across a public thoroughfare, loading and unloading may take place in such exterior yard when the setback is equal to at least fifty (50) feet. 
(Code 1977, § 5.82) 
Sec. 38-383. - Uses not otherwise included within a specific use district. 
(a)  Because the uses hereinafter referred to possess unique characteristics making it impractical to include them in a specific use district classification, they may be permitted by the council under the conditions specified, and after public hearing, and after a recommendation has been received from the planning commission. In every case, the uses hereinafter referred to shall be specifically prohibited from any R-1, R-2 and RT-1 districts. 
(b)  These uses require special consideration since they service an area larger than the city or require sizeable land areas, creating problems of control with reference to abutting use districts. Reference to those uses falling specifically within the intent of this section is as follows: 
(1)  Outdoor theaters. Because outdoor theaters possess the unique characteristics of being used only after darkness and since they develop a concentration of vehicular traffic in terms of ingress and egress from their parking area, they shall be permitted in I-2 districts only. Outdoor theaters shall further be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The proposed internal design shall receive approval from the building inspector and the city engineer as to adequacy of drainage, lighting and other technical aspects. 
b.  Outdoor theaters shall abut a major thoroughfare and points of ingress and egress shall be available only from such major thoroughfare. 
c.  All vehicles, waiting or standing to enter the facility, shall be provided off-street waiting space. No vehicle shall be permitted to wait or stand within a dedicated right-of-way. 
d.  The area shall be so laid out as to prevent the movie screen from being viewed from residential areas or adjacent major thoroughfares. All lighting used to illuminate the area shall be so installed as to be confined within, and directed onto, the premises of the outdoor theater site. 
(2)  Commercial television and radio towers and public utility microwaves, and public utility TV transmitting towers. Radio and television towers, public utility microwaves and public utility TV transmitting towers, and their attendant facilities may be permitted in I-1 and I-2 districts provided said use shall be located centrally on a continuous parcel of not less than one and one-half (11/2) times the height of the tower measured from the base of said tower to all points on each property line. 
(3)  Mobile home park. Mobile home parks possess site characteristics similar to multiple-family residential development. They are, in this chapter, used to provide for transition between nonresidential development and residential districts. Mobile home parks may, therefore, be permitted within the I-1 and RM-1 districts subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Locational requirements: 
1.  Mobile home parks located in an RM-1 district shall abut nonresidential districts on at least two (2) sides. 
2.  Parcels being proposed for mobile home parks in the I-1 districts shall not be surrounded on more than three (3) sides by the I-1 districts, provided further that the mobile home site shall have one (1) entire side abutting a residential district. 
3.  Parcels being proposed for mobile home parks in RM-1 districts may be permitted when the mobile home park generally provides a buffer between a residential district and nonresidential districts. Mobile home parks shall not, therefore, be permitted as a principal use in any RM-1 district which does not directly abut a nonresidential district. 
4.  Access from the mobile home park to the nearest major thoroughfare shall be by means of a public right-of-way of not less than sixty (60) feet in width. No access shall be permitted through a one-family residential district. 
b.  Height regulations. In the MH mobile home district, no structure shall exceed a height of twenty-five (25) feet or two and one-half (21/2) stories. 
c.  Area regulations. In a mobile home park, the minimum dimensions of yards and the minimum lot area per home, shall be as follows: 
1.  The mobile home park shall be permitted only on parcels of the five (5) acres or more. 
2.  An open area shall be provided on each mobile home lot to insure adequate natural light and ventilation to each mobile home and to provide sufficient area for outdoor uses essential to the occupants of the mobile home. Mobile home lots shall have not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet in area exclusive of drives, open space in the mobile home court or other open area not specifically for mobile home occupancy. The minimum width for mobile home lots shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
d.  Setback: 
1.  No mobile home shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet from any building within the park or any property line bounding the park. No building or mobile home shall be located closer than twenty-five (25) feet from any public street right-of-way nor less than forty (40) feet from any major or secondary thoroughfare. 
2.  The mobile home park site shall be enclosed by a fifteen (15) foot greenbelt adjacent to all abutting properties and public rights-of-way. The greenbelt shall be located within the mobile home park site and shall provide a continuous year-around obscuring screen. 
e.  Yards. Each mobile home site shall have the following minimum yard requirements: 
Front yard ten (10) feet 
Side yard ten (10) feet 
Rear yard eight (8) feet 
f.  Service drives and sidewalks: 
1.  The mobile home park shall have direct access to a major thoroughfare by directly abutting thereon. 
2.  Mobile home lots shall abut a service drive. All service drives shall have widths as scheduled below and shall be designed and graded for proper drainage according to standard road building practice and be approved by the city engineer prior to opening of the mobile home park. All service drives shall be constructed of black top or poured concrete within one (1) year after issuance of permit. A cash security guaranteeing monies for such work will be issued to the city in the amount of a bona fide bid from parties performing such work. 
3.  Mobile home courts shall provide an approved hard surface entrance road not less than thirty (30) feet wide, also contingent upon city engineer approval. 
4.  Schedule of service drive widths. 
i.  Two-way traffic street with no parking-minimum 24 feet. 
ii.  One-way traffic street with parallel parking one side-minimum 22 feet. 
iii.  Two-way traffic street with parallel parking one side-minimum 32 feet. 
iv.  One-way traffic street with parallel parking two sides-minimum 32 feet. 
v.  Two-way traffic with parallel parking two sides-minimum 40 feet. 
5.  Parking spaces on service drives shall be clearly marked. 
6.  All service drives shall be provided with curbs and gutters and be properly drained. 
7.  The mobile home park shall be designed to provide a concrete walk at least forty-eight (48) inches wide from entrance of park to all mobile home sites and all required service facilities. 
8.  Street and yard lights sufficient to permit safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night shall be provided, and shall be so located and shaded as to direct the light away from adjacent properties. 
g.  Off-street parking. Two (2) hard surface automobile parking spaces shall be required for each mobile home site. One (1) such space may be placed in the service drive provided parking is permitted on said service drive in accordance with paragraph (f)(4) above and further provided that each space so provided shall be a minimum of twenty-three (23) feet in length. Off-street spaces shall meet the minimum requirements of section 38-381 where applicable. 
h.  Underground wiring: 
1.  Arrangements shall be made for all local distribution lines for telephone or electric services, exclusive of main supply and perimeter feed lines when located on section or quarter section lines, to be placed entirely underground throughout the mobile home court area, provided, however, that when a mobile home park overlaps a section or quarter section line, main supply and perimeter feed lines located on such section or quarter section line shall be placed underground. The planning commission may waive or modify this requirement where, in its judgment, circumstances exist which render compliance impractical. 
2.  Conduits or cables shall be placed within private easements provided to the service companies by the proprietor, developer or within public ways. Those telephone and electrical facilities placed in dedicated public ways shall be planned so as not to conflict with other underground utilities. All telephone and electrical facilities shall be constructed in accordance with standards of construction approved by the state public service commission. 
i.  Required conditions. 
1.  All mobile home park development shall further comply with Act No. 419 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 125.1101 et seq., MSA 19.885(1) et seq.), as amended. 
2.  There shall not be less than three hundred sixty (360) square feet of floor space within each mobile home for the first two (2) occupants, and an additional one hundred (100) square feet of floor space for each occupant over two (2). 
3.  There shall be provided for each mobile home park a recreation area equal in size to at least two hundred (200) square feet per mobile home site. Said recreation area shall be no longer than one and one-half (11/2) times its width. Such area shall be graded, developed, and maintained by the management, so as to provide recreation for the residents of the mobile home park. 
4.  The front yard, and any side yard adjacent to a street shall be landscaped within one (1) year, and the entire mobile home court shall be maintained in a good, clean, presentable condition at all times. 
5.  No business of any kind shall be conducted in any mobile home park except for separate, permanent structures which contain facilities such as the management's office, laundry and dry cleaning facilities or similar uses which are designed to serve only the residents of the mobile home park. 
6.  There shall be no storage of any kind under mobile homes, unless skirted. 
7.  All fences, other than the greenbelt surrounding the park, shall be uniform in height, and shall not exceed thirty (30) inches in height, and shall be constructed in such a manner as to provide firemen access to all sides of each mobile home. 
8.  Mobile home sites shall be provided with a concrete apron of suitable width and length to park and support a mobile home. 
j.  Site plan review. Prior to the issuance of a permit for construction on a mobile home park site, a site plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for approval and in accordance with the following: 
1.  Every site plan submitted to the planning commission shall be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. No site plan shall be approved until same has been reviewed by the building department, fire department, police department and city engineer for compliance with the standards of their respective departments. 
2.  The site plan shall be submitted in accordance with section 38-390 of this chapter. 
3.  Actual construction of the mobile home park shall be in accordance with the site plan. Any minor deviation from said site plan shall require the approval of the city engineer. Any change which in the opinion of the city engineer constitutes a major change in the site plan shall be resubmitted to the planning commission. 
(Code 1977, § 5.83) 
Sec. 38-384. - Plant materials. 
    Whenever in this chapter a greenbelt or planting is required, it shall be planted within six (6) months from the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy and shall thereafter be reasonably maintained with permanent plant materials to provide a screen to abutting properties. Suitable materials equal in characteristics to the plant materials listed with the spacing as required shall be provided: 
(1)  Plant material spacing: 
a.  Plant materials shall not be placed closer than four (4) feet from the fence line or property line. 
b.  Where plant materials are placed in two (2) or more rows, plantings shall be staggered in rows. 
c.  Evergreen trees shall be planted not more than thirty (30) feet on centers, and shall be not less than five (5) feet in height. 
d.  Narrow evergreens shall be planted not more than six (6) feet on centers, and shall be not less than three (3) feet in height. 
e.  Tree-like shrubs shall be planted not more than ten (10) feet on centers, and shall be not less than four (4) feet in height. 
f.  Large deciduous shrubs shall be planted not more than four (4) feet on centers, and shall not be less than six (6) feet in height. 
g.  Large deciduous trees shall be planted not more than thirty (30) feet on centers, and shall not be less than eight (8) feet in height. 
SUGGESTED PLANT MATERIALS 
Evergreen trees. 
Minimum five (5) feet in height. 
Column Hinoki Cypress 
Blue Columnar Chinese Juniper 
Pyramidal Red Cedar 
Swiss Stone Pine 
Pyramidal White Pine 
Irish Yew 
Douglas Arborvitae 
Columnar Giant Arborvitae 
Tree Like Shrubs 
Minimum four (4) feet in height. 
Flowering Crab 
Mountain Ash 
Redbud 
Hornbeam 
Magnolia 
Russian Olive 
Dogwood 
Rose of Sharon 
Hawthorn 
Large Deciduous Shrubs 
Minimum six (6) feet in height. 
Honeysuckle 
Mock-Orange 
Lilac 
Cotoneaster 
Euonymus 
Buckthorn 
Viburnum 
Forsythia 
Ninebark 
Hazelnut 
Privet 
Sumac 
Large Deciduous Trees 
Minimum eight (8) feet in height. 
Oak 
Hackberry 
Planetree (Sycamore) 
Ginkgo 
Sweet-Gum 
Linden 
Hard Maple 
Birch 
Beech 
Honeylocust 
Hop Hornbeam 
(1)  Trees not permitted. 
a.  Box Elder 
b.  Soft Maples (Red-Silver) 
c.  Elms 
d.  Poplars 
e.  Willows 
f.  Horse Chestnut (nut bearing) 
g.  Tree of Heaven 
h.  Catalpa 
(Code 1977, § 5.84) 
Cross reference- Vegetation generally, Ch. 35. 
Sec. 38-385. - Signs. 
    Signs shall be permitted in conformance with the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 26, Signs, of the City Code of the City of Owosso. 
(Code 1977, § 5.85; Ord. No. 499, 2-16-93) 
Cross reference- Signs generally, Ch. 26. 
Sec. 38-386. - Exterior lighting. 
    Exterior lighting shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  All outdoor lighting in all use districts used to light the general area of a specific site shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so arranged as to reflect lights away from all adjacent residential districts or adjacent residences. 
(2)  All outdoor lighting in all use districts shall be directed toward and confined to the ground areas of lawns or parking lots. 
(3)  All lighting in nonresidential districts used for the external illumination of buildings, so as to feature said buildings, shall be placed and shielded so as not to interfere with the vision of persons on adjacent highways or adjacent property. 
(4)  Illumination of signs shall be directed or shaded downward so as not to interfere with the vision of persons on the adjacent highways or adjacent property. 
(5)  Except as provided for in Chapter 26, Signs, of the City Code, all illumination of signs and any other outdoor feature shall not be of a flashing, moving or intermittent type. Artificial light shall be maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times when in use. 
(Code 1977, § 5.86; Ord. No. 499, 2-16-93) 
Sec. 38-387. - Residential entranceway. 
    In all residential districts, so called entranceway structures including but not limited to, walls, columns and gates marking entrances to single-family subdivisions or multiple housing projects may be permitted and may be located in a required yard, except as provided in section 38-388, corner clearance, provided that such entranceway structures shall comply to all codes of the city, and shall be approved by the building department and a permit issued. 
(Code 1977, § 5.87) 
Sec. 38-388. - Corner clearance. 
    No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to vision above a height of thirty (30) inches from the curb or centerline of the street pavement shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between the right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of twenty-five (25) feet from their point of intersection. 
(Code 1977, § 5.88) 
Cross reference- Visibility at street intersections concerning fences, § 38-393(c). 
Sec. 38-389. - Walls. 
(a)  For those use districts and uses listed below, there shall be provided and maintained on those sides abutting or adjacent to a residential district, or a single-family detached residential use, an obscuring wall as required below, except otherwise required in subsection (d): 
Use Requirements 
(1)  P-1 Vehicular parking district-Four (4) foot six (6) inch high wall. Off-street parking area (other than P-1 districts) four (4) foot six (6) inch high wall. 
(2)  B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, and OS-1 districts-Four (4) foot, six (6) inch high wall. 
(3)  I-1 and I-2 districts-Open storage areas, loading or unloading areas, service areas-Four (4) foot, six (6) inch to eight (8) foot high wall or fence. Height shall provide the most complete obscuring possible. See subsection (d) of this section. 
(4)  Auto wash. Drive-in restaurants-Six (6) foot high wall. 
(5)  Utility buildings, stations and/or substations-Six (6) foot high wall. 
(b)  Required walls shall be located on the lot line except where underground utilities interfere and except in instances where this chapter requires conformance with front yard setback lines in abutting residential districts. Upon review of the site plan, the board of appeals or planning commission may approve an alternate location for the wall or may waive the wall requirement if in specific cases it would not serve the purposes of screening the area effectively. Required walls may, upon approval of the board of appeals, be located on the opposite side of an alley right-of-way from a nonresidential zone that abuts a residential zone when mutually agreeable to affected property owners. The continuity of the required wall on a given block will be a major consideration of the board of appeals in reviewing such request. 
(c)  Such walls and screening barrier shall have no openings for vehicular traffic or other purposes, except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except such openings as may be approved by the police chief and the building inspector. All walls herein required shall be constructed of materials approved by the building inspector to be durable, weather resistant, rust proof and easily maintained. Masonry walls may be constructed with openings which do not in any square section (height and width) exceed twenty (20) percent of the surface. Where walls are so pierced, the openings shall be so spaced as to maintain the obscuring character required, and shall not reduce the minimum height requirement. The arrangement of the openings shall be reviewed and approved by the building inspector. 
(d)  The requirement for an obscuring wall between off-street parking areas, outdoor storage areas, and any abutting residential district, or single family detached residential use, shall not be required when such areas are located more than two hundred (200) feet distant from such abutting residential district. 
(e)  The board of appeals or planning commission may waive or modify the foregoing requirements where cause can be shown that no good purpose would be served, provided that in no instance shall a required wall be permitted to be less than four (4) feet six (6) inches in height, except where section 38-388 applies. In certain consideration of request to waive wall requirements between nonresidential and residential districts, or single-family detached residential use, the planning commission shall determine or the board shall refer the request to the planning commission to determine whether or not the residential district or single-family detached residential use, is considered to be an area in transition and will become nonresidential in the future. In such cases as the planning commission determines the residential district or single-family detached residential use, to be a future nonresidential area, the board or commission may temporarily waive wall requirements for an initial period not to exceed twelve (12) months. Granting of subsequent waivers shall be permitted, provided that the planning commission shall make a determination as hereinbefore described, for each subsequent waiver prior to the granting of such waiver. 
(Code 1977, § 5.89; Ord. No. 440, § 1, 1-6-86) 
Sec. 38-390. - Site plan review. 
    When provisions of this chapter require submission of a site plan to the planning commission, it shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Submission for approval. A site plan shall be required for the following: 
a.  Any use or development for which the submission of a site plan is required by any provision of this chapter; 
b.  Any development, except single-family and two-family residential, for which off-street parking areas are provided as required in section 38-380, off-street parking requirements; 
c.  Any use in an RM-1, RM-2, OS-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, I-1, I-2, P-1 or PUD district; 
d.  Any use except single- or two-family residential which lies contiguous to a major thoroughfare or collector street; 
e.  All residentially related uses permitted in single-family districts such as, but not limited to, churches, schools, colleges, institutions, and public facilities; 
f.  Accessory buildings or building additions which require additional off-street parking. 
(2)  Any person seeking site plan approval hereunder shall submit a site plan, application, and the applicable filing fee to the building department. The building department shall provide application forms and graphic standards for the site plan. Said site plan shall be prepared by a professional architect, engineer, landscape architect or land planner and must contain the following information: 
a.  A scale of not less than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet if the subject property is less than three (3) acres and one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet if three (3) acres or more; 
b.  Date, northpoint, scale, and area of the site in acres; 
c.  The dimensions of all lot and property lines, showing the relationship of the subject property to the abutting properties; 
d.  The location of all existing and proposed structures and utilities on the subject property and all existing structures within one hundred (100) feet to the subject property; 
e.  The location and layout of all existing and proposed drives and parking areas; 
f.  The location and right-of-way widths of all abutting streets and alleys; 
g.  The names and addresses of the architect, planner, designer, engineer, or person responsible for the preparation of the site plan. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a complete site plan, application, and application fee the building department shall forward said documents to the community development department for distribution to appropriate city departments for comment. Staff comments shall be made with respect to compliance with the minimum technical requirements of city ordinances and the quality of the development consistent with the intent of the building codes, zoning codes and comprehensive plan. Upon receipt of all staff comment, the community development department shall review the site plan and make its recommendation to the planning commission which shall consider the application, site plan, all staff comments, and community development department recommendation at the next scheduled meeting. 
(4)  Final approval of site plan. Every site plan submitted to the planning commission shall be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Three (3) copies of the site plan shall be submitted to the building department ten (10) days prior to the city planning commission's regular meeting. No site plan shall be approved until and unless a letter of assurance has been received from the building inspector, that the site plan has been reviewed by and is in conformance with all applicable standards of the building department, police department, fire department, engineering department, and city utility department. Further, no construction, reconstruction, demolition, or other site work may progress during the interim, and no building permit(s) shall be issued prior to the final approval of the site plan by the planning commission. Upon granting final approval of a site plan, the chairman of the planning commission shall sign all three (3) copies of the site plan, return one (1) copy to the petitioner, and deliver two (2) copies to the building inspector. The site plan submitted for final approval by the planning commission shall include: 
a.  The number, location, and layout of off-street parking spaces to include all access roads and the manner in which they are to be surfaced; 
b.  The provision of internal site drainage and necessary city utilities complete with existing and proposed elevations; 
c.  The proposed site landscaping complete with a planting plan to include all proposed walls, fences, and screening in compliance with the provisions of this chapter; 
d.  The elevation of the site in relation to the identified flood hazard area. All proposed construction, reconstruction, or demolition shall be in compliance with local, state, and federal ordinances, laws, or regulations with regard to flood hazard areas; 
e.  A copy of the permit from the local enforcing agency on soil erosion and sedimentation control if the earth change activity involves more than one (1) acre or is within five hundred (500) feet of a lake or stream. 
(5)  In the process of reviewing the site plan, the planning commission shall consider: 
a.  The location and design of driveways providing vehicular ingress to and egress from the site, in relation to streets giving access to the site, and in relation to pedestrian traffic; 
b.  The traffic circulation features within the site and location of automobile parking areas; and may make such requirements with respect to any matters as will assure: 
1.  Safety and convenience of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic both within the site and in relation to access streets; 
2.  Satisfactory and harmonious relationships between the development on the site and the existing and prospective development of contiguous land and adjacent neighborhoods; 
c.  The planning commission may further require landscaping, fences, and walls in pursuance of these objectives and same shall be provided and maintained as a condition of the establishment and the continued maintenance of any use to which they are appurtenant; 
d.  In those instances wherein the planning commission finds that an excessive number of ingress and/or egress points may occur with relation to major or secondary thoroughfares, thereby diminishing the carrying capacity of the thoroughfares, the planning commission may recommend marginal access drives. For a narrow frontage, which will require a single outlet, the planning commission may recommend that money in escrow be placed with the city so as to provide for a marginal service drive equal in length to the frontage of the property involved. Occupancy permits shall not be issued until the improvement is physically provided, or moneys have been deposited with the clerk. 
e.  Whether the site is located within a designated historic overlay district, and whether the proposed action would have an adverse impact on the resources of the historic overlay district, as defined in subsection 38-32(b)(4). The planning commission may deny the proposed action if the action would have an unacceptable adverse impact on the historic resource or the historic overlay district itself. The planning commission may also require landscaping or other reasonable methods to minimize the adverse impact any proposed action may have on a historic resource or on the historic overlay district itself. 
(6)  An approved PUD site plan shall be required before applicable permits may be issued for any form of construction or removal or disturbance of any natural feature for all planned unit developments. 
a.  Procedure for PUD site plan review. 
1.  The applicant for PUD site plan approval shall file with the community development director (hereinafter "director") all drawings and other materials required for site plans in this chapter, all drawings and other materials required in Section 38-395 for PUD zoning district approval, and the additional information listed below. A PUD site plan application shall not be considered filed until all drawings and other required materials have been submitted and may be rejected if the materials submitted are inadequate to make the foregoing determinations. 
2.  If requested by the planning commission or city council, additional graphics, models, three-dimensional or electronic, or written materials shall be submitted to assist the city in visualizing and understanding the proposal. Additional detailed information, including but not limited to plans, elevations, building and site sections, or existing and proposed building materials, if submitted, shall become a part of the PUD site plan. 
3.  The director will distribute these materials to the appropriate city departments and other reviewing agencies for review and comment regarding compliance with the PUD zoning district supplemental regulations and conceptual PUD plan, and compliance with all applicable local, state, or federal laws, ordinances, standards and regulations and to determine the need for a development agreement as provided in this chapter. The director will notify the applicant of any questions raised by the city departments and other reviewing agencies and negotiate a development agreement with the applicant if it is determined that such an agreement is needed. The director shall submit a report and recommendation to the planning commission based on this review. 
4.  The planning commission, after holding a public hearing on the PUD site plan with notification as required by this chapter, shall transmit its recommendation based on the standards below, together with any recommended conditions of approval and all related reports and minutes to city council. 
b.  Standards for PUD site plan review. City council, after holding a public hearing on the PUD site plan with notification as required by this chapter, and after receiving all related reports and minutes and a recommendation from the commission, shall approve, with conditions, or deny a PUD site plan. A PUD site plan shall be approved by city council only after it determines that: 
1.  The development would comply with the PUD zoning established pursuant to the requirements of section 38-395, and with all applicable local, state, or federal laws, ordinances, standards and regulations; and 
2.  The development would limit the disturbance of natural features to the minimum necessary to allow a reasonable use of the land, applying criteria for reviewing a natural features statement of impact set forth in this chapter; and 
3.  The development would not cause a public or private nuisance and would not have a detrimental effect on the public health, safety or welfare. 
c.  Development agreement. 
1.  Upon obtaining approval of a site plan, the applicant and the city council may enter into a development agreement that describes the terms and conditions of the approval and the rights and obligations of each party. The city council may approve the development agreement immediately following approval of a site plan or it may be placed on a subsequent agenda of the city council. The applicant shall reimburse the city for all fees for city legal counsel and consultant participation in the development agreement. 
2.  The approved development agreement shall be recorded with the county register of deeds. 
3.  In the event the site plan requires a major amendment, the development agreement shall be amended to reflect the approved changes and recorded as provided in subsection (5)c.2. above. 
d.  Effect of PUD site plan approval. For three (3) years from the date of approval of a PUD site plan, permits may be issued and the land developed consistent with the PUD site plan and the regulations, laws and ordinances in effect as the time of approval, unless new regulations, laws and ordinances have been made applicable to previously approved developments. After three (3) years from PUD site plan approval, no permits shall be issued unless the PUD site plan is reconsidered in the manner provided for new PUD site plans and is determined to meet the standards of the PUD zoning district or has been extended as provided under administrative amendments to approved PUD site plans. 
e.  PUD site plan amendments. A minor change to an approved PUD site plan may be approved by the planning commission as provided in this chapter except that the proposed changes shall not alter the fundamental design, conceptual integrity, natural features shown to be preserved, any specific conditions of the PUD development program, the conceptual PUD plan or the supplemental regulations. The following restrictions shall also apply: 
1.  Adjustment in approved phases of development shall not result in a change greater than ten percent of the total gross area in any phase, or ten percent of the number of approved lots, or ten percent of the approved maximum building square footage. 
2.  For residential buildings the size may be reduced or increased by five percent, provided the overall density of units does not increase and the minimum square footage requirements are met. 
3.  Gross floor area of non-residential buildings may be decreased or increased by up to five (5) percent or ten thousand (10,000) square feet whichever is smaller. 
4.  Floor plans may be changed if consistent with the character of the use. 
5.  Horizontal and/or vertical elevations may be altered by up to five (5) percent. 
6.  Relocation of a building is permitted by up to ten (10) feet, if consistent with required setbacks and other standards. 
7.  Designated "areas not to be disturbed" may be increased. 
8.  Plantings approved in the final PUD site plan may be replaced by similar types of landscaping on a one-to-one or greater basis. Any trees to be preserved, which are lost during construction, may be replaced by at least two (2) trees of the same or similar species. 
9.  Improvements or slight relocation of site access or circulation patterns are minor changes, such as inclusion of deceleration lanes, boulevards, curbing, and pedestrian or bicycle paths. 
10.  Changes of building materials to another of higher quality can be made, with determined of quality a judgment of the building inspector. 
11.  Slight modification of sign placement or reduction of size may be made. 
12.  Internal rearrangement of a parking lot is possible if the change does not affect the number of parking spaces or alter access locations or design. 
13.  Changes required by the city, county or state for safety reasons are a basis for a minor change. 
(7)  It shall be understood that the petitioner agrees to install and/or construct all improvements in the approved site plan within twelve (12) months from the initiation of on-site construction, and to provide for their continued maintenance. 
(8)  The planning commission may modify the foregoing requirements or waive them if it can be shown that no good purpose would be served in the preparation of a site plan. 
(9)  The planning commission may require that a bond be posted by a developer(s) to assure that improvements connected with an approved site plan are made as proposed. 
(Code 1977, § 5.90; Ord. No. 585, § 1, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 662, § 1, 10-18-04; Ord. No. 763, §§ 1-3, 4-6-15) 
State Law reference- Site plan, MCL 125.584d. 
Sec. 38-391. - Frontage on a public street. 
    Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, no lot shall be used for any purpose permitted by this chapter unless the lot abuts a public street. 
(Code 1977, § 5.91) 
Sec. 38-392. - Access to major or secondary thoroughfare. 
    For uses making reference to this section, vehicular access shall be provided only to an existing or planned major or secondary thoroughfare; provided, however, that access driveways may be permitted to other than a major or secondary thoroughfare when such access is provided to a street where the property directly across the street from such driveway and all property abutting such street between the driveway and the major or secondary thoroughfare is zoned for multiple-family use or any nonresidential uses, is developed with permanent uses other than single-family residences or is an area which, in the opinion of the planning commission, will be used for other than single-family purposes in the future. This exception shall only apply if the planning commission finds that there are special circumstances which indicate that there will be a substantial improvement in traffic safety by reducing the number of driveways to a thoroughfare. 
(Code 1977, § 5.92) 
Sec. 38-393. - Fences and hedges. 
(a)  A fence is defined as any partition, structure or gate that is erected as a dividing marker, barrier or enclosure (excluding hedges as defined below). 
(b)  A hedge is defined as any bush, shrub or any living green screen of any nature that serves as a dividing marker, barrier or enclosure. 
(c)  Regulations applicable to R-1, R-2, RM-1, RM-2, OS-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, C-OS, and P-1. 
(1)  A fence shall not exceed six (6) feet in height in the rear or side lot of any parcel; 
(2)  Front yard fences or hedges must be less than fifty (50) percent solid, impervious, or of an obscuring nature above a height of thirty (30) inches above the curb or centerline of the street, and not exceed four (4) feet in total height; 
(3)  Fences and hedges in front yards that function as exterior side yards must follow front yard restrictions unless the fence or hedge is installed or planted at least nineteen (19) feet back from the right-of-way line or follows the building line of the nearest legal structure. All such fences and hedges must meet clear vision requirements for streets, driveways, and sidewalks. 
(4)  No fence or hedge shall extend across property lines; 
(5)  The finished side of any fence shall face away from the property on which the fence is located; 
(6)  No portion of any fence shall be constructed with or contain barbed wire, electric current or charge of electricity, glass, spikes or other sharp protruding objects; 
(7)  Fences must be maintained so as not to endanger life or property. Any fence which, through lack of maintenance or type of construction which will obstruct vision so to create a hazard to vehicular traffic or pedestrians upon the public streets and/or sidewalks shall be deemed a nuisance; 
(8)  Fences shall not be constructed, in whole or in part, with any of the following materials: 
a.  Junk or other debris. 
b.  Scrap building materials or metals. 
c.  Organic materials known to be poisonous or hazardous to human or animal life. 
d.  Other materials which may be deemed unsafe to person or property by the zoning administrator or building official. 
(9)  No hedge shall be constructed with noxious weeds or grasses, as defined by PA 359 of 1941, being MCL 247.62. 
(10  Screening walls are required as prescribed in section 38-389. 
(d)  Regulations applicable to industrial districts. 
(1)  Fences, walls and screens are permitted in the required front, side and rear lots provided they do not exceed six (6) feet in the front yard and eight (8) feet in the side and rear lots. To preserve open space and aesthetic character in the front yard, fences higher than four (4) feet must be setback two (2) feet for each additional foot above four (4) feet and all front yard fences must be black vinyl chain link or decorative in nature. 
(2)  Except as provided below, barbed wire strands and noncoated or decorative chain link are permitted on fences six (6) feet or higher on industrial parcels with the barbed wire tilted in toward the fenced parcel. Barbed wire is not permitted in the front yard except for those located on McMillan Ave, Industrial Drive, South Street, and Aiken Road. 
(3)  On any corner lot, no fence, wall or screen, whether structural or botanical, shall be more than thirty (30) inches above the curb or the centerline of the street pavement, or within twenty-five (25) feet of the intersection of the two (2) right-of-way lines, so as to interfere with motorists' vision across the corner. 
(4)  Screening walls are required as prescribed in section 38-389. 
(e)  The zoning administrator or building official may require removal, reconstruction, or repair of any fence or wall which, in their judgment is dilapidated, unsafe, or a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Owosso. 
(f)  A permit shall be required for new fence construction, with a fee to be prescribed by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. No. 745, §§ 1, 3, 8-19-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 745, §§ 1, 3, adopted Aug. 19, 2013, repealed § 38-393, and enacted a new § 38-393 as herein set out. Former § 38-393 pertained to fences, walls, or screens, and derived from the 1977 Code, §§ 8.202-8.207; Ord. No. 436, § 1(5.92(a)), adopted Sept. 16, 1985; Ord. No. 524, § 1, adopted March 20, 1995; and Ord. No. 626, § 1, adopted March 17, 2003. 
Cross reference- Corner clearance, § 38-388. 
Sec. 38-394. - Home occupations. 
(a)  Definitions. "Home occupation" [is defined as] an occupation or business activity which results in a product or service for financial gain and is conducted in whole or part in the dwelling unit or accessory building and is clearly an accessory or incidental use and subordinate to the residential use of the dwelling unit. 
(b)  Permitted conditions. Home occupations are permitted in any dwelling unit, subject to the conditions in this section and the related provisions of chapter 38, zoning, of this Code. 
(1)  These provisions are not intended to regulate typical family or personal activities or occasional visits by business associates and outside service providers, except as otherwise provided. 
(2)  It is not the intent of this chapter to involve the city in the enforcement of private restrictive covenants. 
(c)  Purpose. The home occupation is provided in this chapter as an accessory use to the principal use of a residence. The provisions are herein detailed to the extent that the neighborhood, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of their existence. 
(d)  Performance standards for home occupations. 
(1)  Employees: No more than one person who is not a resident of the dwelling shall be engaged in a home occupation. 
(2)  Appearance: In no way shall the appearance of the structure be altered or the occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner which would cause the premises to differ from its residential character, either by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, or by the emission of sounds, noises or vibrations. 
(3)  The home occupation shall not occupy a portion of the dwelling unit or associated accessory buildings, which is greater than twenty-five (25) percent of the usable floor area of the dwelling unit. If more than one (1) home occupation is conducted within a particular dwelling unit or associated accessory buildings, the total of all space devoted to said home occupations shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the usable floor area of the dwelling unit. 
(4)  There shall be no outside or visible storage of any kind related to the home occupation. There shall be no use of refuse service beyond that normal to the use of the property for residential purposes. 
(5)  Nuisance controls: No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, heat, dust, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot. The production, storage or dumping of combustible or toxic substances on the property is prohibited. 
(6)  No use shall require internal or external alterations or involve construction features or the use of electrical or mechanical equipment that would change the fire rating of the structure or the fire district in which the structure is located. 
(7)  In order to preserve the residential appearance and character of a neighborhood, window or yard displays of merchandise for sale or trade shall not be permitted. One unanimated, unilluminated, flat sign having an area of one and one-half (11/2) square feet shall be permitted on the wall of the house and not more than two (2) feet from the main entrance. 
(8)  The operator of a home occupation shall reside within the same dwelling unit in which the activity is conducted. 
(9)  The home occupation shall not create any greater vehicle or pedestrian traffic than is usual and normal for the residence in which the home occupation is located. Up to six customers may visit the site in a day between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. No retail activity is permitted except those products that are not marketed and sold in a wholesale or retail outlet or for merchandise or hand-crafted items clearly accessory to a service (e.g., sales of paintings, horticultural products, and crafts or art work.) 
(10)  The pickup and delivery of goods in connection with the home occupation shall not exceed one (1) pickup and one (1) delivery per day and shall be restricted to the use of a vehicle having a gross vehicle weight of fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds or less. Truck deliveries of supplies or products are allowed only between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(11)  A home occupation shall not cause the elimination of any required off-street parking for the main dwelling. Off-street parking for an additional employee shall be provided and shall conform to all applicable regulations. Nothing within these provisions shall be interpreted to condone the use of shared driveways for parking purposes. 
(12)  In addition to parking required for the residents, there are no more than two vehicles parked on or in the vicinity of the property as a result of the business at any one time. 
(13)  There shall be a limit of one commercial vehicle and it shall not exceed the size of a 13/4-ton pick-up truck. 
(e)  Home occupations specifically not permitted. 
(1)  Stables or kennels; 
(2)  Automobile body or large engine repair or any similar business; 
(3)  Upholstery; furniture stripping; 
(4)  Animal hospitals; 
(5)  Welding service; 
(6)  Beauty salons or barbershops; 
(7)  Real estate or development sales office, banks or credit unions; 
(8)  Taxi services, ambulance services, vehicles leases or sales; 
(9)  Medical, dental/optical offices or clinics; 
(10)  Taxidermy. 
(f)  Home occupations not regulated. The following uses shall not be regulated as home occupations: 
(1)  Tutoring for six (6) or fewer persons at one (1) time; 
(2)  Economic enterprises conducted by minor children who are occupants of the dwelling unit, provided that no adult occupants are employed in the enterprises and the gross income from such enterprise does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) annually for all such enterprises conducted on that property. 
(3)  Bed and breakfast operations; see chapter 7 for licensing and standards. 
(4)  Various arrangements for day care and foster care permitted elsewhere in this chapter. 
(g)  Permit required. No home occupation shall be operated within the city except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A home occupation permit is required for all home occupations except those exempted pursuant to section 38-394(f) and except where there are less than five customers per week or no employees. Those home occupations that do not require a permit shall be classified as a type A home occupation but a type A home occupation is still required to comply with the standards of this chapter. 
(1)  Type B home occupations exist where there are more than five (5) customers per week or there is an employee. 
(2)  A type B permit shall be obtained from the department of building and zoning. Prior to the issuance of the home occupation permit, the applicant for such permit shall submit to the department written and graphic documentation demonstrating compliance with the rules and regulations of this chapter. A permit may be issued by the building official or his agent upon proof of compliance with the provisions of the chapter. 
(3)  The applicant shall be the owner of the property for which the permit is applied; except that if the applicant is not the owner, then an affidavit executed by the owner shall be submitted which clearly gives the owner's permission to utilize the residence for a home occupation. 
(4)  A type B permit shall not be issued for a two-family dwelling unit or multiple-family dwelling units. Attached single-family units may obtain a type B permit. 
(5)  Transferability. Permits shall not run with the land and shall not be transferable. All home occupation permits shall automatically and immediately terminate when the permittee no longer resides in the subject residence. 
(6)  Renewal. A home occupation permit shall have a term of five years, provided no provisions of this chapter have been violated. 
(7)  Permit revocation. A violation of any part of this section by a permit holder shall be grounds for the revocation of the permit. A renewal applicant will need to wait two (2) years from the date of revocation before a new permit can be issued. 
(8)  Process for permit revocation. Upon determination that there has been a violation of any decision criteria or condition of approval, the building official may give written notice to the permit holder describing the alleged violation. Within fourteen (14) days of the mailing of notice of violation, the permit holder shall show cause why the permit should not be revoked. At the end of the 14-day period, the building official shall sustain or revoke the permit. When a home occupation permit is revoked, the building official shall notify the permit holder by certified mail of the revocation and the findings upon which revocation is based. Appeals of decisions to revoke a home occupation permit will be processed using the zoning board of appeals procedures in article XXI of this chapter. 
(9)  Renewal of permits. Following a permit expiration or revocation, an applicant shall not have a vested right to a permit renewal by reason of having obtained a previous permit. In applying for and accepting a permit, the holder agrees that his monetary investment in the home occupation will be fully amortized over the life of the permit and that a permit renewal will not be needed to amortize the investment. Each application for the renewal of a permit will be reviewed without taking into consideration that a previous permit has been granted. The previous granting or renewal of a permit shall not constitute a precedent or basis for the renewal of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 465, § 1, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 637, § 1, 8-18-03) 
Sec. 38-395. - PUD planned unit development regulations and standards for approval. 
    The provisions of this section shall apply to all PUD zoning districts: 
(1)  Definitions. 
a.  Conceptual PUD plan: A graphic depiction in plan form of the elements of a planned unit development district, which illustrates the PUD development program and the district's supplemental regulations. 
b.  PUD development program: A written document describing the objectives, purposes, and beneficial effect for the city proposed to be achieved by the PUD zoning district. 
c.  Supplemental regulations: A written document which contains the zoning and site development requirements which, once approved, become part of the ordinance establishing the PUD zoning district, and, in addition to current city regulations and ordinances, will be in effect for the district. 
(2)  Modifications permitted. In order to achieve a beneficial effect for the city, the planning commission may recommend and city council may approve, as part of the supplemental regulations, modifications that increase, decrease, or eliminate the requirements listed below for equivalent land uses and intensities: 
a.  Use regulations, and area, height and placement regulations as provided in section 38-351. 
b.  Off-street parking requirements as provided in this chapter, section 38-380. 
c.  Landscaping, screening, and buffer requirements as provided in this chapter, section 38-384 and section 38-389. 
(3)  The PUD process. The PUD process shall involve three (3) consecutive steps: pre-application conference, PUD zoning district review, and PUD site plan review. The pre-application conference occurs before the applicant has submitted a formal application; zoning district and site plan reviews occur after the applicant has submitted a formal petition. The PUD site plan review may occur only if the PUD zoning district has been approved as required by this chapter. 
a.  Pre-application conference. Before submitting an application, the applicant shall contact the community development director (hereinafter "director") to schedule a pre-application conference with city staff that shall include the city manager, the building official, the city engineer, the director and other city personnel and consultants as deemed appropriate. At the conference, the applicant shall present the proposed conceptual PUD plan and PUD development program with emphasis on timing, open space and residential density. The staff will take no official action, but may provide the applicant with their comments regarding the appropriateness of the proposed land uses, the proposal's conformance with adopted master plan and policies, the necessity of a traffic impact study, the beneficial effects to be achieved, whether or not a model may be required and whether applicant's requests for zoning district approval and PUD site plan approval should be presented together at the same meeting or independently at separate meetings. No fees will be charged for the preliminary review. 
b.  PUD zoning district review. PUD zoning district review involves departmental and commission review of the conceptual PUD plan, the PUD development program, and supplemental regulations to determine consistency with or the appropriateness for deviating from the city's adopted plans and policies and its suitability for inclusion in the land use and zoning plans of the city and adoption by city council as part of the zoning ordinance. Once approved by the city council, the property shall be zoned to a PUD zoning district, and use of the property shall be regulated by the supplemental regulations and all other applicable code requirements. 
c.  PUD site plan review. Review and approval of a PUD site plan consistent with the requirements of this chapter is required prior to the issuance of permits. If the PUD zoning district provides that a PUD may be developed in phases, as shown on the conceptual PUD plan, approval of a PUD site plan for each phase is required prior to the issuance of permits for that phase. 
(4)  PUD zoning district review submittal requirements. The applicant for any PUD zoning district shall submit a complete application together with the following materials: 
a.  Information that indicates the entire parcel or parcels for which application is made is under one (1) ownership, or the application shall be made with the written authorization of all property owners who have a legal or equitable ownership interest in the property or properties. Application for a PUD zoning district may be made only by or with the written authorization of the owner(s) of the parcel(s) involved. All property that is proposed to be part of the development shall be included in the PUD zoning. 
b.  The planning commission may request that the applicant provide a market study demonstrating the market demand and feasibility of a proposed PUD project. 
c.  Sheet size of conceptual drawings shall be at least 24 inches by 36 inches, with graphics at an engineer's scale. The applicant shall also submit a set of plans on 11? × 17? sheets, with at least one (1) sheet in color, highlighting landscaped and open space areas. 
d.  A conceptual PUD plan containing the information required in this chapter for site plan reviews. In addition such plan shall include, but not be limited to: criteria of area, height, and placement standards; the location and relationships of permitted land uses; parking and circulation systems; landscape features; preserved natural features; architectural design components and use of building materials, proposed phasing, and any other unique physical characteristics which warrant the PUD zoning. 
e.  A boundary survey and legal description of the parcel(s) to be zoned. 
f.  A PUD development program describing the objectives, purposes, and beneficial effect for the city proposed to be achieved by the PUD zoning district; why this beneficial effect cannot be achieved under any other zoning designation; and its conformity to the adopted master plan and policies of the city or detailed compelling justification for departures from the plan and policies. 
g.  Proposed supplemental regulations for the PUD zoning district which shall include, but not be limited to permitted land uses; accessory uses; minimum and maximum standards of lot area and lot area per dwelling unit, if applicable; minimum usable open space in percentage of lot area; minimum required front, side and rear setbacks; maximum height and number of stories. The supplemental regulations shall include sufficient analysis and justification for the beneficial effect and detailed performance standards by which the development will be evaluated and the beneficial effect achieved. Such analysis and justification may include, but are not limited to: 
1.  A comprehensive analysis of the surrounding neighborhood, providing such details as scale of structures, minimum and maximum height and number of stories, minimum and maximum setbacks, historic or architectural styles or features, building materials and colors, and other unique features and a detailed analysis of how the PUD site plan and design contribute to the neighborhood. 
2.  A comprehensive analysis of the unique features of the site, including such components as topography, site orientation, circulation, or special condition and a detailed analysis of how the PUD site plan and design contribute to the preservation, protection, utilization, and enhancement of the site's unique features. 
h.  A study model, indicating the three-dimensional character of the proposal, unless determined by the planning commission during its preliminary review that one is unnecessary. With the approval of the director, other visual representations such as computer-enhanced photography or video may be substituted. 
i.  Any additional graphics, photographs, traffic impact studies, or written materials requested by the director, commission or city council to assist the city in visualizing and understanding the proposal and assessing the possible benefits and impacts. 
(5)  Procedure for PUD zoning district review. A PUD zoning district is established as follows: 
a.  All required materials with sufficient number of copies, together with appropriate fees as established by city council, shall be filed with the community development director. Copies of the materials will be distributed by the director to the appropriate city departments and other reviewing agencies for review to determine the following: 
1.  If the development can be accommodated by the existing public utility, street, and general city service facilities, or if any additions to, or extension of facilities are necessary for the project. 
2.  If the proposal meets the standards for PUD zoning district approval listed below. 
3.  If the development will comply with all applicable local, state, or federal laws, ordinances, standards, and regulations or provides sufficient compelling justification for modifications of those local ordinances, standards or regulations as permitted for PUDs, and 
4.  If the proposal conforms to the adopted master plan and policies, or provides sufficient compelling justification for departure from the adopted plan and policies. 
b.  The director will notify the applicant of any questions raised by the city departments and other reviewing agencies and shall submit a report to the commission for its consideration including an evaluation of the planning aspects of the project and its impact on the present and future development of the city. 
c.  The commission shall hold a public hearing with notification as required by this chapter for zoning ordinance amendments. 
d.  The commission shall recommend to city council an action as it deems proper and shall transmit its recommendation together with any recommended conditions of approval and all related reports and minutes to city council. 
e.  Before taking final action on the petition, the city council shall hold a public hearing with notification as required by this chapter for zoning ordinance amendments. 
f.  A protest of a proposed PUD zoning district may be presented as provided in this chapter for zoning ordinance amendments. 
g.  The director shall keep a record of all approved PUD zoning districts and supplemental regulations. Notice of approvals shall be published as required by this chapter for zoning ordinance amendments. 
(6)  Standards for PUD zoning district review. The commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial, and city council shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed PUD zoning district based on the following standards: 
a.  The use or uses, physical characteristics, design features, or amenities proposed shall have a beneficial effect for the city, in terms of public health, safety, welfare, aesthetics, or convenience, or any combination thereof, on present and potential surrounding land uses. The beneficial effects for the city, which warrant the zoning, include, but are not limited to, features such as: 
1.  Innovation in land use and variety in design, layout and type of structures that furthers the stated design goals and physical character of adopted land use plans and policies; 
2.  Economy and efficiency of land use, natural resources, energy, and provision of public services and utilities; 
3.  Provision of usable open space; 
4.  Preservation and protection of natural features that exceeds ordinance requirements, especially for those features prioritized in the land development regulations as being of highest concern, or that preserves existing conditions instead of merely providing mitigation; 
5.  Employment and shopping opportunities particularly suited to the needs of the residents of the city; 
6.  Expansion of the supply of affordable housing; and 
7.  The use and reuse of existing sites and buildings that contributes to the desired character and form of an established neighborhood. 
8.  The reduction, to a significant extent, the nonconformity of a nonconforming use or structure so that the site is rendered nonconforming or less offensive to the character of the neighborhood and the health, safety and general welfare of the vicinity. 
b.  This beneficial effect for the city shall be one which could not be achieved under any other zoning classification and shall be one which is not required to be provided under any existing standard, regulation or ordinance of any local, state or federal agency. 
c.  The use or uses proposed shall not have a detrimental effect on public utilities or surrounding properties. 
d.  The use or uses proposed shall be consistent with the master plan and policies adopted by the city or the applicant shall provide adequate justification for departures from the approved plans and policies. 
e.  If the proposed district allows residential uses, the residential density proposed shall be consistent with the plans and policies adopted by the city. 
f.  The supplemental regulations shall include analysis and justification sufficient to determine what the purported benefit is, how the special benefit will be provided, and performance standards by which the special benefit will be evaluated. 
g.  Safe, convenient, uncongested, and well-defined vehicular and pedestrian circulation within and to the district shall be provided and, where feasible, the proposal shall encourage and support the use of alternative methods of transportation. 
h.  Disturbance of existing natural features, historical features and historically significant architectural features of the district shall be limited to the minimum necessary to allow a reasonable use of the land and the benefit to the community shall be substantially greater than any negative impacts. 
(7)  Effect of PUD zoning district approval. 
a.  Approval of the PUD zoning district by city council shall rezone the property to a "PUD" zoning classification for the land uses, the area, height, and placement standards, and the objectives, purposes, beneficial effects, and special conditions provided in the PUD development program, the conceptual PUD plan, and supplemental regulations for the zoning district. In the case of differences between plans and written documents, written documents shall govern. 
b.  The approval shall confer upon the owner or subsequent owners the right to seek PUD site plan approval for the proposal or for any of its approved phases in accordance with the site plan, the approved PUD zoning district and supplemental regulations and city regulations and ordinances. 
c.  A PUD zoning district and its supplemental regulations shall remain in effect as approved until a change to the PUD zoning district has been approved. 
(8)  Changes to a PUD zoning district. A change to a PUD zoning district may be accomplished by amending the PUD zoning district by the process provided for establishment of a PUD zoning district or by rezoning to a different zoning district pursuant to the procedures of this chapter for zoning ordinance amendments. 
(9)  Any deviation from the approved PUD zoning district or PUD site plan, except as authorized in this chapter, shall be considered a violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties stated herein. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-396. - Mechanical equipment and utilities. 
    The following requirements shall apply to all site plans and new installations, not including replacement equipment and wind energy systems, for uses in the RM-1, RM-2, OS-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, and PUD zoning districts. 
(a)  Ground-mounted mechanical equipment, such as blowers, ventilating fans, and air conditioning units, are permitted only in nonrequired side yards and in any rear yard, as determined by the building official/zoning administrator. 
(b)  Mechanical equipment shall be placed no closer than three (3) feet to any lot line in the B-3 zoning district. 
(c)  Any ground, building, or roof-mounted mechanical equipment or utilities, including water and gas meters or related devices, utility boxes, transformers, elevator housings, stairways, tanks, heating, ventilation and air condition equipment (HVAC), and other similar equipment, shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  All such equipment shall be screened by a solid wall, fence, landscaping, and/or architectural features that are compatible in appearances with the principal building. 
(2)  Roof-mounted equipment shall not exceed a height of ten (10) feet above the surrounding roof surface, and shall occupy no more than fifteen (15) percent of the total roof area. All roof mounted mechanical units must be screened at a height equal to or greater than equipment being screened or otherwise be demonstrated to not be visible from all properties located within a distance of three hundred (300) feet. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 4, 8-19-13) 
Sec. 38-397. - Commercial design requirements. 
    The following design requirements for commercial buildings shall be applied during site plan review to development within the RM-1, RM-2, OS-1, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, and PUD zoning districts. These standards shall also apply to those elevations and parking areas that face a state highway and are within two hundred (200) feet of the right-of-way. 
(a)  Exterior building design. 
(1)  Buildings shall possess architectural variety, but enhance the overall cohesive community character. All buildings shall provide architectural features, details, and ornaments such as archways, colonnades, cornices, recesses, projections, wall insets, arcades, window display areas, peaked roof lines, or towers. 
(2)  Building walls and roofs over fifty (50) feet in length shall be broken up with varying building lines, windows, gables, and/or architectural accents such as pilasters, columns, dormers, or awnings. 
(3)  Window area or spandrel glass shall make up at least twenty (20) percent or more of the exterior wall area facing the principal street(s). 
(4)  In addition, a portion of the on-site landscaping shall abut the walls so that the vegetation combined with the architectural features significantly reduce the visual impact of the building mass as viewed from the street. Additional landscaping requirements of this article must also be satisfied. 
(5)  Overhead doors shall not face a public street or residential district. The planning commission can modify this requirement upon a determination that there is good or necessary cause and the visual impact will be moderated through use of building materials, architectural features and landscaping beyond that required by the ordinance. 
(6)  Additions to existing buildings must complement the current building design with regard to height, proportions, scale, materials, and spacing of openings. 
(b)  Building materials. 
(1)  Durable building materials which provide an attractive, quality appearance must be utilized. 
(2)  The predominant building materials (fifty (50) percent or more of the face) should be quality materials such as earth-toned brick, native stone, and tinted/textured concrete masonry units and/or glass products. 
(3)  Other materials such as smooth-faced concrete block, EIFS panels, or pre-fabricated corrugated steel panels should only be used as accents and not dominate the building exterior of the structure. 
(c)  Building colors. 
(1)  High intensity colors such as neon, metallic, or fluorescent for the facade and/or roof of the building are prohibited except as approved by the planning commission. 
(2)  Mechanical and service features such as gutters, ductwork, service doors, etc. that cannot be screened must be of a color that blends in or compliments the color of the building. 
(d)  Roof design. 
(1)  Roofs should be designed to reduce the apparent exterior mass of a building, add visual interest, and be appropriate to the architectural style of the building. 
(2)  Roofs shall have no less than two (2) of the following features: 
a.  Parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment, such as HVAC units from public view. The average height of such parapets shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the height of the supporting wall and such parapets shall not at any point exceed one-third ( 1/3 ) of the height of the supporting wall. Such parapets shall feature three-dimensional cornice treatment; 
b.  Overhanging eaves, extending no less than one (1) foot past the support walls; 
c.  Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of the supporting walls, with an average slope greater than or equal to one (1) foot of vertical rise for every three (3) feet of horizontal run and less than or equal to one (1) foot of vertical rise for every one (1) foot of horizontal run; 
d.  Three (3) or more roof slope planes. 
e.  A specific architectural element proposed by the applicant's architect that is acceptable to the building official or planning commission, depending upon the reviewing entity. 
(e)  Customer entrances. 
(1)  Each large retail establishment (twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet or more) on a site shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances featuring no less than five (5) of the following: 
a.  Canopies or porticos; 
b.  Overhangs; 
c.  Recesses/projections; 
d.  Arcades; 
e.  Raised corniced parapets over the door; 
f.  Peaked roof forms; 
g.  Arches; 
h.  Outdoor patios; 
i.  Display windows; 
j.  Architectural details such as tile work and moldings which are integrated into the building structure and design; 
k.  Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting; 
l.  A specific architectural element proposed by the applicant's architect that is acceptable to the building official or planning commission, depending upon the reviewing entity. 
(2)  Where additional units will be located in the large retail establishment, each such store may have at least one (1) exterior customer entrance, which shall conform to the above requirements. 
(3)  A bike rack or other acceptable form of bike parking or storage shall be provided near the primary entrance of all commercial structures. This shall not apply to structures in the B-3 zoning district. 
(f)  Community amenities. Community amenities such as patio/seating areas, water features, art work or sculpture, clock towers, pedestrian plazas with park benches, or other features located adjacent to the primary entrance to the building(s) are highly encouraged and may be calculated as part of the landscaping requirement. 
(g)  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with the city's sign ordinance. All sign bases shall be constructed of materials compatible with the architecture of the building(s) located on the premises. 
(h)  Natural features. When feasible and not in direct conflict with site needs, buildings shall be sited to protect existing natural areas such as steep natural grades, trees, significant groupings of healthy vegetation (shrubs and trees), and rock outcroppings. To the extent practical, these areas shall be incorporated into the overall site plan. 
(i)  Building location and orientation. New buildings shall have at least one (1) principal building entrance oriented toward the front lot line. 
(j)  Sidewalks. All development shall include a provision for sidewalks within the site and within the right-of-way to provide connectivity between adjacent sites, the public realm, parking areas, primary structures, and any other on-site amenities. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 4, 8-19-13) 
Sec. 38-398. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 764, adopted May 4, 2015, repealed former § 38-398, which pertained to residential dwelling design standards, and derived from Ord. No. 745, § 4, adopted Aug. 19, 2013. 
Sec. 38-399. - Temporary structures and uses. 
(a)  Conditions applicable to all temporary structures, uses, and displays: Unless otherwise noted, the following conditions shall apply to all temporary structures, uses, and displays. 
(1)  All such uses and structures must first be reviewed and approved by the building official. 
(2)  The use of any space or structure must be one (1) permitted as-of-right within the applicable zoning district. 
(3)  Adequate off-street parking, site ingress/egress, and adequate clear vision areas shall be provided. 
(4)  The applicant shall specify the exact duration of the temporary use, and no permit for any temporary use, structure, or display shall be valid for more than one (1) calendar year. 
(5)  Approval of other applicable government agencies is required to ensure compliance with applicable health and safety regulations and standards. 
(6)  The use must be carried out so as to meet all zoning and general ordinance provisions and shall not create or result in any nuisance factors. 
(7)  Temporary structures shall comply with the setback standards for the district in which they are located. 
(8)  The building official or his/her designee shall approve any and all plumbing, electrical, and mechanical connections to any temporary structure. 
(9)  The building official or zoning administrator may require the applicant to furnish the city with a performance bond in accordance with section 29-48 to ensure removal of the temporary structure, use or display. 
(b)  Temporary structures used for residential purposes: A building or structure may be approved for temporary residential use only while damage to the principal dwelling due to fire, flood, ice, wind, or other natural disaster is being repaired. Any such temporary building shall not be used as a residence without prior review and approval by the building official. 
Also, a manufactured dwelling unit or other approved living quarters may be occupied as a residence on a temporary basis on sites for which a building permit has been issued for construction, major repair, or remodeling of a new dwelling unit, subject to the following: 
(1)  An occupancy permit is issued by the building official for the temporary residence. 
(2)  Such permits may be issued by the building official for up to six (6) months in duration and may be renewed for periods of up to six (6) months, provided that work is proceeding in an expeditious manner. 
(3)  An approved temporary structure may be moved onto a site fourteen (14) days prior to commencement of construction and shall be removed within fourteen (14) days following issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the permanent dwelling. 
(c)  Temporary structures used for nonresidential purposes: Temporary buildings for nonresidential use, including semi-trucks/trailers and concrete batch plants, shall be permitted only when the intended use is by a contractor or builder in conjunction with a construction project. 
(1)  Such temporary structures shall be removed immediately upon completion of the construction project and prior to a request for a certificate of occupancy for the project. 
(2)  Permits for the utilization of temporary structures shall be issued by the building official. The permit shall specify a date for the removal of the temporary structure. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for such structures. 
(d)  Temporary uses in accessory structures: A temporary building or structure may be used as an accessory building or structure if it meets all accessory structure requirements of this Code. 
(e)  Special purpose temporary uses: The following conditions apply to specific temporary uses: 
(1)  Carnival, circus, festival, seasonal markets (public and/or private lands): 
a.  City council approval required. 
(2)  Sidewalk uses including display, sales, and other features: 
a.  Time: Operating hours only. The business must be open and staffed. 
b.  Location: In the B-3 zoning district only. 
c.  Sidewalk coverage: An area no less than five (5) feet wide shall be maintained for passage of pedestrians at all times. 
d.  Uses: For portable signs, display, sale, and/or service of onsite products and activities only, including retail goods and food service. No off-premises advertising, sales, or services are permitted (i.e. vendors are not permitted). 
e.  Exceptions: Planters, bike racks, and decorative features may remain outside provided they adhere to all performance standards of the ordinance. 
f.  Additional requirements: The approval of the building official and street administrator is required; owner must provide liability insurance for activities in the right-of-way. 
(3)  Christmas tree sales: 
a.  Maximum duration: Forty-five (45) days. 
b.  Clean-up: Stumps, branches, and other debris shall be completely removed from site. 
c.  Building official approval required. 
(4)  Roadside produce or farm stands: Because roadside stands are seasonal in character and utilized on a temporary basis, roadside stands shall be allowed in business districts by the city for periods not to exceed six (6) months provided a temporary permit is obtained from the city and provided the following provisions are met: 
a.  The sale of farm products in a roadside stand shall not take place within the dedicated right-of-way of any thoroughfare within the city, and assurances shall be made to the city that ample off-street parking has been provided, and adequate ingress and egress provided to the stand. 
b.  No permanent structure of any type shall be erected, and upon discontinuance of the temporary use, the temporary structures shall be removed from the roadside. 
(f)  Outdoor sales and display in conjunction with an existing business (private lands only): 
(1)  Location: In the B-1, B-2, and B-4 zoning districts only; front or side yards only; use cannot occur in areas dedicated to parking, storm water detention/collection, or areas required for emergency use or clear vision. 
(2)  Lot coverage: An area no more than three hundred (300) square feet shall be used as outdoor sales and display area. 
(3)  Setbacks: Setbacks from the right-of-way and all lot lines must be a minimum of ten (10) feet or that setback require by article XVI, whichever is less. 
(4)  Uses: For display, sale, and/or service of onsite products and activities only. No off-premises advertising, sales, or services are permitted (i.e. vendors and/or leased space are not permitted). 
(5)  Additional requirements: Any loose debris, damaged products, unsecured materials, or products determined to be junk, waste, or scrap in nature shall be deemed a nuisance per se. 
(Ord. No. 744, § 5, 8-19-13) 
Secs. 38-400-38-410. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVIII. - GENERAL EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 38-411. - Area, height and use exceptions. 
    The regulations in this chapter shall be subject to the interpretations and exceptions of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 5.93) 
Sec. 38-412. - Essential services. 
    Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the city, it being the intention hereof to exempt such essential services from the application of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 5.94) 
Sec. 38-413. - Voting place. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be so construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a city or other public election. 
(Code 1977, § 5.95) 
Sec. 38-414. - Height limit. 
    The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to farm buildings, chimneys, church spires, flag poles, public monuments or wireless transmission towers; provided, however, that the board of appeals may specify a height limit for any such structure when such structure requires authorization as a conditional use. 
(Code 1977, § 5.96) 
Sec. 38-415. - Lot area. 
    Any lot existing and of record on the effective date of this chapter may be used for any principal use permitted other than conditional uses for which special lot area requirements are specified in this chapter, permitted in the district in which such lot is located whether or not such lot complies with the lot area and width requirements of this chapter. Such use may be made provided that all requirements other than lot area requirements prescribed in this chapter are complied with, and provided that not more than one (1) dwelling unit shall occupy any lot except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter for required lot area for each dwelling unit. 
(Code 1977, § 5.97) 
Sec. 38-416. - Lots adjoining alleys. 
    In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins an alley for the purpose of applying lot area and setback requirements of this chapter, one-half the width of such alley abutting the lot shall be considered as part of such lot. 
(Code 1977, § 5.98) 
Sec. 38-417. - Yard regulations. 
    When yard regulations cannot reasonably be complied with, or where their application cannot be determined on lots of peculiar shape, topography or due to architectural or site arrangement, such regulations may be modified or determined by the board of appeals. 
(Code 1977, § 5.99) 
Sec. 38-418. - Porches. 
    An open, unenclosed and uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into a front yard for a distance not exceeding ten (10) feet, but this shall not be interpreted to include or permit fixed canopies. 
(Code 1977, § 5.100) 
Sec. 38-419. - Projections into yards. 
    Architectural features, not including vertical projections, may extend or project into a required side yard not more than two (2) inches for each one (1) foot of width of such side yard; and may extend or project into a required front yard or rear yard not more than three (3) feet. 
(Code 1977, § 5.101) 
Sec. 38-420. - Access through yards. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, access drives may be placed in the required front or side yards so as to provide access to rear yards or accessory or attached structures. These drives shall not be considered as structural violations in front and side yards. Further, any walk, terrace or other pavement servicing a like function, and not in excess of nine (9) inches above the grade upon which placed, shall for the purpose of this chapter, not be considered to be a structure, and shall be permitted in any required yard. 
(Code 1977, § 5.102) 
Sec. 38-421. - Lots having water frontage. 
(a)  Those residential lots or parcels having a water frontage, and abutting a public thoroughfare shall maintain the yard on the water side as an open unobscured yard, excepting that a covered boat well shall be permitted after review and approval of plans by the board of appeals. Accessory structures shall be permitted in the setback between the abutting road right-of-way and the main building providing the minimum front yard setback required in section 38-352 of this chapter is met. 
(b)  For any development of land that includes a parking lot of three thousand (3,000) square feet or more adjacent to the Shiawassee River, no portion of the said parking lot shall be less than thirty-five (35) feet from the mean high level water mark of the flow of the river. The area between the parking lot and the river must be maintained as a greenbelt of natural plantings and include grass if necessary as a stormwater filter. 
(Code 1977, § 5.103; Ord. No. 517, § 1, 2-22-94) 
Secs. 38-422-38-450. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIX. - SPECIAL USE PERMITS 

Sec. 38-451. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  Rather than permitting all of the many and varied land use activities within individual and limited zoning districts, it is the intent of this article to provide a set of procedures and standards for specific uses of land or structures that will allow, on one hand, practical latitude for the investor or developer, but that will, at the same time, promote the intent and purpose of this chapter, and insure that the land use or activity authorized shall be compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land uses. In order to provide controllable and reasonable flexibility, this article permits detailed review of certain specified types of land use activities which, because of their particular and unique characteristics, require special consideration in relation to the welfare of adjacent properties and to the community as a whole. Land and structure uses possessing these characteristics are designated special uses and may be authorized within certain zone districts by the issuance of a special use permit. By such a procedure, the planning commission and the council have the opportunity to impose conditions and safeguards upon each use which are deemed necessary for the protection of the public welfare. 
(b)  The following sections, together with previous references in other articles of this chapter, designate specific uses that require a special use permit and, in addition, specify the procedures and standards which must be met before such a permit can be issued. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 19A1.1, 6-18-84) 
Sec. 38-452. - Permit procedures. 
    An application for a special use permit for any land or structure use permitted under this article shall be submitted and processed under the following procedures: 
(1)  Submission of application. Any application shall be submitted through the building inspector on a special form for that purpose. Each application shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee as established by the council to cover costs of processing the application. No part of any fee shall be refundable. 
(2)  Data required. Every application shall be accompanied by the following information and data: 
a.  The special form supplied by the building inspector, filled out in full by the applicant, including a statement of supporting evidence concerning the required findings specified in section 38-453. 
b.  Site plan, plot plan, or development plan according to the provisions of section 38-390. 
(3)  Planning commission review. The application, along with all required data, shall be transmitted to the planning commission for review. After adequate review and study of the application, one (1) notice that a request for special land use approval has been received shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all persons whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants of all structures within three hundred (300) feet, except that the notice shall be given not less than five (5) and not more than fifteen (15) days before the application will be considered. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one (1) occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one (1) dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, one (1) occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four (4) dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. The notice shall: 
a.  Describe the nature of the special land use request; 
b.  Indicate the property which is the subject of the special land use request; 
c.  State when and where the special land use request will be considered; 
d.  Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request; 
e.  Indicate that a public hearing on the special land use request may be requested by a property owner of the occupant of a structure located with three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the property being considered for a special use. 
(4)  Discretionary public hearing. At the initiative of the planning commission, or upon the request of the applicant for special land use authorization, or a property owner or the occupant of a structure located within three hundred (300) feet of the boundary of the property being considered for a special land use, a public hearing with notification as required for a notice of a request for special land use approval as provided in this section shall be held before a decision on the special land use request which is based on discretionary grounds is made. If the applicant or the planning commission requests a public hearing, only notification of the public hearing need be made. A decision on a special land use request which is based on discretionary grounds shall not be made unless notification of the request for special land use approval, or notification of a public hearing on a special land use request is given as required. Such notice shall indicate the place, time and purpose of the hearing. Upon conclusion of the hearing procedures, the planning commission shall transmit a written recommendation within sixty (60) days to the council setting forth the reasons for the acceptance, denial or modification of the special use permit application. 
(5)  Council. Upon receipt of the planning commission's recommendation, the council shall consider the special use permit application at its next regular meeting. The council shall approve or disapprove the recommendations of the planning commission; or if the council deems any changes, additions or departures are advisable to the proposed conditions of the proposed permit or it is felt additional study is necessary, it shall refer the same back to the planning commission for a report thereon within a time specified by the council. The council decision rendered on the special use permit application shall be accompanied with a clear explanation of the reason for the action taken. Any permit issued shall contain all the specified conditions under which the use is allowed. Only in the event of an appeal, shall a special use permit be issued by the city clerk. The special use permit shall become effective when the application has been approved by the council or the board of appeals in the event of an appeal. 
(6)  Permit expiration. A special use permit issued under this section shall be valid for a period of one (1) year from the date of the issuance of the permit. If construction has been commenced and proceeded meaningfully toward completion by the end of this one-year period, the zoning administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the expiration or the revocation of the permit. The planning commission shall review every special use permit and the associated land use prior to the expiration of the permit and shall recommend continuance or discontinuance of the permit based on whether the activities, structures and other site characteristics satisfactorily comply with the conditions stipulated in the special use permit. This determination of the planning commission shall be forwarded to the council with a recommended action. After the first year review the council may extend the permit for periods of longer than one (1) year. 
(7)  Permit revocation. The council shall have the authority to revoke any special use permit after it has been proved that the holder of the permit has failed to comply with all of the applicable conditions specified in the permit. After a revocation notice has been given, the use for which the permit was granted must cease within sixty (60) days. 
(8)  Violation and penalties. Failure to terminate the use for which the permit was granted within sixty (60) days is declared to be nuisance per se and a violation of this article. The violation shall be reported to the city attorney who is hereby authorized to and shall initiate procedures to eliminate such violations. For each and every day the violations continues beyond the aforementioned sixty (60) days, a separate offense shall be declared. 
(9)  Appeal. Recourse by a person considering himself/herself aggrieved by a decision of the council in the granting or denial of a special use permit shall be to the county circuit court, as provided by law. 
(10)  Reapplication. No application for a special use permit which has been denied wholly or in part by the council shall be resubmitted until the expiration of one (1) year or more from the date of such denial, except on the grounds of newly-discovered evidence or proof of changed conditions. 
(11)  Fees. The council may from time to time prescribe and amend by resolution a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for special use permits. At the time of application for a special use permit is filed, the fee shall be paid to the office of the building inspector, while the building inspector shall forthwith pay over to the city's chief fiscal office to the credit of the general revenue fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 19A1.2, 6-18-84) 
Sec. 38-453. - Basis for determination. 
    Before making a recommendation on a special use permit application, the planning commission shall establish beyond a reasonable doubt that the following general standards, as well as the special standards outlined in each applicable section of this article, shall be satisfied: 
(1)  General standards. The planning commission shall review each application for the purpose of determining that each proposed use meets the following standards and in addition, shall find adequate evidence that each use on its proposed location will: 
a.  Be harmonious with and in accordance with the general principals and objectives of the mid-county land use plan and other approved planning documents of the city; 
b.  Be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and that such a use will not change the essential character of the area in which it is proposed; 
c.  Not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future uses in the same general vicinity and will be a substantial improvement to property in the immediate vicinity and to the community as a whole; 
d.  Be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, such as highways, streets, police, fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewage facilities and schools; 
e.  Not involve uses, activities, processes, materials and equipment or conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any person, property, or general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare or odors; 
f.  Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the zoning regulations; be related to the standards established in the ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration; and be necessary to insure compliance with these standards; 
g.  Be related to the valid exercise of police power and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity. 
(2)  Conditions and safeguards. The planning commission may impose such additional conditions and safeguards deemed necessary for the general welfare, for the protection of individual property rights and for insuring that the intent and objectives of this article will be observed. The conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a land use or activity shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the council and the landowner. The city clerk shall maintain a record of changes granted in conditions. The breach of any condition, safeguard, or requirement shall automatically invalidate the permit granted. 
(3)  Performance guarantee. In authorizing a special land use permit, the city planning commission may require that a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond be furnished by the developer to insure compliance with an approved site plan and the special land use permit requirements. Such guarantee shall be deposited with the city clerk at the time of the issuance of the special land use permit. In fixing the amount of such performance guarantee, the city planning commission shall limit it to reasonable improvements required to meet the standards of this article and to protect the natural resources or the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area including but not limited to roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening and draining. The term "improvements" does not include the entire project which is the subject of zoning approval nor to improvements for which a performance guarantee has been deposited pursuant to Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.), as amended. The city planning commission and the project developer shall establish an agreeable procedure for the rebate of any cash deposits required under this section in reasonable proportion to the ratio of work completed on the required improvements as work progresses. The agreement shall be written as an element of the conditions surrounding the approval of the special land use permit. 
(4)  Specified requirements. The general standards and requirements of this section are basic to all uses authorized by special use permit. The specific and detailed requirements set forth in the following sections relate to particular uses and are requirements which must be met by those uses in addition to the foregoing general standards and requirements where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 19A1.3, 6-18-84) 
Sec. 38-454. - Special uses that may be permitted. 
    The following uses may be permitted within the districts mentioned provided that there is an issuance of a special use permit and a compliance with the provisions of this article: 
(a)  Adult foster care small group home in the R-1, R-2, RM-1 and RM-2 residential districts. 
(1)  Authorization. In recognition of the existence of several large homes in the city with no practical use as a single family setting, there may be particular homes and settings that would allow for an adult foster care small group home in a residential neighborhood that would be compatible and reasonably harmonious with residential uses. In addition to section 38-453 provisions, the following conditions and standards are to be reviewed and applied by the planning commission: 
(2)  Site location principals: 
a.  Any permitted institutional structure should preferably be located at the edge of a low density residential district abutting a public open space or high density residential district or commercial district. 
b.  If possible, institutional use homes should front on a major street. 
c.  Motor vehicle entrance and exit should be made on a major street to avoid the impact of traffic generated by the institutional use upon the residential area. 
d.  Site locations should be chosen which offer natural or manmade barriers that would lessen the effect of the intrusion of any institutional uses into an established residential area. 
(3)  Site development requirements. 
a.  Minimum floor area in the dwelling unit shall be three thousand (3,000) square feet for seven (7) adults receiving foster care and an additional one hundred fifty (150) square feet for every foster care adult thereafter. 
b.  Minimum lot width of one hundred thirty-two (132) feet and minimum lot depth of one hundred thirty-two (132) feet. Yard, height and setback requirements should not be less than that specified for the district in which the proposed use would be located. 
c.  Not more than thirty (30) percent of the lot area may be covered by buildings. 
d.  All buildings should be harmonious in appearance with the surrounding residential area and shall be similar in design and appearance to any other buildings in the same site development. 
e.  All signs shall be in accordance with section 38-385. 
f.  A minimum of three (3) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each foster care home caring for seven (7) adults and a half space for each additional foster care adult thereafter. 
(b)  Child or adult care centers in the R-1, R-2, RM-1 and RM-2 residential districts: 
(1)  Site development requirements: The following requirements for site development shall be complied with: 
a.  Minimum site size: Seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet with sixty (60) feet lot width. For each child not a member of the family in excess of seven (7) children at a time there shall be provided two hundred (200) square feet of lot area in addition to the base figure of seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet. 
b.  Yard requirements and lot coverage shall conform to the provisions of Article XVI, schedule of regulations, as they pertain to the R-1 district. 
c.  A proposed site shall front a major street as said streets are defined by the city engineer's act 51 street systems map. 
d.  Off-street parking: One (1) space for each teacher and other staff member and one (1) space for every five (5) children shall be provided. Parking shall conform to all other provisions of Article XVII, general provisions. 
e.  Signs: As provided in Article XVII, general provisions, for residential units. 
f.  Play areas: There shall be provided on the site a usable outdoor play area at the rate of seventy-five (75) square feet for each child not a member of the family, exclusive of required front yard and side yard, and of driveways and parking areas. The play area shall be no nearer than forty (40) feet to any adjacent residential structure. The outdoor play area shall be suitably fenced and screened to protect the children and to avoid any nuisance to adjoining properties. 
g.  Maximum size: Any facility that is to be operated for more than thirty (30) children shall be subject to the standards in section 38-53(2) for public and private schools. 
h.  Such facilities shall be duly licensed by the state department of social services. 
(c)  Conversion of one-family dwellings: The conversion of one-family dwellings to two-family dwellings shall be permitted when all of the following conditions can be met: 
(1)  Need: It can be demonstrated that larger houses in older residential areas of the city have been or can be converted from one-family to two-family residences in order to extend the economic life of these structures and allow the owners to justify the expenditures for repairs and modernization. 
(2)  Lot size: A conforming lot of eight thousand seven hundred (8,700) square feet is required. 
(3)  The minimum square footage of the structure shall be one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet. 
(4)  The primary unit shall remain the larger one and retain the predominant location in the structure. The accessory unit shall not exceed forty (40) percent the size of the primary unit. 
(5)  Except for a first floor entrance, there shall be no exterior alterations of the structure. 
(6)  Parking: There shall be a minimum of three (3) parking spaces. 
(7)  Either one (1) of the two (2) dwelling units shall be occupied by the owner of the property. 
(8)  To assure a subordinate position of the accessory unit and to encourage flexibility in the event the structure can return to single-family use, there shall be only one (1) utility service meter for gas, electric, and water supply to the structure. 
(9)  The proposal meets the general guidelines for determination of a special use permit outlined in section 38-453. 
(d)  Private clubs, fraternal organizations, lodge halls, union halls: Owing to the location of many R-1 district areas to more intensive land use districts, specifically commercial and industrial uses, and in recognition of large lot parcels in these locations, there may exist particular settings where these parcels could be developed into private clubs, fraternal organizations, or lodge/union halls. In addition to section 38-453 provisions, the following conditions and standards are to be reviewed and applied by the planning commission: 
(1)  Site location principals: 
a.  Any proposed site should be at the edge of a low density residential district abutting commercial districts or uses. 
(b)  A proposed site should front a major street. 
(2)  Site development requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot size shall be forty thousand (4,000) square feet. 
b.  Lot coverage by structures shall not exceed thirty (30) percent. 
c.  All buildings shall be harmonious in appearance with the surrounding residential area. 
d.  To assure adequate setbacks, building height shall be governed by the specification for the churches in section 38-53(1). 
e.  See article XVII, general provisions for requirements governing off-street parking, signs, fencing, and other provisions. 
(e)  Loft apartments in older industrial buildings: The development of an apartment or apartments in the upper stories of older industrial buildings, hereinafter entitled "loft apartments," may be permitted subject to the following specific standards and conditions: 
(1)  Need: It can be demonstrated that the building is an architectural landmark at least fifty (50) years old and an example of a period of style or method of construction significant to the region. Also the building's upper floors are considered functionally obsolete for industrial purposes and would clearly benefit from the development of a loft apartment dwelling or group of dwellings, the benefit being the justification for continued investment and rehabilitation of a historically significant structure. The development of residential living units shall not impair existing, routine legal conforming operations of industrial activity onsite or existing and future uses on neighboring properties. The planning commission and city council shall place a critical emphasis on the evaluation of the short term and long term influence of mixing residential living with industrial district uses. A finding of potential interference or residential complaints or legal standing against industrial uses, such as hours of operation, activity in shipping areas, noise, and the like-referenced areas of conflict specified in the Uniform Building Code shall result in the denial of a special use permit for loft apartments. 
(2)  Location: The structure is located on the boundary of a residential district, said boundary including any residential districts on the opposite side of a street. 
(3)  Square footage: Each apartment shall contain at least one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area, the purpose of said area being the control of lower residential densities in industrial areas and the provision of adequate residential storage area within the unit. The apartment shall contain at least one hundred (100) square feet of floor space dedicated to storage. Each unit shall contain a functional laundry area with hookups for a washer and dryer. 
(4)  Parking: Parking shall comply with section 38-380, off-street parking requirements, and shall be in addition to the loading zone and parking space requirements for the balance of the structure's zoning specifications for parking. 
(5)  Open space: Compliance with section 38-123 is required. 
(6)  Floor area ratio: The provisions of section 38-352(e) shall apply. 
(f)  Group day care home in the R-1, R-2, RM-1 and RM-2 residential districts: 
(1)  Minimum site size shall be seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet. 
(2)  There shall be one (1) off-street parking space for a caregiver not a member of the family. 
(3)  Play areas: There shall be provided on the site a usable outdoor play area of nine hundred (900) square feet, exclusive of required front yard and side yard, and of driveways and parking areas. The minimum setback for the play area shall be the greater of eight (8) feet from the property line of sixteen (16) feet from any adjacent residential structure. The planning commission may increase this setback up to forty (40) feet from property lines based on local conditions. 
(4)  The planning commission may introduce site improvement measures or restricted areas of operation to assure safety and lessening of nuisances as it may relate to the activities of pickup and dropoff of a proposed home's clients. 
(5)  Such facilities shall be duly licensed by the state department of social services. 
(g)  Conversion of school and church buildings to office use in the R-1, R-2, RM-1 and RM-2 residential districts. For those structures with a previous use and with institutional design features for public or private schools and churches, an office use may be permitted when all of the following specific standards and conditions can be met: 
(1)  The building does not have a demonstrated demand for uses permitted by right within the district. In order to encourage at the outset only those principal uses permitted by right in residential areas, demonstration of insufficient demand shall include a one-year period of public sale offering for which no reasonable offer was received. 
(2)  The zoning board of appeals, after public hearing, has determined that the structure and/or parcel is impractical for a conforming use within the residential district. An example of impracticality may include insufficient demand, insufficient parking for a church or school or a combination of architectural or structural limitations. 
(3)  The term "office use" shall be limited to mean the following occupations: 
a.  Executive, administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, or stenographic. 
b.  Offices of doctors, dentists, osteopaths and similar or allied professions, but not including clinics. 
c.  Photographic studios, art galleries, art studios, interior decorating studios and nonprofit museums. 
d.  Uses similar to the above uses. 
(4)  Employee parking shall not be permitted on residential streets. 
(5)  Occupancy and redevelopment of a building shall be limited by the capacity of an onsite parking plan that conforms to section 38-380 and 38-381. Except for the preceding sentence and the sign standards in subsection (6), the office use shall comply with all of the standards within the respective residential district where the special use permit is considered. 
(6)  One (1) wall sign not exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet for each public street frontage and in compliance with the other sign standards for the office service district shall be permitted. Smaller dimensions and other sign controls applied to residential districts in Chapter 26 of the Owosso City Code may be instituted by the special use permit when factors of preservation of neighborhood character are determined. These factors may include nonconforming setback of existing buildings, or the location within an historic district of the city. 
(h)  Conversion of ground floor commercial space to apartment dwellings in the B-4 district. The development of apartment or apartments on the ground floor may be permitted subject to the following specific standards and conditions: 
(1)  A special use permit under this category of use applies only to the lots of Westown fronting Main Street and bordered by State Street, including the now closed portion of State Street north of Main Street, on the west side and Cedar Street on the east side. 
(2)  The apartment space may only occupy twenty-five (25) percent of the gross ground floor area of a structure and must be located at the rearmost portion of that structure. 
(3)  The apartment development must be designed to the extent that an eight-foot wide commercial use corridor from the rear entrance of the structure to the commercial section of the building is preserved. 
(4)  Each apartment must have at least one (1) parking space. 
(5)  In lieu of open space and setback requirements for apartment developments, a project must supply extra storage sufficient for bicycles or exercise equipment at a minimum dimension of twenty-five (25) square feet. 
(6)  The floor plan and relationship of apartment spaces to the surrounding commercial area shall be subject further to the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission in accordance with section 38-390. 
(i)  Commercial recreation operations in upper stories of commercial buildings. The development of commercial recreation operations in the upper stories of commercial buildings may be permitted subject to the following specific standards and conditions: 
(1)  The building does not have any residential or office use at the time of application of special use permit. 
(2)  A determination is made that the use shall not substantially affect the daytime use of the public parking system designed and constructed to service the principal uses of the district. 
(3)  The special use is a subordinate use of the principal use of the building in terms of the space occupied by the special use. 
(4)  The special use business is owned or operated by the principal user of the building. 
(5)  The owner or operator of the special use shall assume responsibility to take whatever legally available measures that are necessary to deter loitering and gathering, during hours of operation of the special use, on the sidewalks that front the building containing the principal use and the adjoining buildings to the end of the city block or within one hundred (100) feet, whichever is the lesser. 
(Ord. No. 424, § 19A2, 6-18-94; Ord. No. 444, § 1, 12-1-86; Ord. No. 445, § 1, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 446, § 1, 12-15-86; Ord. No. 476, § 1, 9-17-90; Ord. No. 477, § 1, (5), (6), 11-19-90; Ord. No. 483, § 1, 7-1-91; Ord. No. 512, § 1, 11-15-93; Ord. No. 533, § 1, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 560, § 1, 12-2-96) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 560, § 1, adopted December 12, 1996, which amended § 38-454 by adding a subsection (j), was repealed by voters May 6, 1997. 
Secs. 38-455-38-475. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Administration. Ch. 2. 

Sec. 38-476. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the building inspector or by such deputies of his or her department as the building inspector may delegate to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 5.105) 
Sec. 38-477. - Duties of building inspector. 
(a)  The building inspector shall have the power to grant zoning compliance and occupancy permits, to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his or her duties in the enforcement of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for the building inspector to approve any plans or issue any permits or certificates of occupancy for any excavation or construction until he or she has inspected such plans in detail and found them to conform with this chapter. 
(b)  Under no circumstances is the building inspector permitted to make changes to this chapter or to vary the terms of this chapter in carrying out his or her duties as building inspector. 
(c)  The building inspector shall record all nonconforming uses existing at the effective date of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of section 38-378. 
(Code 1977, § 5.106) 
Sec. 38-478. - Permits. 
    The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit: 
(1)  Permits not to be issued. No building permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration or use of any building or structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Permits for new use of land. No land heretofore vacant shall hereafter be used or an existing use of land be hereafter changed to a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
(3)  Permits for new use of buildings. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be changed to or occupied by a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
(4)  Permits required. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved or repaired unless a building permit shall have been first issued for such work. The terms "altered" and repaired" shall include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type of construction, type, class or kind of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of egress and ingress, or other changes affecting or regulated by the city building code, housing law, or this chapter except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of the aforesaid features. 
(Code 1977, § 5.107) 
Sec. 38-479. - Certificates. 
    No land, building or part thereof, shall be occupied by or for any use unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such use. The following shall apply in the issuance of any certificate: 
(1)  Certificates not to be issued. No certificates of occupancy shall be issued to the owner of or contractor for any building, structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Certificates required. No building or structure, or parts thereof, which is hereafter erected or altered, shall be occupied or used or the same caused to be done, unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such building or structure. 
(3)  Certificates including zoning. Certificates of occupancy as required by the city building code for new buildings or structures, or parts thereof, or for alterations to or changes of use of existing buildings or structures, shall also constitute certificates of occupancy as required by this chapter. 
(4)  Certificates for existing buildings. Cer- tificates of occupancy shall be issued for existing buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or existing uses of land if, after inspection, it is found that such buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or such use of land, are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Record of certificates. A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved. Two (2) copies thereof shall be delivered to the owner or contractor. 
(6)  Certificates for dwelling accessory buildings. Buildings or structures accessory to dwellings shall not require a separate certificate of occupancy but may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the dwelling when shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same time as such dwellings. 
(7)  Application for certificates. Application for certificates of occupancy shall be made in writing to the building inspector on forms furnished by that department, and such certificates shall be issued within ten (10) days after receipt of such application if it is found that the building or structure, or part thereof, or the use of land is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant therefor shall be notified of such refusal and cause thereof, within the aforesaid ten-day period. 
(Code 1977, § 5.108) 
Sec. 38-480. - Final inspection. 
    The holder of every building permit for the construction, erection, alteration, repair or moving of any building, structure or part thereof, shall notify the building inspector immediately upon the completion of the work authorized by such permit, for a final inspection. 
(Code 1977, § 5.109) 
Secs. 38-481-38-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - BOARD OF APPEALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions generally, § 2-216 et seq. 
State Law reference- Board of appeals, MCL 125.585, MSA 5-2935. 

Sec. 38-501. - Creation and membership. 
(a)  Establishment. There is hereby established a city zoning board of appeals in accordance with Act No. 110 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2006 (MCL 125.3101 et seq., as amended. The board of appeals shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided by section 603 of the Act, as amended, and in such a way that the objectives of this chapter may be equitably achieved; that there shall be provided a means for competent interpretation and controlled flexibility in the application of this chapter; that the health, safety and welfare of the public be secured, and that substantial justice be secured. 
(b)  Membership, terms of office. The board shall consist of five (5) members: One (1) member being a member of the planning commission; the remaining regular members and any alternate members shall be selected from the electors of the city residing within the city who shall be representative of the population distribution and of the various interests present in the local unit of government. One regular member may be a member of the city council but shall not serve as chairman of the zoning board of appeals. An employee or contractor of the city may not serve as member of the zoning board of appeals. As used in this subsection "contractor" means any individual that is a party, directly or indirectly, through an entity in which he or she has an ownership interest to an agreement with the city, wherein that individual or entity provides goods or services to the city. Except for the planning commissioner or council appointments that are not term limited. Appointments for the first year to be made for a period of one (1), two (2), and three (3) years respectively, two (2) of which shall be appointed for three (3) years, so as nearly as may be to provide for the appointment of an equal number each year, thereafter each member to hold office for the full three-year term. Two (2) alternate members shall be appointed. Appointments for the first year are to be made for two (2) and three (3) years respectively, thereafter each alternate to hold office for the full three-year term. A successor shall be appointed not more than one (1) month after the term of the preceding member has expired. The alternate members may sit as regular members of the board of appeals in the absence of a regular member if a regular member is absent from or unable to attend one (1) or more meetings of the board of appeals or for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days. An alternate member may also be called to serve in the place of a regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. The alternate member having been selected shall serve in the case until a final decision has been made. The alternate member shall have the same voting rights as a regular member of the board of appeals. All members of the board shall serve without compensation. Board vacancies shall be filled by council appointment for the unexpired terms remaining. The board shall annually elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary. Members of the board of appeals shall be removable by the council for nonfeasance, malfeasance and misfeasance in office upon written charges and after public hearing. 
(c)  Training for board of appeals members. It shall be the duty of the building inspector to carefully review with each new member of the board of appeals the provisions of this chapter, most importantly the provisions of article XXI as they regard the duties, powers and scope of responsibility that each board member will assume while a member of the board of appeals. Furthermore, once each year the city building inspector may, at the board's request, review with the entire board of appeals their duties, powers, scope of responsibilities and the procedures and policies set forth for the board of appeals in the chapter. 
(Ord. No. 437, § 5.110, 9-16-85; Ord. No. 680, § 1, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 38-502. - Organization and procedures. 
(a)  Rules of procedure. The board of appeals shall adopt its own rules of procedure as may be necessary to conduct its meetings and carry out its function. The board shall choose its own chairperson, and in his or her absence, an acting chairperson. The rules of procedure shall contain compliance requirements consistent with section 601 PA 110 of 2006 as amended and that is a member must disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest. Failure of a member to disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest constitutes malfeasance in office. 
(b)  Meetings . Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such times as the board of appeals may determine. All meetings by the board shall be open to the public. The board may declare any meeting, or part of any meeting, a study meeting to pursue matters of business without comment or interruption from the public in attendance. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained as required by this act shall be made available to the public in compliance with the freedom of information act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246. 
State Law reference- Open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
(c)  Records. Minutes shall be recorded of all proceedings which shall contain the evidence received, the findings of fact and data relevant to every case considered, together with the votes of the members and the final disposition of each case. Such minutes shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be made available to the general public. 
(d)  Counsel. The city attorney shall act as legal counsel for the board and shall be present at all meetings upon request of the board. 
(e)  Hearings and notice. The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the public hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to all persons to whom any real property within three hundred (300) feet of the premises in question is assessed, and to the occupants of all single- and two-family dwellings within three hundred (300) feet regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction, such notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation and to be delivered personally or by mail addressed to the respective owners at the address given in the last assessment roll at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the public hearing and shall decide the same within a reasonable time. If the tenant's name is not known, the term "occupant" may be issued. The board may require any party applying to the board for relief to give such notice to other interested parties as it shall prescribe. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The board of appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and shall make such order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises and to that end shall have all powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, the board of appeals may in passing upon appeals vary or modify any of its rules, regulations or provisions relating to the construction, or structural changes in equipment, or alteration of buildings or structures, or the use of land, buildings, or structures, so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The board may recess such hearing from time to time and, if the time and place of the continued hearing is publicly announced at the time of adjournment of the board hearing, no further notice shall be required. 
(f)  Decisions. The board of appeals shall return a decision on a case within sixty (60) days after a request or appeal has been filed, unless a further time is agreed upon with the parties concerned. Any decision of the board shall not become final until expiration thereof five (5) days from the date of entry of such order, unless the board shall find the immediate effect of such order is necessary for the preservation of property or personal rights and shall so certify on the record. 
(g)  Quorum and vote. The presence of three (3) members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum. A vote of a majority vote of the full board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the city building official or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which they are required to pass under this chapter or to effect any variation in this chapter. 
(h)  Reports to council. At intervals of not greater than one (1) year, the board of appeals shall, by written report to the council, list all applications and appeals made to it since its last report, and shall summarize its decisions on such applications and appeals. 
(Ord. No. 437, § 5.111, 9-16-85; Ord. No. 549, § 1, 12-4-95; Ord. No. 680, § 1, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 38-503. - Appeals. 
(a)  Filing of appeals. Appeals to the board of appeals may be made by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city. Any appeal from the ruling of the building inspector concerning the enforcement of the provisions of the chapter shall be made to the board of appeals within ten (10) days after the date of the notice of the building inspector's decision. Such appeal shall be filed with the secretary of the board of appeals and with the city building inspector, and shall specify the grounds for the appeal. The city building inspector shall immediately transmit to the secretary of the board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(b)  Stay. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the city building inspector certifies to the board of appeals after notice of appeal has been filed with her/him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the inspector's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order, which may granted by the board of appeals, or, on application, by court of record. 
(c)  Fees. A fee, as established by the city council, shall be paid to the City at the time the petitioner files an application with the board. The purpose of such fee is to cover, in part, the necessary advertisements, investigations, hearing records and other expenses incurred by the board in connection with the appeal. No fee shall be charged if the city or any official body of the city is the moving party. 
(d)  Review by circuit court. Any party aggrieved by any order, determination or decision of any officer, agency, board, commission, board of appeals or the council which has acted pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 110 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2006, as amended, and Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq.), as amended may obtain a review thereof both on the facts and the law, in the circuit court of the county; provided, that application is made to the court within thirty (30) days after the board of appeals certifies its decision in writing or approves the minutes of the decision; and further provided, that all other means of local appeal and review as provided in this chapter have first been exhausted. The circuit court shall review the record and decision of the board of appeals to ensure that the decision: 
(1)  Complies with the constitution and laws of the state; 
(2)  Is based upon proper procedure; 
(3)  Is supported by competent, material, and substantial evidence on the record; 
(4)  Represents the reasonable exercise of discretion granted by law to the board of appeals. 
If the circuit court finds the record of the board of appeals inadequate to make the review required by this section, or that there is additional evidence which is material and with good reason was not presented to the board of appeals on conditions which the court considers proper, the board of appeals may modify its findings and decision as a result of the new proceedings, or may affirm its original decision. The supplementary record and decisions shall be filed with the courts. As a result of this review the circuit may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 437, § 5.112, 9-16-85; Ord. No. 680, § 1, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 38-504. - Duties and powers. 
    The city zoning board of appeals shall not have the power to alter or change the zoning district classification of any property, nor to make any change in the terms or intent of this chapter, but does have power to act on those matters where this chapter provides for an administrative review, interpretation, variance, exception, or special approval permit as defined in this section: 
(1)  Review. The board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision or refusal made by the city building inspector or by any other official in administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Interpretation. The board shall have the power to: 
a.  Interpret, upon request, the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter; 
b.  Determine the precise location of the boundary lines between zoning districts; 
c.  Classify a use which is not specifically mentioned as part of the use regulations of any zoning district so that it conforms to a comparable permitted or prohibited use, in accordance with the purpose and intent of each district; 
d.  Determine the off-street parking and loading space requirements of any use not specifically mentioned in section 38-380, 38-381 or 38-382; 
e.  Permit, after recommendation from the planning commission, less than three (3) attached units in the R-T district as outlined in section 38-98; 
f.  Authorize a change to another nonconforming use as provided in section 38-378(e)(3); 
g.  Authorize selected accessory buildings, provisions outlined in section 38-379(5) and (7). 
(3)  Variances. The board shall have the power to authorize, upon appeal, specific variances from such requirements as lot area and width regulations, building height and bulk regulations, yard and depth regulations, signs and off-street parking and loading space requirements, provided all of the basic conditions listed herein and any one (1) of the special conditions listed thereafter can be satisfied. 
a.  Basic conditions. In order to qualify for a variance, the applicant must show that a variance: 
1.  Will not be contrary to the public interest or to the intent and purpose of this chapter; 
2.  Shall not permit the establishment within a district of any use which is not permitted by right within that zone district, or any use or dimensional variance for which a conditional use permit or a temporary use permit is required; 
3.  Is one that is unique and not shared with other property owners; 
4.  Will relate only to property that is under control of the applicant; 
5.  Is applicable whether compliance with the strict letter of the restrictions governing area, set backs, frontage, height, bulk or density would unreasonably prevent the owner from using the property for a permitted purpose or would render conformity with such restrictions unnecessarily burdensome; 
6.  Was not created by action of the applicant (i.e. that it was not self-created); 
7.  Will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property or unreasonably increase the congestion of public streets or increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety; 
8.  Will not cause a substantial adverse effect upon property values in the immediate vicinity or in the district in which the property of the applicant is located; 
9.  Is applicable whether a grant of the variance applied for would do substantial justice to the applicant as well as to other property owners in the area, or whether a lesser relaxation than that applied for would give substantial relief to the owner of the property involved and be more consistent with justice to other property owners. 
b.  Special conditions. When all of the foregoing basic conditions can be satisfied, a variance may be granted when any one (1) of the following special conditions can be clearly demonstrated: 
1.  Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships which prevent carrying out the strict letter of this chapter. These hardships or difficulties shall not be deemed economic, but shall be evaluated in terms of the use of a particular parcel of land; 
2.  Where there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or physical conditions such as narrowness, shallowness, shape, or topography of the property involved, or to the intended use of the property, that do not generally apply to other property or uses in the same zoning district; 
3.  Where such variation is necessary for the preservation of a substantial property right possessed by other properties in the same zoning district. 
c.  Rules. The following rules shall be applied in the granting of variances: 
1.  The board may specify, in writing, such conditions regarding the character, location, and other features that will, in its judgement, secure the objectives and purposes of this chapter. The breach of any such condition shall automatically invalidate the permit granted. 
2.  Each variance granted under the provisions of this chapter shall become null and void unless: 
i.  The construction authorized by such variance or permit has been commenced within six (6) months after the granting of the variance and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of the variance; 
ii.  The occupancy of land, premises, or buildings authorized by the variance has taken place within one (1) year after the granting of the variance. 
3.  No application for a variance which has been denied wholly or in part by the board shall be resubmitted for a period of one (1) year from the date of the last denial, except on the grounds of newly-discovered evidence or proof of changed conditions found upon inspection by the board to be valid. 
4.  In granting or denying a variance the board shall state the findings of fact upon which it justifies the action. 
(4)  Special exceptions. When, in its judgment, the public welfare will be served and the use of neighboring property will not be injured thereby, the board may, in a specific case, after due notice and public hearing and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, determine and vary the application of the regulations of this chapter in harmony with the general character of the district and the intent and purposes of this chapter. The granting of a special exception shall in no way constitute a change in the basic uses permitted in the district affected nor on the property wherein the exception is permitted. The board may issue either temporary or conditional permits as special exceptions for the following land and structure uses: 
a.  Reserved. 
b.  Conditional permits. When conditions exist that are unique to a particular situation, a conditional permit may be issued with specific limitations imposed by the board. The land or structure may be permitted to be established and to continue in use as long as the conditions unique to the use exist. The permit issued shall contain all the specified conditions under which continued use may be allowed. Conditional permits may be issued for the following uses: 
1.  Permit more than two (2) roomers in any one (1) dwelling, but not more than four (4), when it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the board that such an expanded capacity is a clear necessity for satisfaction of this particular housing demand; that adequate off-street parking space can be provided in accordance with standards stated in section 38-380; and that such use will not injure the character or value of the immediate neighborhood. 
2.  The board may authorize a reduction, modification, or waiver of any of the off-street parking or off-street loading regulations in section 38-380, 38-381 or 38-382, when it can be demonstrated that circumstances of extreme practical difficulty exist that would unquestionably result in hardship to the applicant when a literal interpretation of the regulations is required. Hardship shall not be deemed economic, but shall be evaluated in terms of the use of a particular parcel of land. A hardship that is a result of any action of the applicant shall not be considered by the board. Under all these circumstances, in no case shall the off-street parking or off-street loading standards be reduced by more than twenty-five (25) percent. 
3.  Joint use of off-street parking areas may be authorized by the board when the capacities outlined in section 38-380 are complied with and when a copy of an agreement between joint users shall be filed with the application for a building permit and is recorded with the county register of deeds, guaranteeing continued use of the parking facilities for each party. 
4.  Permit modification of wall requirements, as outlined in Article XVIII, section 38-387, only when such modification will not adversely affect or be detrimental to surrounding or adjacent development. 
5.  Permit, upon proper application, the following character of temporary use, not otherwise permitted in any district, not to exceed twelve (12) months with the granting of twelve-month extensions being permissible: Uses which do not require the erection of any capital improvement of a structural nature. 
 The board of appeals, in granting permits for the above temporary uses, shall do so under the following conditions: 
i.  The granting of the temporary use shall in no way constitute a change in the basic uses permitted in the district nor on the property wherein the temporary use is permitted. 
ii.  The granting of the temporary use shall be granted in writing, stipulating all conditions as to time, nature of development permitted and arrangements for removing the use at the termination of said temporary permit. 
iii.  All setbacks, land coverage, off-street parking, lighting and other requirements to be considered in protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city, shall be made at the discretion of the board of appeals. 
iv.  In classifying uses as not requiring capital improvement, the board of appeals shall determine that they are either demountable structures related to the permitted use of the land; recreation developments, such as, but not limited to: golf-driving ranges and outdoor archery courts; or structures which do not require foundations, heating systems or sanitary connections. 
v.  The use shall be in harmony with the general character of the district. 
vi.  No temporary use permit shall be granted without first giving notice to owners of adjacent property of the time and place of a public hearing to be held as further provided for in this chapter. Further, the board of appeals shall seek the review and recommendation of the planning commission prior to the taking of any action. 
(5)  Findings of adverse impact on historical resources. Prior to any action taken by the board for any of the aforementioned duties and powers, a consideration of adverse impact described in section 38-32(e)(1) shall be applied to a matter as a basis for denial or alteration of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 437, § 5.113, 9-16-85; Ord. No. 448, §§ 1, 2, 2-16-87; Ord. No. 499, 2-16-93; Ord. No. 590, § 1, 10-18-99; Ord. No. 744, § 2, 8-19-13) 
Sec. 38-505. - Essential services. 
    The board of appeals shall have the power to permit the erection and use of a building, or an addition to an existing building, or a public service corporation or for public utility purposes, in any permitted district to a greater height or of larger area than the district requirements herein established, and permit the location in any use district of a public utility building, structure, or use if the board shall find such use, height, area, building, or structure reasonably necessary for the public convenience and service. 
(Ord. No. 437, § 5.114, 9-16-85) 
Sec. 38-506. - Bond for compliance. 
    In authorizing any variance, or in granting any conditional, temporary or special approval permits, the city board of appeals may require that a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond acceptable to the city covering the estimated cost of improvements associated with a project for which zoning approval is sought, be deposited with the city clerk to insure faithful completion of the improvements. The performance guarantee shall be deposited at the time of the issuance of the permit authorizing the activity or project. The city board of appeals may not require the deposit of the performance guarantee before the date on which the permit is to be issued. The city board of appeals shall establish procedures under which a rebate of any cash deposit in reasonable proportions to the ratio of work completed on the required improvements will be made as work progresses. 
(Ord. No. 437, § 5.115, 9-16-85) 
Secs. 38-507-38-525. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXII. - PLANNING COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions generally, § 2-216 et seq.; city planning commission generally, § 23-16 et seq. 

Sec. 38-526. - Establishment, membership, terms. 
    The city planning commission is hereby designated as the commission specified in section 301 of Act No. 110 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2006 (MCL 125.3301) as amended and shall perform the zoning duties of the commission as provided in the statute. 
(Code 1977, § 5.119; Ord. No. 694, § 1, 3-3-08) 
Sec. 38-527. - Approval of certain uses. 
    In cases where the city planning commission is empowered to approve certain uses of premises under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant shall furnish such surveys, plans or other information as may be reasonably required by the commission for the proper consideration of the matter. 
    The planning commission shall investigate the circumstances of each such case and shall notify such parties, who may in its opinion be affected thereby, of the time and place of any hearing which may be held relative thereto as required under its rules of procedure. 
    The planning commission may impose such conditions or limitations in granting approval as may in its judgment be necessary to fulfill the spirit and purpose of this chapter. 
    Any approval given by the planning commission, under which premises are not used or work is not started within six (6) months or when such use or work has been abandoned for a period of six (6) months, shall lapse and cease to be in effect. 
(Code 1977, § 5.120) 
Secs. 38-528-38-550. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 732, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 21, 2012, repealed the former Art. XXIII, §§ 38-551-38-555 and enacted a new Art. XXIII as set out herein. The former Art. XXIII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1977 Code, §§ 5.121-5.124; and Ord. No. 586, § 1, adopted June 21, 1999. 
State Law reference- Enactment of ordinances, MCL 125.584. 

Sec. 38-551. - Initiation of amendments. 
    The city council may, from time to time, amend, modify, supplement, or revise the zoning district boundaries shown on the official zoning map or the provisions of this article. Amendments to the provisions of this article may be initiated by the city council, the planning commission, the zoning board of appeals, the zoning administrator or by petition of one (1) or more residents or land owners. 
    Amendments to the official zoning map may be initiated by the city council, the planning commission, or by the owner or owners of the subject site. All proposed amendments to the provisions of this article or the official zoning map shall be referred to the planning commission for public hearing and recommendation to the city council before to action by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2, 5-21-12) 
Sec. 38-552. - Application procedure. 
    An amendment to this article or the official zoning map, except those initiated by the city, shall be initiated by submission of a completed application form and fee. The following information shall accompany the application form: 
(1)  A legal description and street address of the subject property, with a map identifying the subject property in relation to surrounding properties. 
(2)  The name and address of the owner of the subject site, and a statement of the applicant's interest in the subject site if not the owner in fee simple title. 
(3)  The existing and proposed zoning district designation of the subject property. 
(4)  The land use classification for the subject site as illustrated on the city's master plan. 
(5)  For of an amendment to this article, other than an amendment to the official zoning map, a general description of the proposed amendment and rationale for the change shall accompany the application form. 
(6)  A written description of how the requested rezoning meets the amendment criteria of this article. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2, 5-21-12) 
Sec. 38-553. - Amendment procedure; public hearing and notice. 
(1)  Public hearing. Upon initiation of an amendment, a work session and public hearing to consider the proposed amendment shall be scheduled before the planning commission. If an individual property or ten (10) or fewer adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, written notice of the public hearing shall be made as follows: 
a.  The notice shall do all of the following: 
1.  Describe the nature of the request. 
2.  Identify the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used. Individual addresses are not required for an amendment to the zoning ordinance, or the zoning map that affects eleven (11) or more properties. 
3.  State when and where the request will be considered. 
4.  State when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
b.  The notice shall be published and delivered not less than fifteen (15) days before the date of the public hearing as follows: 
1.  Notice of the request shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. This shall be the only notice required for an amendment to the zoning ordinance, or the zoning map that affects eleven (11) or more properties or an interpretation by the zoning board of appeals. 
2.  Where approval is being sought under this ordinance for an individual property or a rezoning affecting ten (10) or fewer properties, notice shall also be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered. 
3.  In addition to paragraph 2. above, notice shall be sent to all persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred (300) feet of the property and to the occupants of all structures within three hundred (300) feet of the property regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification under this subsection. 
c.  If eleven (11) or more properties are proposed for rezoning, or if an amendment is proposed to the text of the ordinance, the city shall give a notice of the proposed rezoning in the same manner as required under subsection (1), except for the individual property notices required by subsections (1)b.2., and (1)b.3., and except that no individual addresses of properties are required to be listed under subsection (1)a.2. 
(2)  Planning commission findings and recommendation. Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall identify and evaluate all factors relevant to the petition and shall report its findings and recommendation to the city council. The planning commission shall consider the criteria listed in section 38-555 for a requested amendment to the official zoning map, and the criteria listed in section 38-556 for requested amendments to the standards and regulations in the text. 
(3)  City council findings and action. Following receipt of the findings and recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall act on the proposed amendment. For a text amendment to this article, the city council may modify or revise the proposed amendment recommended by the planning commission before enactment. For an amendment to the official zoning map, the city council shall approve or deny the amendment, based on the criteria in section 38-355 or 38-356 as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2, 5-21-12) 
Sec. 38-554. - Required amendments to comply with a court decree. 
    Any amendment complying with a decree of a court of competent jurisdiction shall be adopted by the city council and published, without necessity of a public hearing or referral hereof to any other board or agency. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2, 5-21-12) 
Sec. 38-555. - Criteria for amendment of the official zoning map. 
    In considering any petition for an amendment to the official zoning map, the planning commission and city council shall consider the following criteria in making its findings, recommendations and decision: 
(1)  Consistency with the goals, policies, and future land use map of the City of Owosso Master Plan. If conditions upon which the master plan was developed (such as market factors, demographics, infrastructure, traffic and environmental issues) have changed significantly since the master plan was adopted, as determined by the city, the planning commission and council shall consider the consistency with recent development trends in the area. 
(2)  Compatibility of the site's physical, geological, hydrological, and other environmental features with the host of uses permitted in the proposed zoning district. 
(3)  Evidence the applicant cannot receive a reasonable return on investment through developing the property with at least one (1) use permitted under the current zoning. 
(4)  The compatibility of all the potential uses allowed in the proposed zoning district with surrounding uses and zoning in terms of land suitability, impacts on the environment, density, nature of use, traffic impacts, aesthetics, infrastructure and potential influence on property values. 
(5)  The capacity of the city's infrastructure and services sufficient to accommodate the uses permitted in the requested district without compromising the "health, safety, and welfare." 
(6)  The apparent demand for the types of uses permitted in the requested zoning district in relation to the amount of land currently zoned and available to accommodate the demand. 
(7)  The request has not previously been submitted within the past one (1) year, unless conditions have changed or new information has been provided. 
(8)  Other factors deemed appropriate by the planning commission and city council. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2, 5-21-12) 
Sec. 38-556. - Criteria for amendment to the zoning ordinance text. 
    The planning commission and city council shall consider the following criteria to determine the appropriateness of amending the text, standards and regulations of the zoning ordinance: 
(1)  Documentation has been provided from city staff, or the zoning board of appeals indicating problems and conflicts in implementation of specific sections of the ordinance. 
(2)  Reference materials, planning and zoning publication, information gained at seminars or experiences of other communities that demonstrate improved techniques to deal with certain zoning issues, or that the city's standards are outdated. 
(3)  The city attorney recommends an amendment to respond to significant case law. 
(4)  The amendment would promote implementation of the goals and objectives of the city's master plan. 
(5)  Other factors deemed appropriate by the planning commission and city council. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2, 5-21-12) 
Sec. 38-557. - Restrictions on resubmitting a rezoning request. 
    An application for an amendment to the official zoning that has been denied shall not be reconsidered for one (1) year, unless the applicant demonstrates that conditions have changed. 
(Ord. No. 732, § 2, 5-21-12) 
Secs. 38-558-38-575. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIV. - ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND OTHER REMEDIES 

Sec. 38-576. - Violations. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties of section 1-8. 
(Code 1977, § 5.130) 
Sec. 38-577. - Public nuisance per se. 
    Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted, or any use of premises or land which is begun or changed subsequent to the time of passage of this chapter and in violation of any of the provisions thereof is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1977, § 5.131) 
Sec. 38-578. - Fines, imprisonment. 
    The owner of any building, structure or premises or part thereof, where any condition in violation of this chapter shall exist or shall be created, and who has assisted knowingly in the commission of such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be liable to the fines and imprisonment herein provided. 
(Code 1977, § 5.132) 
Sec. 38-579. - Rights and remedies are cumulative. 
    The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Code 1977, § 5.134) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1977 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1977 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1977 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1977 Code 
Section Section 
this Code 1.2 1-4 1.5, 1.6 1-1, 1-2 1.7 19-2 1.8-1.10 1-2 1.11 1-9 19-26 1.13 1-7 1.31 2-51 1.40 2-53 1.41 2-101 1.43 2-102 1.51-1.53 2-116-2-118 1.61 2-136, 2-137 1.66, 1.67 2-151, 2-152 1.71 2-166, 2-167 1.91 2-196, 2-197 1.101-1.107 2-76-2-82 1.122-1.126 2-251-2-255 1.127 2-257 1.128 2-256 1.131-1.136 2-286-2-291 1.141 2-292 1.142, 1.143 2-258 1.144-1.147 2-259 1.151-1.157 2-260 1.161-1.163 2-261 1.164-1.166 2-262 1.167 2-263 1.171 2-264 1.172-1.179 2-265 1.180-1.182 2-266-2-268 1.201-1.203 15-16-15-18 1.204, 1.205 15-1, 15-2 1.221-1.248 28-1-28-28 1.261 2-341, 2-342 1.262-1.266 2-343-2-347 1.281 12-1 1.282 12-3 1.285 12-2 1.290-1.292 12-5 1.295, 1.296 12-6 1.300-1.305 12-8 1.310, 1.311 12-7 1.315, 1.316 12-9 1.320 12-10 1.325, 1.326 12-11 1.330-1.333 12-12 1.335 12-13 1.340 12-14 1.351 2-226 1.352 2-228, 2-229 1.353 2-227 1.354 2-231 1.355 2-230 1.356-1.358 2-232-2-234 2.1 34-16 2.2-2.8 34-42-34-48 2.9(1) 34-31 2.9(2) 34-32 34-41 2.9(3)-2.9(8) 34-33-34-38 2.9(10) 34-39, 34-40 2.21-2.37 34-66-34-82 2.91-2.96 34-246-34-251 2.97, 2.98 34-252 3.1 21-5, 21-6 3.2 21-2 3.4 21-3 3.5 21-1 3.6 21-4 3.7-3.9 21-7 3.31 35-1 3.31(7) 35-2 3.32 35-3 3.33-3.39 35-5-35-11 3.40-3.43 35-31-35-34 3.44, 3.45 35-12, 35-13 3.46 35-4 4.1, 4.2 29-21, 29-22 4.3 29-46-29-53 4.4-4.9 29-23-29-28 4.10-4.12 29-29 4.13 29-30 4.16 29-66 29-68, 29-69 4.18 29-70 4.19 29-67 4.24, 4.25 29-86, 29-87 4.28, 4.29 29-101, 29-102 4.35 29-116-29-119 4.41-4.43 29-136-29-138 4.46-4.48 29-151-29-153 4.51-4.54 29-166-29-169 4.61 29-186 4.62 29-187 29-206, 29-207 4.63 29-188 4.64 29-187 4.65 29-208 4.66-4.69 29-189-29-192 4.75, 4.76 29-226, 29-227 5.00, 5.01 38-1, 38-2 5.1 38-31 5.02 38-3 5.2 38-51 5.03 38-4 5.3 38-52 5.04 38-5 5.4 38-53 5.05 38-26 5.5 38-55 5.06 38-27 5.6 38-56 5.07 38-28 5.7 38-71 5.08 38-29 5.8 38-72 5.09 38-30 5.9, 5.10 38-73, 38-74 5.11-5.16 38-96-38-101 5.17-5.20 38-121-38-124 5.21, 5.22 38-126, 38-127 5.23-5.27 38-146-38-150 5.28-5.33 38-171-38-176 5.34-5.39 38-196-38-201 5.40-5.45 38-216-38-221 5.46-5.51 38-241-38-246 5.52-5.56 38-266-38-270 5.57-5.61 38-291-38-295 5.62-5.65 38-311-38-314 5.66-5.70 38-331-38-335 5.71, 5.72 38-351, 38-352 5.74, 5.75 38-353, 38-354 5.76-5.92 38-376-38-392 5.93-5.103 38-411-38-421 5.105-5.109 38-476-38-480 5.119, 5.120 38-526, 38-527 5.121-5.124 38-551-38-554 5.125 38-6 5.127 38-7 5.130, 5.131 38-576, 38-577 5.132 38-478 5.134 38-479 5.181 17-16 5.181(1) 17-18 5.181(2), 5.181(3) 17-20, 17-21 5.181(4) 17-19 5.181(5) 17-22 5.202 23-17 5.241, 5.242 30-1, 30-2 5.243-5.256 30-21-30-34 5.261-5.264 30-35-30-38 5.265-5.267 30-56-30-58 5.268, 5.269 30-3, 30-4 5.291, 5.292 11-31, 11-32 5.293 11-16 7.1-7.5 16-2-16-6 7.6, 7.7 16-8, 16-9 7.9, 7.10 16-10, 16-11 7.11-7.17 16-13-16-19 7.18 16-1 7.19-7.24 16-20-16-25 7.31, 7.32 16-7 7.36 25-96 7.51 6-21 6-23 7.52 6-22 7.53 6-3 7.54, 7.55 6-2, 6-3 7.56 6-1 7.71 22-16 7.72 22-36 22-39 7.73-7.76 22-17-22-20 7.77 22-37 7.81 22-16 7.82 22-36 22-39 7.83 22-38 7.84 22-40 7.85 22-37 7.91 22-76, 22-77 7.92 22-56 7.93-7.95 22-79-22-81 7.95(2)-7.95(4) 22-58-22-60 7.95(5) 22-82 7.96 22-78 7.97 22-57 7.111 25-41-25-48 7.112 25-16-25-20 25-41-25-48 7.121 25-66-25-77 25-91-25-97 7.151 36-96 7.152-7.155 36-111-36-114 7.156 36-118 7.157-7.159 36-115-36-117 7.171 36-16 7.172 36-47 36-55 7.173 36-48 7.174, 7.175 36-53, 36-54 7.176 36-52 7.177-7.179 36-49-36-51 7.180 36-17 7.181 36-71-36-75 36-77, 36-78 7.182 36-76 7.183 36-79 7.184, 7.185 36-18, 36-19 7.186 36-27 7.187 36-20 7.187(1)-7.187(3) 36-21-36-23 7.187(4)-7.187(6) 36-24-36-26 7.187(7), 7.187(8) 36-28, 36-29 7.187(9), 7.187(10) 36-30 7.187(11) 36-31 7.189(3) 36-23 7.201-7.203 4-96-4-98 7.215 9-16 7.221 4-16 7.222 4-31-4-33 7.223 4-17 7.231 4-116 7.232 4-131-4-133 7.233 4-117 7.235 4-118 7.241 4-66, 4-67 7.271, 7.272 9-1, 9-2 7.273 9-3 9-14 7.274-7.281 9-4-9-11 7.282 9-12, 9-13 7.284 9-15 7.286-7.288 9-17-9-19 7.301, 7.302 20-1, 20-2 7.303-7.309 20-21-20-27 7.310 20-29 7.311 20-28 7.312 20-3 8.2-8.4 8-16-8-18 8.21, 8.22 31-1, 31-2 8.23-8.33 31-4-31-14 8.34 31-3 8.51-8.132 26-1 8.202-8.207 38-393 8.301-8.304 27-1-27-4 8.304(4) 27-34 8.305 27-33 8.305(1), 8.305(2) 27-31, 27-32 8.306-8.310 27-35-27-39 8.311-8.314 27-5-27-8 8.315(1) 27-40 8.315(2) 27-9 8.316, 8.317 27-10, 27-11 9.1-9.3 18-1-18-3 9.11-9.14 18-26-18-29 9.31-9.42 18-46-18-57 9.43, 9.44 18-58 9.45-9.51 18-59-18-65 9.52, 9.53 18-66 9.61, 9.62 18-86 9.62(1)-9.62(10) 18-88-18-97 9.63 18-87 9.71 18-121, 18-122 9.72-9.75 18-123-18-126 9.91, 9.92 19-126 9.121-9.126 5-1-5-6 9.141 5-26 9.142(1)-9.142(4) 5-27 9.142(5) 5-28 9.143 5-29 9.144-9.146 5-30 9.147, 9.148 5-31, 5-32 9.161 19-1 9.162(1) 19-46 9.162(2) 19-109 9.162(3) 19-107 9.162(4) 19-129 9.162(5) 19-127 9.162(6) 19-66 9.162(7) 19-3 9.162(10) 19-4 9.162(11) 19-108 9.162(13), 9.162(14) 19-61, 19-62 9.162(15) 19-52 9.162(16), 9.162(17) 19-86, 19-87 9.162(18) 19-85 9.162(19) 19-53 9.162(20) 19-84 9.162(21) 19-81 9.162(22) 19-88 9.162(23) 19-27 9.162(25) 19-63 9.162(26) 19-65 9.162(27) 19-5 9.162(28), 9.162(29) 19-130, 19-131 9.163 19-106 9.164 19-128 9.165-1 19-146 9.165-3 19-147 9.165-5 19-148 9.165-8 19-149 9.171-9.175 3-1-3-5 9.175A, 9.175B 3-6, 3-7 9.176-9.179 3-8-3-11 9.180(5) 3-12 9.191-9.195 37-1-37-5 9.196 37-26-37-28 9.212, 9.213 13-2, 13-3 9.218 13-14 9.219-9.221 13-5-13-7 9.223 13-36, 13-37 9.224 19-127 9.291 10-27 9.292 10-29 9.293-9.296 10-27 9.297 10-31 9.298, 9.299 10-28 10.1, 10.2 33-16, 33-17 10.4 33-18 10.22 33-18 10.23-10.30 33-81-33-88 10.32 33-66 10.53-10.55 33-106-33-108 10.61, 10.62 33-126, 33-127 10.71-10.76 33-46-33-51  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of ordinances adopted since the 1977 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1977 Code. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Code 354 11- 5-79 1 33-51 356  3- 3-80 1(2.9(3)) 34-49, 34-50 1(2.9(8)) 34-33 1(2.9(11)), 1(2.9(12)) 34-38 357  3-17-80 1, 2 8-116 3 8-117 358  5-16-80 2-8 32-36-32-42 363 10- 6-80 2.92 34-247 2.94, 2.95 34-249, 34-250 2.98 34-253 365 12-15-80 1 38-53 369  3-16-81 1 36-46, 36-47 36-55 3 36-17 370  3-16-81 1 9-1 2 9-5 3, 4 9-15, 9-16 371  3-16-81 1 29-66 29-69 372  3-16-81 1(5601)-1(5603) 8-36-8-38 1(5604(a)), 1(5604(b)) 8-58, 8-59 1(5605) 8-67 1(5606) 8-56 1(5607) 8-61 1(5608) 8-60 1(5609)-1(5612) 8-62-8-65 1(5613) 8-57 1(5614) 8-68 1(5615) 8-66 1(5616), 1(5617) 8-69, 8-70 1(5618), 1(5619) 8-86, 8-87 1(5620) 8-39 1(5621) 8-88, 8-89 1(5622) 8-40 373  4- 6-81 9.401, 9.402 19-110 374  4-20-81 I 34-81 377  6- 1-81 10-1 33-16 10-4 33-18 381  9-21-81 1 2-343 386  1-18-82 1-3 24-1-24-3 387  1-18-82 1.2-1.4 14-2-14-4 2.0 14-1 3.1-3.6 14-5-14-10 4.1-4.3 14-26-14-28 4.3-2-4.3-5 14-29-14-32 4.4-1, 4.4-2 14-33, 14-34 5.1-5.3 14-48-14-50 389  4-19-82 1 32-41 392  7- 6-82 1(9.54) 18-67 395  8-16-82 1 38-268 397  9-20-82 1 13-14 398 10- 4-82 1-3 2-326-2-328 400  1- 4-83 1 38-380 401  1- 4-83 1 33-18 403  2-21-83 1 34-70 405  2-21-83 1 13-36, 13-37 406  2-21-83 1 8-16 407  2-21-83 1 8-141 4 8-142 404  3-14-83 1(7.242) 4-151 4-171 1(7.243) 4-152 1(7.245)-1(7.247) 4-172-4-174 1(7.248) 4-175, 4-176 1(7.249)-1(7.251) 4-177-4-179 1(7.252(a)) 4-153 1(7.252(b)) 4-154, 4-155 409  7-18-83 1(4.77), 1(4.78) 8-161, 8-162 418 12- 5-83 1 11-16 419 12-19-83 1 8-36 442  5- 7-84 1 8-142 424  6-18-84 5.1 38-31 5.04 38-5 5.4A 38-54 5.10A 38-75 5.20A 38-125 5.27A 38-151 19A1.1-19A1.3 38-451-38-453 19A2 38-454 427  9-17-84 1(7.401) 7-1 1(7.402(1)), 1(7.402(2)) 7-4, 7-5 1(7.402(3)) 7-6 1(7.402(4))- 1(7.402(7)) 7-6 1(7.402(8))- 1(7.402(12)) 7-7-7-11 1(7.402) 7-13 1(7.403) 7-2, 7-3 7-31 7-35, 7-36 1(7.404), 1(7.405) 7-32, 7-33 1(7.406) 7-14 1(7.407) 7-34 1(7.408) 7-38 1(7.409) 7-37 428  9-17-84 1 38-5 2 38-52 3 38-72 4 38-97 5 38-122 6 38-147 429 10-15-84 1 33-51 430 11- 5-84 1-9 11-46-11-54 431 11-19-84 1 7-3, 7-13 432  2- 4-85 1(2.240-1.292) 12-5 1(1.281), 1(1.282) 12-1, 12-2 1(1.285) 12-2, 12-4 1(1.295), 1(1.296) 12-6 1(1.300)-1(1.305) 12-8 1(1.310), 1(1.311) 12-7 1(1.315), 1(1.316) 12-9 1(1.320) 12-10 1(1.325), 1(1.326) 12-11 1(1.330)-1(1.333) 12-12 1(1.335) 12-13 1(1.340) 12-14 433  5- 3-85 1(2.40), 1(2.41) 34-101, 34-102 1(2.42)-1(2.46) 34-121-34-125 1(2.47)-1(2.56) 34-141-34-150 1(2.57) 24-151 1(2.58)-1(2.60) 34-166-34-168  6- 3-85 1(2.61)-1(2.66) 34-169-34-174 1(2.67)-1(2.69) 34-186-34-188 1(2.70)-1(2.78) 34-201-34-209 1(2.79)-1(2.84) 34-221-34-226 1(2.86), 1(2.87) 34-227, 34-228 434  6- 8-85 33-18 435  9-16-85 38-379 436  9-16-85 1(5.92(a)) 38-393 437  9-16-85 5.110-5.115 38-501-38.506 439  1- 6-86 1 38-5, 38-379 440  1- 6-86 1 38-389 441  2-17-86 1.401 32-16, 32-19 1.402 32-17, 32-21 1.403 32-18 1.404 32-30 442  3-17-86 1 8-16 443  3-17-86 1, 2 8-116 3 8-117 444 12- 1-86 1 38-454 2 38-54 445 12-15-86 1 38-54, 38-454 446 12-15-86 1 38-125, 38-151, 
38-454 447 12-15-86 1 38-53, 38-54 448  2-16-87 1, 2 38-504 449  3-16-87 1 8-36 452  4-18-88 1-8 Adopting Ordinance, p.vii 453  6-20-88 1 18-46 454  8-15-88 1 38-351 2 38-352(t) 455 11-21-88 11-46 456 12-19-88 1 30-5 459  4- 3-90 1 38-378 460 10-16-89 1 11-16 461 10-16-89 1 33-18 462 10-16-89 1 33-51 464 11- 6-89 1       Added 8-1 465 12-18-89 1       Added 38-394 466 12-18-89 1, 2 8-16 3 8-18 467 12-18-89 1, 2 8-116 468 12-18-89 1, 2 8-141, 8-142 469 12-18-89 1, 2 13-36 3 13-37 470  2-19-90 1       Rpld 32-16-32-21 471  4- 2-90       Added 25-98-25-102 472  5- 7-90 8-36 473  5-22-90 1       Rpld 29-21-29-30, 
29-46-29-53, 
29-66-29-70, 
29-86, 29-87, 
29-101, 29-102, 
29-116-29-119, 
29-136-29-138, 
29-151-29-153, 
29-166-29-169 474  5-22-90 1       Added 29-21-29-27, 
29-46-29-55, 
29-66-29-68, 
29-86-29-89, 
29-101-29-104, 
29-116-29-118, 
29-136-29-138, 
29-151-29-157, 476  9-17-90 1 38-454(e) 477 11-19-90 1(1) 38-5 1(2)       Rpld 38-53(4) 1(3) 38-52(8), 38-72(6), 
38-97(4), 38-122(5), 
38-147(6) 1(4) 38-54(2), 38-72(2), 
38-125(2), 38-151(2) 1(5) 38-454(6) 1(6) 38-454(f) 478 11-19-90 1 38-351, 38-352(u), (v) 479  3- 4-91 1 2-345 480  3-18-91 1       Added 33-36-33-47       Rnbd 33-46-33-51       as 33-48-33-53 481  4- 1-91 1 21-4 483  7- 3-91 1 38-454 484  9- 3-91 1 33-18 485  9-16-91 1 33-39 486 11-18-91 1 8-101, 8-103 487  2- 3-92 1 2-251-2-258, 
2-271-2-281 488  2- 3-92 33-18 489  2-18-92 33-18 490  4-20-92 1 34-168-34-170, 
34-172, 
34-175-34-177, 
34-188, 
34-201, 34-202, 
34-204, 34-205, 
34-224, 
34-226, 
34-229, 34-230 491  5-19-92 1 2-341-2-348 492  8- 3-92 3-7 493  8- 3-92 3-5 494  8- 3-92 1 2-228 496 10- 5-92 27-40 497 11-16-92 18-131-18-134 499  2-16-92 38-5,       Rpld 38-292(8), 38-385, 
38-386(5), 38-504(3) 500  2-16-93 26-1, 26-2, 
26-5-26-7, 26-9, 
26-11-26-21, 
26-23, 26-24, 
26-26-26-33, 
26-35-26-38 502  3-15-93 1 38-5 503  3-15-93 1 38-379(7) 504  4- 5-93 8-16 505  4- 5-93 8-36 506  4- 5-93 8-141, 8-142 507  4-19-93 1 38-268(10) 510 10- 4-93 1 9-30-9-49 512 11-15-93 1 38-454(g) 2 38-54(5) 3 38-75(3) 4 38-125(4) 5 38-151(4) 514  1- 3-94 1 33-17 516  2-22-94 1 38-53(7)d., (9)d. 517  2-22-94 1 38-421 518  2-22-94 1 33-53 519  3- 7-94 1       Added 33-18.385 520  3-21-94 1 38-5 523 12-19-94 1 33-18.270-33-18.290, 
33-18.310 524  3-20-95 1 38-393 525  4-17-94 1       Added 19-89 528  5-15-95 1 1-2, 1-8 529  5-15-95 1       Added 2-103-2-106 530  5-15-95 1 8-142 531  5-15-95 1 18-63 532  6- 5-95 1 2-348 533  6-19-95 1       Added 38-271, 38-454(h) 534  6-19-95 1       Rpld 7-31-7-38 535  6-19-95 1       Rpld 20-1-20-29 536  6-19-95 1       Rpld 24-1-24-3 537  7- 5-95 1 3-2 538  7- 5-95 1       Rpld 22-56-22-82 539  8- 7-95 1       Rpld 25-16-25-48 540  8- 7-95 1       Rpld 25-66-25-102 541  8- 7-95 1       Rpld 36-16-36-79 542  8- 7-95 1       Rpld 36-96-36-118 544  9- 5-95 1       Rpld 4-16-4-33 545  9- 5-95 1       Rpld 4-66, 4-67 546  9- 5-95 1       Rpld 4-96-4-98 547  9- 5-95 1       Rpld 4-116-4-133 548 11-20-95 1 33-18 549 12- 4-95 1 38-502(h) 550 12-18-95 1 3-6 551  2-20-96 1 13-4 552  2-20-96 1 13-5 553  3-18-96 1 38-247, 38-454(i) 554  3-18-96 1 15-16-15-18 556  6-17-96 1       Added 25-21-25-25 557  7-15-96 1 33-18.520 558  9-16-96 1       Rpld 4-151-4-155 
4-171-4-179 559  9-16-96 1 6-1-6-23 560 12- 2-96 1 38-54, 38-454 561  2- 3-97 1       Added 19-6, 19-7 562  4- 7-97 1 33-18.270-33-18.320 563  8-18-97 1       Rpld 34-16, 34-31-34-50       Added 34-16, 34-39-34-50 565 10-20-97 1       Added 33-150-33-153 566  3-16-98 1       Added 2-240-2-244 567  4-26-98 1 19-111 568  5-10-98 1 38-54(6), 38-75(1), (2), (4) 38-125(5) 38-151(6) 569  6- 1-98 1 2-341-2-348 571  9- 6-98 1 26-17(6) 572  9- 6-98 1 38-379(8) 573 11- 2-98 1       Rpld 4-191-4-194, 4-206-4-212       Added 4-191-4-201 574  1-19-99 1 2-316 575  1-19-99 1 38-381(2) 576  1-19-99 1 38-123(c), 38-173(4)c., 38-243(1), 38-380(12)a.2. 577  5- 3-99 1       Added 8-200-8-216 578  5- 3-99 1 26-28(e) 579  5- 3-99 1 26-9 580  5- 3-99 1 13-4 581  5- 3-99 1 13-5 582  5- 3-99 1 25-21-25-25       Added 25-26 584  6-21-99 1       Added 38-32 585  6-21-99 1       Added 38-390(4)e. 586  6-21-99 1       Added 38-555 588 10- 4-99 1 33-18.270 589 10- 4-99 1 33-18.375 590 10-18-99 1       Added 38-504(5) 591  2-23-00 1 27-6(g) 594  5- 1-00 1       Added 33-1-33-4 598  9- 5-00 1       Rpld 8-200-8-216       Added 8-200-8-215 599 11-20-00 1 8-101 4       Rpld 8-102, 8-103 600 11-20-00 1 8-116 4       Rpld 8-117, 8-118 601 11-20-00 1 8-16 4       Rpld 8-17, 8-18 602 11-20-00 1 8-36 4       Rpld 8-37-8-40 8-56-8-70 8-86-8-89 603 11-20-00 1       Rpld 13-36, 13-37       Added 13-36, 13-37 604 12- 4-00 1       Added 8-216  8-14-01       Rpld 8-216 609  8-20-01 1 18-68-18-70 610  2-19-02 1       Added 38-33 615  6-17-02 1 2-244 616  6-17-02 1 2-348 617  7-15-02 1 2-348 619  9-16-02 1 38-378 620 11-18-02 1 4-202 621 11-18-02 1       Added 29-251-29-269 623  1- 6-03 1 14-6 624  3- 3-03 1 28-5 625  3- 3-03 1       Added 28-10.5 626  3-17-03 1 38-26       Added 38-336-38-340 38-351, 38-393 627  5-19-03 1 26-9 628  5-19-03 1 26-28 629  6- 2-03 1 13-4, 13-5 630  6-16-03 1 25-26 636  8- 4-03 1       Added 32-1 637  8-18-03 1 38-394 638  9-15-03 1       Added 2-401-2-413 2-415-2-427 2-427A 2-428-2-435 645 10- 6-03 1       Rpld 33-16-33-18 33-18.010-33-18.530 646 10- 6-03 1       Added 33-16-33-19 647 10- 6-03 1       Added 33-20-33-20.160 648 10- 6-03 1 33-53 649 10- 6-03 1 33-1 650 11- 3-03 1 25-26 652 12- 1-03 1 13-4, 13-5 654  1-20-04 1 11-46 656  4-19-04 1       Rpld 2-51-2-53 2-76-2-82 2-101-2-106 2-116-2-118 2-136, 2-137 2-151, 2-152 2-166, 2-167 2-196, 2-197       Added 2-51-2-53 2-76-2-88 2-101-2-106 2-116-2-119 657  5-17-04 1       Rpld 2-240-2-244 658  5- 3-04 1 13-4, 13-5 659  8-16-04 1 14-49 661 10-18-04 1 26-9 2       Added 26-23(14) 3 26-28 662 10-18-04 1 38-351, 38-352 38-390       Added 38-341-38-344 38-395 663 11-15-04 1 2-403, 2-404 664 12- 6-04 1       Added 34-300-34-312 665  3- 7-05 1       Rpld 22-16-22-20 22-36-22-40 2       Added 22-16-22-24 666  5-16-05 1 19-46 669  6-20-05 1       Rpld 2-326-2-328 670 12- 5-05 1 34-67 671  1-17-06 2-401-2-413 2-415-2-435       Added 2-414, 2-436 672  2-21-06 1 2-410 673  6-19-06 1 26-9, 26-30 674  6-19-06 1 34-82       Added 34-83 675  7- 3-06 1 2-348 677  8-21-06 1 38-268 678  9- 5-06 1 18-92 679  9- 5-06 1 5-28 680 10-16-06 1 38-501-38-503 681 10-16-06 1       Added 2-411(d) 682 11-20-06 1       Added 11-16(19)-(22) 683 11-20-06 1 11-46 686  7-16-07 1       Added 11-55-11-65 ch. 11, art. III, ex. A 687 10-15-07 1       Added 9-100-9-110 688 11- 5-07 1 34-170 689 11- 5-07 1       Added 34-202(e) 691  2- 4-08 1       Added 2-240-2-246 692  2-19-08 1       Added 18-58(c) 693  3- 3-08 1 23-17 694  3- 3-08 1 38-526 695  4-21-08 1 2-51-2-53,       Rpld 2-76-2-88       Added 2-76-2-86 696  4-21-08 1 2-251-2-257, 2-276-2-281 697  6- 2-08 1       Added 34-254-34-264 698  6-16-08 1 2-251-2-257 2-271-2-281 699  7- 7-08 1 34-49(3) 700  7-21-08 1 38-26 701  8- 4-08 1 13-4, 13-5 702  9-15-08 1 34-250 703  2- 2-09 1 27-1-27-40 704  3-16-09       Dltd 8-151-8-154 1       Added 8-151-8-158 705  4-26-09 1 27-1-27-40 706  4-20-09 1 9-105-9-107 707  4-20-09 1 38-27 708  4-20-09 1 38-27 709  4-20-09 1 38-27 710  5- 4-09 1 34-102 711  5- 4-09       Rpld 34-221-34-230 1       Added 34-221-34-235 712  8-17-09 1 28-15 713 10- 5-09 1       Rpld 25-26 714 10-19-09 1       Added 13-8 715  4-19-10 1 2-348 717  8- 2-10 2 8-201 3       Added 8-208(c)(5) 4 8-212(tit.) 5       Rpld 8-213       Added 8-213 6       Added 8-216 718 11- 1-10 1 5-26       Added 5-33 720  3-21-11 1, 2 19-129 721  4-18-11 1 38-5 2       Added 38-52(9) 3       Rnbd 38-217(2)g., h.       as 38-217(2)h., i. 4       Added 38-217(2)g. 5 38-292(8) 722  7- 5-11 1 9-100 2 9-105-9-110 723  9-19-11 1       Added 14-1-14-4 2       Rpld 14-1-14-10, 14-26-14-34, 14-48-14-50 724 11-21-11 2       Added 8-160-8-176 3       Rnbd ch. 8, art. VIII, 
§§ 8-161, 8-162       as ch. 8, art. IX, 
§§ 8-190, 8-191       Rnbd ch. 8, art. IX       as ch. 8, art. X 725 12- 5-11 1 2-403 726 12-19-11 1 28-10.5 727  2- 6-12 2 8-162, 8-163 8-168 8-174 728  2- 6-12 1 38-5 2 38-379(2) 3 38-379(7) 4       Added 38-379(10) 729  2- 6-12 1       Added 38-172(11), 38-197(10), 38-217(3), 38-242(8), 38-267(9), 38-292(11) 730  4- 2-12 1       Added 33-5 732  5-21-12 1       Rpld 38-551-38-555 2       Added 38-551-38-557 733  7- 2-12 1, 2 8-141 3, 4 8-142 734  7- 2-12 1 2-228 735  7-16-12 1, 2 19-127 739  2- 4-13 1       Rpld 32-36-32-42 2 ch. 32, art. III(note) 3       Added 32-36-32-42 740  6- 3-13 1 1-9 741  6- 3-13 1 18-121-18-126 742  7- 1-13 1       Added 32-43 743  7- 1-13 1 19-127(b)(3) 744  8-19-13 1 538-5 2       Rpld 38-504(4)a 4 38-5 5       Added 38-399 745  8-19-13 1       Rpld 38-393 3       Added 38-393 4       Added 38-396-38-398 746  9- 3-13 1       Rpld 33-150-33-153 2, 3       Added 33-150-33-150.18, 33-151-33-151.19 747 12- 2-13 1       Rpld 19-3 748 12-16-13 1 32-40 749  2- 3-14 1       Added 19-112 750  6- 2-14 1       Rpld 2-226-2-234       Added 2-226-2-228, 2-230-2-234 751  6-16-14 1 19-89(b) 753  7- 7-14 1       Rpld 38-33 754  8- 4-14 1 8-154(a) 755  8-18-14 1       Added 19-67 758  1- 5-15 8-142 759  1- 5-15 1       Rpld 21-3 2       Added 21-8, 21-9 760  2- 2-15 1 26-17(6)a. 762  3-16-15 1 38-5 2       Added 38-217(2)j. 763  4- 6-15 1 38-390(1), (2) 2       Added 38-390(3) 3       Rnbd 38-390(3)-(8)       as 38-390(4)-(9) 764  5- 4-15 1       Rpld 38-398 765  5- 4-15 1 34-49(2) 766  6- 1-15 1       Added 5-40-5-46 768  6-15-15 1 38-312 769  8-17-15 1 8-190, 8-191 777  3-21-16 1       Rpld 27-1-27-12, 27-31-27-40 780 12- 5-16 1 2-228 781 12- 5-16 1       Added 2-403(a)(7) 782  1- 3-17 1 2-242 783  6-19-17 1       Rpld 26-1, 26-2, 26-5-26-7, 26-9, 26-11-26-21, 26-23, 26-24, 26-26-26-33, 26-35-26-38 2       Added 26-1, 26-6, 26-7, 26-9, 26-11-26-25 784  7- 3-17 1 18-58 785  7-17-17 1 3-2(c) 786  7-17-17 1       Rpld 2-341-2-348 2       Added 2-341-2-349 787  9- 5-17 1 38-380(2), (11) 789 11- 6-17 1 38-27 790  1-16-18 1 8-141 2 8-142 791  1-16-18 1 13-7 2 13-36 792  5- 7-18 1 26-19(1)a. 793  7- 2-18 1       Added Ch. 16.5, §§ 16.5-1-16.5-8 2 38-5 3 38-197 4 38-217 5 38-242 6 38-267 7 38-292 794  9-17-18 1 33-53  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE STATE CONSTITUTION 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Constitution. 
Article Section Section 
this Code II 8 Char., § 4.13 VII 22 Char., Ch. 6 Char., § 2.8 24 Char., Ch. 15 25 Char., Ch. 15 Char., § 15.7 30 Char., § 15.7 XI 1 Char., § 4.7  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS 
This table gives the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MCL Section
this Code 8.3 et seq. 1-2 8.4 1-3 8.4a 1-3 8.6 1-2 10.31 et seq. Ch. 12 15.231 et seq. Char., § 2.2 Ch. 2 Ch. 2, Art. III 11-61 15.231-15.246 8-206 29-254, 29-267 38-502 15.261 et seq. Char., § 5.4 Ch. 2, Art. II Ch. 2, Art. IV 15-17 38-502(b) 15.261-15.275 8-204 8-206 11-61 15.321 et seq. Char., § 14.4 15.341 et seq. Ch. 2 Ch. 2, Art. II- Ch. 2, Art. IV 15.401 et seq. 2-269 15.602 Char., § 4.2(note) 21.44 et seq. Char., § 9.11 24.201-24.328 33-16 33-150.1 27.3178(598.1) et seq. 1-8 29.1-29.34 33-151.16 29.1 et seq. Ch. 13 29.1b 33-151.16 29.41 et seq. Ch. 13 30.401 et seq. Ch. 12 12-2, 12-3 12-8 35.441 Ch. 22 37.210 et seq. Ch. 10 37.505 10-30 37.2201 et seq. 2-269 37.2501-37.2504 10-26-10-29 37.2506 10-31 38.1701 et seq. 2-414 46.401 et seq. Char., Ch. 11 117.1 et seq. Char., § 3.2 Char., Reso. of Adoption 117.3(a) Char., § 4.1 Char., § 6.1 Char., § 7.1 Char., § 9.4 117.3(b) Char., § 13.7 117.3(c) Char., Ch. 13 Char., § 13.4 117.3(d) Char., § 4.2, Char., § 4.3 Char., § 4.6 Char., § 6.13 Char., § 7.2 117.3(e) Char., § 1.3 117.3(f), 117.3(g) Char., § 9.1 117.3(h) Char., § 8.5 117.3(i) Char., § 9.3 Char., § 9.6 Char., § 9.8 Char., § 9.19 117.3(j) Char., § 3.2(2) 117.3(k) Char., Ch. 6 Char., § 6.4 8-141 26-1 117.3(l) Char., § 2.2 Char., § 5.4 117.3(m) Char., § 5.4 117.3(n) Char., § 7.5 117.4a Char., Ch. 10 Char., § 9.20 Ch. 28 117.4a(1) Char., § 8.11, Char., § 8.12 117.4a(2) Char., § 8.11 117.4b Char., Ch. 10 Ch. 28 117.4c Char., Ch. 15 117.4d Char., Ch. 10 Char., § 10.1 Ch. 28 117.4d(2) Char., § 10.8 117.4e(2) Char., § 3.2(6) 117.4f Char., Ch. 15 117.4h(1) Char., § 3.2(3) 117.4h(2) Char., § 3.2(3)XI 117.4h(3) Char., § 3.2(3)II 117.4i Char., § 2.6 1-8 117.4i(3) Char., § 3.2(2)IX 117.4i(4) Char., § 3.2(2)I Char., § 3.2(2)X 117.4i(5) Char., § 3.2(2)VIII 117.4i(6) Char., § 6.8 117.4i(7) Char., § 7.15 117.4i(8) Char., § 7.19 117.4i(10) Char., § 6.5 117.4i(b) Char., § 4.13 117.4j(3) Char., § 3.1 117.5 Char., Ch. 10 Ch. 28 117.5(f) Char., § 14.3 117.5(i) Char., § 15.7 117.5b 1-1 117.6 et seq. Char., Ch. 1 117.21 et seq. Char., § 2.8 117.56 Char., § 6.4 123.51 et seq. Ch. 21 123.241 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 123.361 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 124.1-124.13 33-151.1 124.351-124.359 33-151.1 124.401-124.426 33-151.1 124.451-124.479 33-151.1 124.501-124.512 2-316(a)(8) 33-151.1 124.531-124.536 33-151.1 125.31 et seq. Ch. 23 23-16 38-503 125.33 Char., § 7.14(a) 125.71 et seq. Ch. 11 125.581 et seq. Ch. 23 Ch. 38 38-1 38-551-38-553 125.583a 37-378 125.584 Ch. 38, Art. XXIII 125.584d 38-390 125.585 Ch. 38, Art. XXI 125.601 et seq. Ch. 11 125.651 Ch. 11 125.901 et seq. Ch. 11 125.1101 et seq. Ch. 17 38-383(b)(3)i, 1. 125.1102(k) 17-16 125.1401 et seq. Ch. 32, Art. III 32-36 125.1415a(5) 32-43 125.1501 et seq. Ch. 8 125.1601 et seq. Ch. 11 125.1651 et seq. Ch. 11 11-16 11-31, 11-32 125.1667(2) 11-47(2) 125.2302 33-150.5 125.3101 et seq. 38-501 125.3301 38-526 129.12 Char., § 8.13 129.91 et seq. 2-316(a) 129.111-129.118 2-316 129.141-129.150 2-316 131.1 et seq. Char., Ch. 8 Char., § 8.11 Ch. 2, Art. VI 141.101-141.140 33-151.1 141.101 et seq. 34-251 141.421 et seq. Char., § 7.5 Ch. 2, Art. VI 168.1 et seq. Char., Ch. 13 Char., § 13.5 168.24a et seq. Char., § 13.11 168.30a et seq. Char., § 13.11 168.491 et seq. Char., § 13.4 168.544a Char., § 13.7 168.546 Char., § 13.7, Char., § 13.8 168.631 Char., § 13.2 168.639 Char., § 13.2 168.851, 168.852 Char., § 13.12 168.861 et seq. Char., § 13.13 168.951 et seq. Char., § 4.13 206.201 20-2(2) 211.1 et seq. Char., Ch. 9 Char., § 9.1 Char., § 9.19 Ch. 32 211.2 Char., § 9.2 211.7 et seq. Char., § 9.2 211.24 et seq. Char., § 9.3 211.30a Char., § 9.7 211.47 Char., § 9.16 211.53 Char., § 10.5 211.436 Char., § 8.13 211.501 Char., § 10.6 211.691 et seq. Char., § 9.13 211.741 et seq. Char., § 10.2(a)(10) 28-5, 28-6 28-12 247.61 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. V 247.62 38-393 247.183 9-2 247.241 et seq. Ch. 35 252.301 et seq. Ch. 26 257.1-257.923 33-1 257.1 et seq. Ch. 33 257.16 33-151.5 257.21 33-151.5 257.605 Ch.33 257.606 Ch. 33 257.606(1)(a) Ch. 33, Art. III 257.606(1)(i) Ch. 33, Art. IV 257.608 33-150.16 257.610 Ch. 33 257.625 33-5 257.627(5) 33-150.9 257.683-257.725a 33-151.15 257.688 33.150.7 257.698 33-150.1 257.705 33-151.3 33-151.5 257.707 et seq. 18-94 257.710e 33-150.7 257.722(5) 33-150.10 257.722(6) 33-150.10 257.722(9) 33-150.10 257.725 33-150.1 33-150.2 33-150.4 33-150.5 33-150.15 257.726a 33-150.17 257.951 Ch. 33, Art. II 257.961 Ch. 33, Art. VI 257.1801 33-151.5 257.1877 33-151.5 281.1001 et seq. Ch. 37 282.1 et seq. Ch. 14 282.101 et seq. Ch. 14 27-6(b) 27-11(b) 287.161 et seq. 5-6 287.261 et seq. Ch. 5, Art. II 287.290 Ch. 5 312.10, (1)(e) 5-3 318.251 et seq. 21-7(a) 325.281 et seq. 20-29(6) 333.1101 et seq. 16.5-2 38-5 333.5111 5-30 333.6107 3-6 333.12501 et seq.       Ch. 17, 20-29(12) 333.12521-333.12534       20-29(9) 333.12541-333.12546       20-29(8) 333.12701 et seq. 20-29(2) 333.12771 20-29(3) 333.12901 et seq. 20-29(4) 333.26421 38-217 38-292 333.26421 et seq. 16.5-1 16.5-2 38-5 38-52 333.26423 33-150.1 333.27101 et seq. 16.5-1 16.5-2 38-5 333.27901 et seq. 16.5-1 16.5-2 38-5 336.11 et seq. Ch. 18 338.41 et seq. 16-12 338.901 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. IV 
20-29(3) 338.904 Ch. 8, Art. IV 338.971 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. V 397.201 et seq. Char., § 7.13 
Ch. 15 399.171 et seq.       Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2 399.201 et seq.       Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2 400.271 et seq. Ch. 22 436.1 et seq. Ch. 3, 3-1, 21-2 436.17 et seq. 3-12 436.19E 3-3 436.29 3-3 436.33 3-7 436.33, (2) 3-9 436.33a, (1) 3-10 436.33b 3-6 436.33b, (3) 3-8 436.34 3-2 436.15031 38-217 38-292 440.2328 Ch. 6, 6-4 445.111 et seq. Ch. 22 445.371 et seq. Ch. 22 445.481 et seq. Ch. 24, 24-1 446.26 et seq. Ch. 6 446.51 et seq. Ch. 6 450.2101-450.3192 33-151.1 460.701 et seq. 29-54 469.1 et seq. 33-106 474.101-474.141 33-151.5 480.11-480.21 33-150.11 480.11-480.22 33-150.9 480.11-480.25 33-150.4 480.11 et seq. 33-151 33-151.2 33-151.8 33-151.15 484.2102 29-253 484.2251 29-254 560.101 et seq. Ch. 30, 30-23(d) 
30-23(f) 560.259 38-453(3) 600.5813 Char., § 10.5 600.8395       Ch. 33, Art. III, Div. 2 600.9921 Char., Ch. 12 
Char., § 2.1(7) Char., § 4.1 
Char., § 6.7 691.1201 et seq. Ch. 18 691.1401 et seq. Char., § 8.9 712A.1 et seq. 1-8 730.501 et seq. Char., § 12.1 750.49 et seq. Ch. 5 750.81 et seq. 19-46 750.103 19-52 750.167 19-52 750.167(1)(c) 19-66 750.167(1)(f) 19-107 750.167(1)(l) 19-85 750.167(i)-750.167(k) 19-53 750.170 19-81, 19-147 750.200 et seq. Ch. 13 750.224 et seq. 19-128 750.240 13-1 750.240 et seq. Ch. 13 750.267 19-4 750.335a 19-108 750.337 19-52 750.337b 13-2 750.364 15-1 750.377 5-2 750.377 et seq. 19-61, 19-62, 
19-148, 21-6, 34-80 750.437 5-2 750.463 et seq. Ch. 4 750.474 19-112 750.479 19-27 750.493d 19-126 750.552 19-64 752.21 et seq. 5-1 752.91 et seq. 5-6 752.362 et seq. 9-100 9-101 9-102 752.541 et seq. 19-87 752.811 Ch. 4, Art. VI 752.901 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. III 
Ch. 29, Art. II, Div. 6 764.9a et seq. Char., § 6.7 767.39 19-2  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE MICHIGAN STATUTES ANNOTATED 
This table shows the locations within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Statutes Annotated. 
MSA Section 
this Code 2.212 et seq. 1-2 2.213, 2.214 1-3 3.4(1) et seq. Ch. 12 3.240(1) et seq. Ch. 22 3.541(504) 10-29 3.548(101) et seq. Ch. 10 3.548(201) et seq. 2-269 3.548(501) et seq. 10-26 3.548(502), 3.548(503) 10-27, 10-28 3.548(505), 3.548(506) 10-30, 10-31 3.560(101) et seq. 33-18(5.82(1)) 33-18(5.82(6)) 3.560(186) 33-18(5.15f(3)) 3.752 Char., § 8.13 3.843(1) 2-316(a) 3.843(1) et seq. 2-316(a) 3.996(101) et seq. Char., § 8.9 4.450(1) et seq. 33-18(1.024) 4.559(1) et seq. Ch. 13 4.824(11) et seq. Ch. 12 12-2, 12-3 12-8 4.1241 Ch. 22 4.1700(51) et seq. Char., § 14.4 4.1700(71) et seq. Ch. 2 Ch. 2, Art. II- Ch. 2, Art. IV 4.1702(1) et seq. 2-268 4.1800(1) et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II 4.1800(11) et seq. Char., § 5.4 Ch. 2, Art. IV 15-17 38-502(b) 4.1801(1) et seq. Char., § 2.2 Ch. 2 Ch. 2, Art. III 5.359(1) et seq. Char., Ch. 11 5.2071 et seq. Char., § 3.2 Char., Reso. of Adoption 5.2073(a) Char., § 4.1 Char., § 6.1 Char., § 7.1 Char., § 9.4 5.2073(b) Char., § 13.7 5.2073(c) Char., § 13.4 5.2073(d) Char., Ch. 7 Char., § 4.2, Char., § 4.3 Char., § 4.6 Char., § 7.2 5.2073(e) Char., § 1.3 5.2073(f), 5.2073(g) Char., § 9.1 5.2073(h) Char., § 8.5 5.2073(i) Char., § 9.3 Char., § 9.6 Char., § 9.8 Char., § 9.19 5.2073(j) Char., § 3.2(2) 5.2073(k) Char., Ch. 6 Char., § 6.4 8-141 26-1 5.2073(l) Char., § 2.2 Char., § 5.4 5.2073(m) Char., § 5.4 5.2073(n) Char., § 7.5 5.2074 Char., Ch. 10 Ch. 28 5.2074(1) Char., § 8.11, Char., § 8.12 5.2074(2) Char., § 8.11 5.2075 Char., Ch. 10 Ch. 28 5.2076 Char., Ch. 15 5.2077 Char., Ch. 10 Char., § 10.1 Ch. 28 5.2077(2) Char., § 10.8 5.2078(2) Char., § 3.2(6) 5.2079 Char., Ch. 15 5.2081(1) Char., § 3.2(3) 5.2081(2) Char., § 3.2(3)XI 5.2081(3) Char., § 3.2(3)II 5.2081(4) Char., § 3.2(2)X 5.2082 1-8 5.2082(3) Char., § 2.6 5.2082(4) Char., § 3.2(2)I 5.2082(5) Char., § 3.2(2)VIII 5.2082(6) Char., § 4.13 Char., § 6.8 5.2082(7) Char., § 7.15 5.2082(8) Char., § 7.19 5.2082(10) Char., § 6.5 5.2083 Char., § 2.6 5.2083(3) Char., § 3.1 5.2084 Char., Ch. 10 Ch. 28 5.2084(2) Char., § 6.4 1-1 5.2084(f) Char., § 14.3 5.2084(i) Char., § 15.7 5.2085 et seq. Char., Ch. 1 5.2100 et seq. Char., § 2.8 5.2421 et seq. Ch. 21 5.2661 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 5.2726(1) et seq. Ch. 34, Art. II 5.2731 et seq. 34-251 5.2931 et seq. Ch. 23 Ch. 38 38-1 38-501(a) 38-503(d) 38-551-38-553 5.2934 Ch. 38, Art. XXIII 5.2934(4) 38-390 5.2935 Ch. 38, Art. XXI 5.2949(1) et seq. Ch. 8 5.2991 et seq. Char., § 7.14(a) Ch. 23 23-16 38-503(d) 5.2993 Char., § 7.14(a) 5.2993(1) 38-378 5.3010(1) et seq. Ch. 11 11-16 11-31, 11-32 5.3010(17)(2) 11-47(2) 5.3011 et seq. Ch. 11 5.3057(1) et seq. Ch. 11 5.3058(1) et seq. Ch. 11 5.3188(1) et seq. Char., Ch. 8 Char., § 8.11 Ch. 2, Art. VI 5.3228(21) et seq. Char., § 7.5 Ch. 2, Art. VI 5.3230(1) et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 2 5.3230(3) 2-328 5.3230(4), 5.3230(5) 2-327, 2-328 5.3395 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2 5.3407(1) et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2 5.3501 et seq. Ch. 11 5.3520(1) et seq. Ch. 11 5.3534(1) et seq. Char., § 10.2(a)(10) 28-5, 28-6 6.1001 et seq. Char., Ch. 13 Char., § 13.5 6.1024(1) et seq. Char., § 13.11 6.1030(1) et seq. Char., § 13.11 6.1491 et seq. Char., § 13.4 6.1544(1) Char., § 13.7 6.1546 Char., § 13.7, Char., § 13.8 6.1631 Char., § 13.2 6.1639 Char., § 13.2 6.1851, 6.1852 Char., § 13.12 6.1861 et seq. Char., § 13.13 6.1951 et seq. Char., § 4.13 7.1 et seq. Char., Ch. 9 Char., § 9.1 Char., § 9.19 7.2 Char., § 9.2 7.7 et seq. Char., § 9.2 7.24 et seq. § 9.3 7.30(1) Char., § 9.7 7.51(1) et seq. Char., § 9.13 7.86 Char., § 8.13 7.87 et seq. Char., § 9.11 7.91 Char., § 9.16 7.97 Char., § 10.5 7.557(1201) 20-2(2) 7.721 Char., § 10.6 9.241b et seq. 33-18(5.95) 9.263 9-2 9.361 et seq. Ch. 35 9.391(101) et seq. Ch. 26 9.631(1) et seq. Ch. 18, Art. V 9.1801 et seq. Ch. 33 9.1801(2) 33-18(1.001a) 9.1804(2) 33-18(1.004) 9.1808(2) 33-18(1.007a) 9.1821 33-18(1.012c) 9.1825(1) 33-18(1.002a) 9.1832(2) 33-18(1.016) 9.1842 33-18(1.024) 9.1857 33-18(1.031a) 9.1952(1) 33-18(2.5) 9.1952(2) 13-88(2.5a) 9.1952(3), 9.1952(4) 13-88(2.6), 13-88(2.7) 9.1952(5)-9.1952(7) 33-18(2.7a)- 33-18(2.7c) 9.2011 33-18(5.63) 9.2011(1) 33-18(2.17c(3)) 33-18(5.63(1)) 9.2022 33-18(5.15f(2)) 9.2023 33-18(5.15f(3)), 33-18(5.15f(4)) 9.2305, 9.2306 Ch. 33 9.2306(1)(a) Ch. 33, Art. III 9.2306(1)(i) Ch. 33, Art. IV 9.2310 Ch. 33 9.2317 33-18(2.10(1)) 9.2319 33-18(2.10(1)) 9.2323(2) 33-18(5.15b) 9.2324(8) 33-18(5.15h) 9.2325 33-18(5.15) 9.2325(1) 33-18(5.15a) 9.2325(3)-9.2325(7) 33-18(5.15c)- 33-18(5.15g) 9.2354 33-18(5.44) 9.2358(4) 33-18(6.23) 9.2374 33-18(8.10) 9.2382 33-18(5.76(5)(c)) 33-18(5.97) 9.2397 33-18(5.76(8)) 9.2397(1) 33-18(5.76(8)) 9.2398 33-18(5.76) 9.2398(1) 33-18(5.76(8)) 9.2409 33-18(5.81) 9.2410(2) 33-18(5.82(3)) 9.2410(4), 9.2410(5) 33-18(5.82), 33-18(5.83) 9.2427 33-18(2.10(5)) 33-18(2.17c) 9.2427(1), 9.2427(2) 33-18(2.10(1)) 9.2427(3) 33-18(2.8) 33-18(2.10(1)) 9.2428(1) 33-18(2.10) 33-18(2.15) 9.2428(2), 9.2428(3) 33-18(2.10) 9.2428(4) 33-18(2.10) 33-18(2.17a) 9.2428(5) 33-18(2.10) 9.2442 33-18(2.10b) 9.2447 33-18(2.10g) 9.2449 33-18(2.10i) 9.2503(4) 33-18(8.10(s)(ii)) 9.2503(6) 33-18(8.10(s)(v)) 9.2607 33-18(2.10g)(5) 9.2651 Ch. 33, Art. II 9.2651 et seq. 33-16 9.2660 Ch. 33, Art. VI 9.9375(5) 33-18(8.10(s)(i)) 12.471 et seq. 5-6 12.482(1) et seq. 5-6 12.511 et seq. Ch. 5, Art. II 12.541 Ch. 5 12-1501-12.1531 8-208 13.1064(1) et seq. 21-7(a) 13.1339, (1)(e) 5-3 13.1781 et seq. Ch. 27 13.1820(1) et seq. Ch. 27 27-6(a) 27-11(b) 14.15(5111) 5-30 14.15(7101) et seq. 33-18(1.007a) 14.15(12501) et seq. Ch. 17 20-29(12) 14.15(12521)-(12534) 20-29(9) 14.15(12541)-(12546) 20-29(8) 14.15(12542)- 14.15(12546) 20-29(8) 14.15(12701) et seq. 20-29(2) 14.15(12771) 20-29(3) 14.15(12901) et seq. 20-29(4) 14.15(20301) et seq. 33-18(1.001a) 14.58(1) et seq. Ch. 18 14.434(1) et seq. 20-29(6) 14.451 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. IV 20-29(3) 14.454 Ch. 8, Art. IV 14.528(201) et seq. Ch. 18 15.1661 et seq. Char., § 7.13 Ch. 15 16.691 et seq. 22-40 18.86(1) et seq. Ch. 8, Art. V 18.185(1) et seq. 33-18(5.76(7)) 33-18(5.76)(7) 18.971 et seq. Ch. 3 3-1 21-2 18.988 et seq. 3-12 18.990(5) 3-3 18.1000 3-3 18.1004 3-7 18.1004(1), (1) 3-10 18.1004(2) 3-6 3-8 18.1004(3) 3-8 18.1004(2) 39 18.1005 3-2 18.1208(1) et seq. 16-12 18.1287(1) et seq. Ch. 37 19.416(201) et seq. Ch. 22 19.551 et seq. Ch. 6 19.565(1) et seq. Ch. 6 19.691 et seq. Ch. 22 19.720(1) et seq. Ch. 24 24-1 19.855(1) et seq. Ch. 17 19.855(2)(k) 17-16 19.885(1) et seq. 38-383(b)(3)i., 1. 19.2328 Ch. 6 6-4 21.718 et seq. Ch. 4 22.190(1) et seq. 29-54 22.761 et seq. 33-106 26.430(101) Ch. 30 26.430(101) et seq. 30-23(d) 30-23(f) 38-453(3) 26.430(259) Ch. 30 27.3937(1) et seq. Char., § 12.1 27A.994 Char., § 6.7 27A.5813 Char., § 10.5 27A.8312 33-18(2.7a(2)) 27A.8395 Ch. 33, Art. III, Div. 2 27A.9921 Char., § 2.1(7) Char., § 4.1 Tit. 28 Ch. 19 28.161 et seq. 5-1 28.244 et seq. Ch. 5 28.298 19-52 28.364 19-52 28.364(1)(c) 19-66 28.364(1)(f) 19-107 28.364(1)(l) 19-85 28.364(i)-28.364(k) 19-53 28.367 19-81 19-147 28.397 et seq. Ch. 13 28.421 et seq. 19-128 28.437 13-1 28.437 et seq. Ch. 13 28.440(1) et seq. 19-127 28.567(1) 19-108 28.569 19-52 28.596 15-1 28.603(1) et seq. Ch. 18, Art. III Ch. 29, Art. II, Div. 6 28.603(1a) 33-18(5.55a) 28.609 5-2 28.609 et seq. 19-148 21-6 34-80 28.609(2) 13-2 28.643(101) Ch. 4, Art. VI 28.692 5-2 28.761(4) 19-126 28.790(1) et seq. 19-87 28.843 33-18(2.8(3)) 28.868(1) et seq. Char., § 6.7 28.871(1) 33-18(2.17c) 28.979 19-2  
