Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ordinance enforcement — See Ch. 52. Offenses — See Ch. 285.
1:1

ARTICLE I
Definitions; General Penalty
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. II)]
§ 1-1. Definitions and rules of construction.
The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code
and all ordinances and resolutions unless the context requires otherwise:
CIVIL INFRACTION — An act or omission prohibited by law which is not a
crime and for which civil sanctions may be ordered.
CODE — The Code of Ordinances, Charter Township of Oakland, Michigan,
as designated in Article II of this chapter.
COMPUTATION OF TIME — In computing a period of days, the first day
shall be excluded and the last day shall be included. If the last day of
any period or a fixed or final day is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday,
the period or day shall be extended to include the next day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday.
CONJUNCTIONS — In a provision involving two or more items, conditions,
provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are
connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either . . . or," the conjunction
shall be interpreted as follows:
COUNTY — Oakland County, Michigan.
CRIME — An act or omission forbidden by law that is not designated as a
civil infraction and is punishable, upon conviction, by any one or more of the
following:
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY — A provision that authorizes or requires
a Township officer or Township employee to perform an act or make a
decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision
through subordinates.
GENDER — Terms of one gender shall include the other genders.
The term "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions,
provisions or events apply.
A.
The term "or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions
or events apply singly or in any combination.
B.
The term "either . . . or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions,
provisions or events apply singly but not in combination.
C.
A. Imprisonment.
B. Fine not designated as a civil fine.
C. Other penal discipline.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3
GENERALLY — When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over
the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent
of the Township board may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language,
but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have
acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed
according to such meanings.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT and DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH — The
County Health Department.
HEALTH OFFICER — The Director of the County Health Department.
HIGHWAY — Includes any street, alley, highway, avenue, public place or
square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway which is
dedicated or devoted to public use.
INCLUDES, INCLUDING — Terms of enlargement and not of limitation
or exclusive enumeration, and the use of such terms does not create a
presumption that components not expressed are excluded.
JOINT AUTHORITY — A grant of authority to three or more persons as a
public body confers the authority on a majority of the number of members
as fixed by statute or ordinance.
MAY — The term "may" shall be construed as being permissive and not
mandatory.
MAY NOT — States a prohibition.
MCL; MCLA — The Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended.
MONTH — A calendar month.
MUST — Construed as being mandatory.
NUMBER — The singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
number shall include the singular.
OATH, AFFIRMATION, SWORN, AFFIRMED — Includes an affirmation in all
cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. In similar cases,
the term "sworn" shall include the term "affirmed."
OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS or EMPLOYEES —
References to officers, departments, boards, commissions or employees
shall be to Township officers, Township departments, Township boards,
Township commissions and Township employees.
OWNER — The term "owner," as applied to property, shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or
tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. With respect
to special assessments, however, the owner shall be considered to be the
person whose name appears on the assessment roll for the purpose of giving
notice and billing.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, club, joint
venture, estate, trust, limited liability company, governmental unit and any
§ 1-1 OAKLAND CODE § 1-1
1:4
other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting
such group or unit.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Any property other than real property.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
PREMISES — As applied to real property, shall include land and structures.
PROPERTY — Real and personal property.
PUBLIC ACTS — References to Public Acts are references to the Public Acts
of Michigan. (For example, a reference to Public Act No. 279 of 1909 is
a reference to Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909.) Any
reference to a Public Act, whether by Act number or by short title, shall be
a reference to the Act, as amended.
REAL PROPERTY, REAL ESTATE and LAND — Includes lands, tenements
and hereditaments.
ROADWAY — The portion of a street which is improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular traffic.
SHALL — The term "shall" shall be construed as being mandatory.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral
line of the roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
SIGNATURE and SUBSCRIPTION — Includes a mark when the person
cannot write.
STATE — The State of Michigan.
STREET — Any street, alley, highway, avenue, or public place or square,
bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway which is
dedicated or devoted to public use.
SUPERVISOR or TOWNSHIP SUPERVISOR — The duly elected Supervisor
of the Charter Township of Oakland, except where the reference to the
Supervisor shall be substituted with "Superintendent" as provided in
Ordinance No. 971 and Section 10 of the Charter Township Act, Act 359 of
the Public Acts of 1947 (MCLA § 42.10).
SWEAR — Includes "affirm."
TENSES — The present tense shall include the past and future tenses. The
future tense shall include the present tense.
TOWNSHIP — The Charter Township of Oakland, Michigan.
TOWNSHIP BOARD, TOWNSHIP BOARD OF TRUSTEES, BOARD OF
TRUSTEES and BOARD — The governing body of the Charter Township of
Oakland.
WEEK — Seven consecutive days.
1. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 45, Art. I.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:5
WRITTEN — Includes any representation of words, letters, symbols or
figures.
YEAR — Twelve consecutive months.
§ 1-2. General penalty; continuing violations.
A. In this section, the term "violation of this Code" shall mean any of the
following:
(1) Doing an act which is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an
offense or a violation by ordinance or rule or regulation authorized
by ordinance.
(2) Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by
ordinance or rule or regulation authorized by ordinance.
(3) Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or
declared unlawful, an offense or a violation or by ordinance or rule
or regulation authorized by ordinance.
B. Any provision of this Code which is made or declared to be a
misdemeanor, civil infraction or municipal civil infraction shall be a
violation of this Code.
C. In this section, the term "violation of this Code" shall not include the
failure of a Township officer or employee to perform an official duty
unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to
be punished as provided in this section.
D. Except as specifically provided otherwise by state law or Township
ordinance, all violations of this Code are misdemeanors. Except as
otherwise provided by law or ordinance, a person convicted of a
violation of this Code that is a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine
not to exceed $500, and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for a
period of not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
However, unless otherwise provided by law, a person convicted of a
violation of this Code which substantially corresponds to a violation of
state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of
imprisonment is 93 days shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500,
and costs of prosecution, or by imprisonment for a period of not more
than 93 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
E. Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, with respect to
violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each
day that a violation continues shall be a separate offense. With respect
to other violations, each violation shall constitute a separate offense.
F. The imposition of a penalty under this section shall not prevent
suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other
administrative sanctions.
§ 1-1 OAKLAND CODE § 1-2
1:6
G. Violations of this Code that are intermittent or ongoing are a nuisance
per se and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The
imposition of a penalty shall not prevent injunctive relief or civil or
quasi-judicial enforcement.
H. A person determined to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction
for any violation of the Code of the Charter Township of Oakland shall
be subject to a civil fine in the amount of $75, plus costs and other
sanctions, for each first offense, and a civil fine of $150, plus costs and
other sanctions, for each repeat offense. In addition to ordering a
person determined to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction to
pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the Judge or Magistrate
shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to
enforce or enjoin violation of this Code.
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-2
1:7

ARTICLE II
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 3-13-2018]
§ 1-3. Adoption of Code.
The ordinances of the Charter Township of Oakland of a general and
permanent nature adopted by the Township Board of Trustees of the
Charter Township of Oakland, as revised, codified and consolidated into
chapters and sections by General Code, LLC, and consisting of Chapters 1
through 430, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the
"Code of the Charter Township of Oakland" hereinafter known and referred
to as the "Code."
§ 1-4. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all general and permanent
ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except such
ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or continued in
force.
§ 1-5. When effective.
This ordinance shall become effective upon publication after adoption.
§ 1-6. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Charter
Township of Oakland by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as
provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of
the Township Clerk, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the
same during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-7. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Charter Township
of Oakland" shall be understood and intended to include such additions
and amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements
to the Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as
provided hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-8
1:9
§ 1-8. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Charter Township of Oakland, pursuant to law, shall cause
to be published, in the manner required, a copy of this Adopting Ordinance
in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection
by the public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-9. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall ·be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-10. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased
from the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of
a fee to be set by the Township Board of Trustees, or may be furnished
electronically. The Clerk may also arrange for procedures for the periodic
supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-11. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Charter
Township of Oakland to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this
section or any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to a
fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or
both, in the discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-12. Severability of Code provisions.
This Code and the various parts, sections, subsections, paragraphs,
sentences, phrases, and clauses thereof are hereby declared to be
severable. If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, phrase,
or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, it is hereby provided that the remainder of this Code shall not
be affected thereby and shall remain in effect and valid.
§ 1-8 OAKLAND CODE § 1-13
1:10
§ 1-13. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-14. Repeal of inconsistent ordinances.
Except as provided in § 1-17, Ordinances saved from repeal; certain
ordinances not affected by this Code, below, all ordinances or parts of
ordinances inconsistent with the provisions contained in the Code adopted
by this ordinance are hereby repealed; provided, however, that such repeal
shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any valid legislation of
the Charter Township of Oakland which is not in conflict with the provisions
of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and effect, even if not
fully incorporated or restated within this Code.
§ 1-15. Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as
ordinances previously adopted by the Township relating to the same subject
matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and
not as entirely new enactments.
§ 1-16. Effect on prior offenses or rights.
§ 1-17. Ordinances saved from repeal; certain ordinances not
affected by this Code,
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-14 of this ordinance shall not affect the validity of the following
ordinances, rights and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from
repeal. The ordinances or portions of ordinances designated below continue
in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this
Code.
A. Nothing in this Code (or the ordinance adopting this Code) affects any
offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or
any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code.
B. The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the
continuation of any use of a structure, building, or premises in violation
of any Township ordinance on the effective date of this Code.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to July 14, 2015.
B. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance promising or guaranteeing
the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other
instruments of indebtedness.
§ 1-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-17
1:11
C. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance authorizing or approving any
contract, deed, or agreement.
D. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance granting any right or
franchise.
E. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance making or approving any
appropriation or budget.
F. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance providing for salaries or
other employee benefits or personnel policies for officers or employees
not codified in this Code.
G. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance levying, imposing, or
otherwise relating to truces not codified in this Code.
H. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance adopting or amending the
Township Master Plan.
I. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance dedicating, accepting, or
vacating any plat or subdivision, or annexing into or excluding from the
Township any property.
J. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance dedicating, establishing,
naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, or
vacating any street, sidewalk, or alley.
K. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance establishing the grade of any
street or sidewalk.
L. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance levying or imposing any
special assessment.
M. Any ordinance rezoning property.
N. Any currently effective ordinance providing for intergovernmental
cooperation or establishing an intermunicipal agreement.
O. Any currently effective ordinance or portion of an ordinance
establishing a specific fee amount for any license, permit or service
obtained from the Charter Township of Oakland.
P. Any ordinance pertaining to engineering design standards.
Q. Any ordinance regarding special districts.
R. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance that is temporary although
general in effect.
S. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance that is special although
permanent in effect.
T. Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance the purpose of which has
been accomplished.
§ 1-17 OAKLAND CODE § 1-17
1:12
§ 1-18. References to Michigan Compiled Laws.
§ 1-19. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
§ 1-20. Adoption and effective date,
This ordinance shall be published in the manner as required by law. Except
as otherwise provided by law, this ordinance shall be effective on the day
after final publication.
U. The Township's Zoning Ordinance and land use regulations, as
amended; and the Zoning Map, as amended.
V. Ordinance No. 58, adopted 1-9-1990, Site Condominium Subdivisions,
and any amendments thereto.
A. Throughout the Code, a reference to "Michigan Compiled Laws" shall
include all sections of law, as last amended, which are assigned a
compilation number by the legislative service bureau and are not
subsequently repealed.
B. Unless otherwise specifically provided, a reference to all or part of a
statute, regardless of whether the words "as amended" are used in the
reference, shall include the latest amendments to the statute or part.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Township Board of Trustees that all such changes be adopted as part of
the Code as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally
amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)2
C. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, the following outdated terms are
updated as follows:
(1) "Township Manager" is changed to "Township Superintendent."
(2) "County Drain Commission" and "County Drain Commissioner?"
are changed to "County Water Resources Commission" and "County
Water Resources Commissioner," respectively.
2. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-19B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article II. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 3-13-2018." Schedule A,
which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the Township offices.
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:13
Chapter 45
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 68.
§ 1-20 OAKLAND CODE § 1-20
1:14
ARTICLE I
Township Superintendent
[Adopted 2-26-2002 by Ord. No. 97 (Ch. 2, Art. III, Div. 2, of the
2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 45-1. Position of Township Superintendent.
The position of Township Superintendent has been duly created by
resolution of the Township Board, and is hereby established by this article.
§ 45-2. Appointment; qualifications; terms of office; employment
contract.
The Township Superintendent shall be appointed by the Township Board
of Trustees and shall hold office at the pleasure of the Township Board.
The Township Superintendent shall be selected on the basis of training,
education, experience and ability alone, without regard to his or her
political preference and in conformity with all applicable laws concerning
equal employment opportunity. A contract of employment may be executed
between the Township and Superintendent specifying employment,
compensation, benefits and such other terms as approved by the Township
Board of Trustees.
§ 45-3. Powers and duties.
The Superintendent shall attend all meetings of the Township Board of
Trustees and report to the Township Board of Trustees regarding the
administration of the Township. Further duties, authority and responsibility
of the Township Superintendent are as follows:
A. The Township Superintendent shall be the Chief Administrative Officer
of the Township and shall be responsible and report to only the
Township Board of Trustees.
B. The Township Superintendent shall supervise all Township departments
unless separate supervision for a department is provided by law, this
article, another duly adopted ordinance of the Township, or a duly
adopted resolution of the Township Board of Trustees. The
Superintendent shall be responsible for all human resource matters or,
under his responsibility, delegate such duties to some other Township
officer or employee.
C. To see that all laws and Township ordinances are enforced.
D. To manage and supervise all public improvements, works and
undertakings of the Township.
E. To have charge of the construction, repair, maintenance, lighting and
cleaning of streets, sidewalks, safety paths, bridges, pavements, sewers
and all the public buildings or other property belonging to the
Township.
§ 45-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-3
1:15
§ 45-4. Township consultants.
The Township Board of Trustees shall have authority to direct Township
consultants and other professionals including, but not limited to, attorneys,
auditors, engineers, and planning consultants to perform certain tasks or
assignments. The Township Board shall have sole and exclusive authority
to appoint such consultants and professionals, however, the Superintendent
may make recommendations and monitor the performance of all
consultants.
F. To manage and supervise the operation of all Township utilities.
G. To be responsible for the preservation of property, tools and appliances
of the Township.
H. To see that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the Township or
its inhabitants in any public utility franchises or in any contract are
faithfully kept and performed.
I. To attend all meetings of the Township Board, with the right to take part
in discussions, but without the right to vote.
J. To be a member, ex officio, of all committees of the Township Board.
K. To prepare and administer the annual budget under policies formulated
by the Township Board and to keep the Board fully advised at all times
as to the financial conditions and needs of the Township.
L. To recommend to the Township Board for adoption such measures as
the Superintendent may deem necessary or expedient.
M. To be responsible to the Township Board for the efficient administration
of all departments of the Township, or, under his responsibility, delegate
such duties to some other Township officer or employee.
N. To act as the purchasing agent for the Township or, under his
responsibility, delegate such duties to some other Township officer or
employee.
O. To conduct all sales of personal property which the Township Board of
Trustees may authorize to be sold.
P. To submit regular reports to the Township Board of Trustees.
Q. To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the Charter
Township Act3 or required of the Superintendent by ordinance or by
direction of the Township Board of Trustees, or which are not assigned
to some other official in conformity with the provisions of the Charter
Township Act.
3. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 42.1 et seq.
§ 45-3 OAKLAND CODE § 45-4
1:16
Chapter 52
ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
General penalty — See Ch. 1, Art. I. Offenses — See Ch. 285.
§ 45-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 45-4
1:17

ARTICLE I
Authority to Issue Appearance Tickets
[Adopted 4-22-1986 by Ord. No. 49 (Ch. 14, Art. II, of the 2007 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 52-1. Authorized officials.
The following persons, being public servants of the Township, shall be
authorized to issue and serve upon persons appearance tickets with respect
to alleged violations of ordinances and codes of the Township in such cases
as such public servants have reasonable cause to believe that such persons
have committed violations of an ordinance or code of the Township:
§ 52-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPEARANCE TICKET — A complaint or written notice issued and
subscribed by a public servant, authorized in § 52-1, directing a designated
person to appear in a designated local criminal court at a designated future
time in connection with his alleged commission of a specified violation
or violations of Township ordinance or code for which the maximum
permissible penalty is provided in § 1-2.
A. The Township Supervisor; and
B. The Township Zoning Inspector.
§ 52-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-2
1:19

ARTICLE II
Municipal Civil Infractions; Citations
[Adopted 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 80 (Ch. 14, Art. III, of the 2007
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 52-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION — A violation of a provision of a Township
ordinance for which the remedy and/or penalty is prescribed to be a civil
fine, or other sanction other than a criminal penalty. A municipal civil
infraction is not a lesser included offense of a criminal offense or of an
ordinance violation that is not a civil infraction.
MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION DETERMINATION — A determination that
a defendant is responsible for a municipal civil infraction by one of the
following:
REPEAT OFFENSE — A determination of responsibility for a second, or any
subsequent, municipal civil infraction with regard to the same ordinance,
committed by the same person within any three-year period, unless some
other period is specifically provided with regard to a specific ordinance
provision.
RESPONSIBLE or RESPONSIBILITY — A determination entered by a court
or Magistrate that a person is in violation of a provision of a Township
ordinance prescribed to be a municipal civil infraction.
VIOLATION — Any act which is prohibited or made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense under a Township ordinance, including affirmative
acts as well as omissions and/or failures to act where that act is required by
these ordinances.
§ 52-4. Ordinance Enforcement Officer.
A. An admission of responsibility for the municipal civil infraction.
An admission of responsibility for the municipal civil infraction, with
explanation.
B.
A preponderance of the evidence at an informal hearing or formal
hearing.
C.
D. A default judgment for failing to appear at a scheduled appearance.
A. The Township board is hereby authorized to appoint by motion or
resolution any person as Ordinance Enforcement Officers for such term
as may be designated in the motion or resolution for the purposes of
carrying out the duties and responsibilities specified in this article for
officials charged with the enforcement of this article. The Board may
§ 52-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-4
1:21
§ 52-5. Commencement of action; issuance of citation.
A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance of
a municipal civil infraction citation by an authorized official of the Township
directing the person alleged to be responsible to appear in court.
§ 52-6. Form of citations.
The form of citations used to charge municipal civil infraction violations
shall be in accordance with state law (MCLA § 600.8709).
§ 52-7. Basis for issuance of municipal civil infraction citation.
The basis for issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation shall be as
follows:
further, by motion or resolution, remove any person from such office, at
the discretion of the Board.
B. An appointed Ordinance Enforcement Officer is authorized to enforce
all ordinances of this Township whether or not any particular provision
specifies or designates a different enforcing official. Where a particular
officer is designated in any ordinance provision, that officer's authority
shall continue in full force and effect, and shall not be diminished or
impaired by the terms of this article, and the authority of the Ordinance
Enforcement Officer shall be in addition and supplementary to the
authority granted to such other specific officer.
C. The Ordinance Enforcement Officer's duties shall include the following:
(1) Investigation of ordinance violations;
(2) Issuance and service of municipal civil infraction citations;
(3) Appearance in court and other judicial or quasi-judicial
proceedings in the administration of the Township ordinances.
A. An authorized official who witnesses a person violate an ordinance, the
violation of which is a municipal civil infraction, shall prepare and
subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original
and three copies of a citation.
B. An authorized official may issue a citation to a person if, based upon
investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that a person
is responsible for a municipal civil infraction.
C. An authorized official may issue a citation to a person if, based upon
investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed a
person violate an ordinance, a violation of which is a municipal civil
infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction and if the attorney for the
Township approves in writing the issuance of the citation.
§ 52-4 OAKLAND CODE § 52-8
1:22
§ 52-8. Service of citations.
A. Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served in the following
manner:
(1) Except as otherwise provided below, the authorized official shall
personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator.
(2) A municipal civil infraction action involving the use or occupancy of
land or a building or other structure, a copy of the citation need not
be personally served upon the alleged violator but may be served
upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by
posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or
structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by firstclass
mail to the owner of the land, building or structure at the
owner's last known address.
B. A citation served as provided in Subsection A(2) of this section, for a
violation involving the use or occupancy of land or a building or other
structure, shall be processed in the same manner as a citation served
personally upon a defendant.
§ 52-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 52-8
1:23
Chapter 68
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction standards — See Ch. 165.
Floodplain and wetlands protection — See Ch.
210.
Historic districts and preservation — See Ch.
228.
Land divisions and subdivisions — See Ch.
250.
Mining operations — See Ch. 267.
Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 364.
Tree protection, preservation and
removal — See Ch. 389.
§ 68-1. Statutory authority; purpose; establishment.
§ 68-2. Membership; terms; removal.
A. Authority. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted the
Township Board of Trustees under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act,
Public Act 33 of 2008, MCLA § 125.3801 et seq., and the Michigan
Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.,
to establish a Planning Commission with the powers, duties and
limitations provided by those Acts and subject to the terms and
conditions of this chapter and any future amendments to this chapter.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide that the Charter
Township of Oakland Board of Trustees hereby confirms the
establishment, under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act
33 of 2008, MCLA § 125.3801 et seq., of the Oakland Township
Planning Commission, formerly established under the Township
Planning Act, Public Act 168 of 1959, MCLA § 125.321 et seq., to
establish the appointments, terms, and membership of the Planning
Commission; to identify the officers and the minimum number of
meetings per year of the Planning Commission, and to prescribe the
authority, powers and duties of the Planning Commission.
C. Establishment. There shall be a Charter Township of Oakland Planning
Commission in accordance with the Michigan Planning Enabling Act,
Act 33 of 2008, as amended, with the powers and duties as therein set
forth and as hereinafter provided. This chapter shall be officially known
and described as the "Oakland Township Planning Commission
Ordinance."
A. The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members. Members of
the Planning Commission shall be appointed by the Township
Supervisor subject to approval by majority vote of the members of the
Township Board elected and serving.
§ 52-8 OAKLAND CODE § 68-2
1:24
§ 68-3. Officers of the Planning Commission.
B. The term of each member shall be three years and until a successor is
appointed and qualified, except that a Township Board member shall be
appointed as an ex officio member of the Planning Commission and
shall have a term corresponding with that person's term as a member of
the Township Board. The duration of the terms of members first
appointed to the Planning Commission shall vary, though not exceeding
three years, so that terms will expire in different years. Vacancies in
office shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term.
C. The membership of the Planning Commission shall be representative of
important segments of the community, such as the economic,
governmental, educational, and social development of the Township, in
accordance with the major interests, as they exist in the Township, such
as agriculture, natural resources, recreation, education, public health,
government, transportation, industry, and commerce. The membership
shall also be representative of the entire geography of the Township to
the extent practicable.
D. Members of the Planning Commission shall be qualified electors of the
Township, except that one Planning Commission member may be an
individual who is not a qualified elector of the Township.
E. The Township Board may remove a member of the Planning
Commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office
upon written charges and after a public hearing. Before casting a vote
on a matter on which a member may reasonably be considered to have a
conflict of interest, the member shall disclose the potential conflict of
interest to the Planning Commission. The member is disqualified from
voting on the matter if so provided by the bylaws or by a majority vote
of the remaining members of the Planning Commission. Failure of a
member to disclose a potential conflict of interest as required by this
subsection constitutes malfeasance in office. For purposes of this
chapter, a "conflict of interest" exists when a member of the Planning
Commission or a member of his or her family has a proprietary or
financial interest in an issue or matter that is before the Planning
Commission beyond that which is experienced by the public in general,
or the member may receive or gain a financial benefit as a result of a
vote on such issue or matter, or which would result in a violation of the
Standards of Conduct for Public Officers and Employees Act, 196 PA
1973 (being MCLA § 15.341 et seq.), the Incompatible Public Offices
Act, 566 PA 1978 (being MCLA § 15.181 et seq.), or any other state law
or Township ordinance or policy applicable to conflicts of interest.
A. The Planning Commission shall elect a Chairperson and Secretary from
its members and create and fill other offices, as it considers advisable.
The Township Board member of the Planning Commission is not eligible
to serve as Chairperson. The term of each officer shall be one year, with
opportunity for reelection as specified in bylaws adopted under § 68-4A
of this chapter.
§ 68-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-3
1:25
§ 68-4. Bylaws; annual report.
§ 68-5. Meetings; powers of Zoning Board.
§ 68-6. Duties and responsibilities.
The members of the Planning Commission shall have the following principal
duties and responsibilities, among others:
B. The Planning Commission may appoint advisory committees whose
members are not members of the Planning Commission.
A. The Planning Commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of
business, and shall keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions,
findings, and determinations.
B. The Planning Commission shall make an annual written report to the
Township Board concerning its operations and the status of planning
activities, including recommendations regarding actions by the
Township Board related to planning and development.
A. The Planning Commission shall hold not fewer than four regular
meetings each year. At its first meeting of each calendar year, the
Planning Commission shall adopt and provide public notice of its
regular meetings for the ensuing year in accordance with the Open
Meetings Act,4 as amended; provided, however, that a meeting need not
be held if pending matters do not warrant a meeting. Unless the
Planning Commission bylaws provide otherwise, the Secretary shall
send written notice of a special meeting to Planning Commission
members not less than 48 hours before the meeting.
B. The business that the Planning Commission may perform shall be
conducted at a public meeting of the Planning Commission held in
compliance with the Open Meetings Act, 1976 PA 267, as amended.
Public notice of the time, date, and place of a regular or special meeting
shall be given in the manner required by that Act.
C. The Township Board hereby transfers all powers and duties of a Zoning
Board to the Planning Commission, as outlined in the Zoning Enabling
Act, Act 110 of 2006,5 as amended, and as permitted in Section 11 of
the Township Planning Act, Act 168 of 1959.
A. To consider, report upon, and make recommendations regarding the
adoption of and amendments to the Township Zoning Ordinance.
B. To prepare, consider and approve the Township Master Plan, in
accordance with the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, as amended.
4. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 15.261 et seq.
5. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.
§ 68-3 OAKLAND CODE § 68-6
1:26
§ 68-7. Approval, ratification and reconfirmation of prior actions.
All official actions taken by the Charter Township of Oakland Planning
Commission preceding this chapter are hereby approved, ratified, and
reconfirmed. Any project, review, or process taking place at the effective
date of this chapter shall continue with the Planning Commission confirmed
by this chapter, subject to other requirements of this chapter, and shall be
deemed a continuation of any previous matter before the Charter Township
of Oakland Planning Commission. This chapter shall be in full force and
effect from and after its adoption and publication.
Chapter 101
ADDRESS DISPLAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction standards — See Ch. 165.
Land divisions and subdivisions — See Ch.
250.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 320.
C. In accordance with the Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006,6 as
amended, to consider, no less frequently than every five years, whether
a revision of the Master Plan or updated amendments in the Master
Plan are needed and to prepare, consider and approve any such
revisions or amendments.
D. To consider, recommend and/or approve zoning applications and
requests assigned to the Commission under Township ordinances,
including special land uses and other types of land use approval.
E. To promote understanding of and interest in the Master Plan and the
Township Zoning Ordinance.
F. Unless exempted, to review and make recommendations on proposed
public improvement projects, and to review and approve a capital
improvement plan, in accordance with the Planning Enabling Act, Act
33 of 2008,7 as amended.
G. To review and make recommendations on proposed platted
subdivisions, condominiums and site condominiums.
H. To carry out other duties and responsibilities as set forth in the
Planning Enabling Act, Act 33 of 2008.
6. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3101 et seq.
7. Editor's Note: See MCLA § 125.3801 et seq.
§ 68-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-1
1:27
§ 101-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADDRESS — The numbers and/or letters assigned to, approved or utilized
by the Township as a mailing address or means of identifying a geographical
location on a street and/or within a building in the Township.
BUILDING — A principal structure in the Township, to which an address has
been assigned, approved or utilized by the Township.
DRIVEWAY — A private road or drive that provides a means for vehicle
access to one building.
OCCUPANT — All persons with actual, or rights to, possession, use or
occupancy of all or part of a building or parcel of real property in the
Township on or for which an address is required to be displayed by this
chapter.
OWNER — All persons with an ownership interest in all or part of a building
or parcel of real property in the Township, on or for which an address
is required to be displayed by this chapter, as a titleholder, land contract
purchaser or otherwise. For purposes of this chapter, the Township may
base and limit its determination of owners to those shown on Township tax
records.
ROAD — A public or private street or thoroughfare that provides a means of
vehicle access to more than one building.
§ 101-2. Requirements.
A. General requirement. Addresses shall be displayed by placement and
maintenance on, in and for buildings and real property as provided in
this chapter.
(1) Style, size and spacing. Each numeral or letter in an address shall
be at least four inches high and two inches wide. Block-style Arabic
numerals and English letters shall be used, with a space of at least
one inch between numerals or letters.
(2) Colors and materials. Addresses shall be metal, wood or other
sturdy, permanent material, securely fastened or attached to, and
of a color that contrasts with, the surface upon which they are
mounted or displayed.
B. Building addresses. Addresses shall be displayed on and/or in all
buildings or parts thereof in the manner and locations specified in this
section.
(1) Location on building exterior. Addresses shall be displayed on an
exterior surface, at or near an entrance on the front or other side of
the building that faces and is visible from the road that provides the
§ 101-1 OAKLAND CODE § 101-2
1:28
means of vehicle access to the building at a height at least four feet
above the ground and so as to be plainly visible and unobstructed
from the road by visual barriers such as trees, shrubs, landscaping
or structures.
(2) Multiple occupancies. For buildings having more than one
occupant, the address for each occupant shall be displayed on the
building exterior as required in Subsection B(1) of this section, at
any interior entrances to the occupant's use area within the
building, and, when there is more than one exterior entrance to the
building, at or near the entrance providing the most direct means
of access to the occupant's use area within the building.
(3) Building address number sizes. If a main address common to all
occupants of a building is displayed in compliance with all
requirements of this chapter, the size and spacing of address
numerals and letters for individual occupants may be adjusted by
the Township in response to a request for a waiver or variance
under § 101-3.
C. Property addresses. In addition to addresses required on and in
buildings, addresses shall be displayed in the circumstances, manner
and locations designated in this section.
(1) When required. Property addresses are required:
(a) For buildings, vehicular access to which is provided by a
private road serving more than one building;
(b) Where the exterior portion of a building where an address is
required to be displayed under Subsection B(1) of this section
is more than 100 feet from the nearest edge of the traveled
portion of the road providing access to the building; or
(c) Where, due to topography, vegetation, layout or intervening
sight barriers, the address required to be displayed on the
building is not clearly visible on a year-round basis from the
nearest edge of the traveled portion of the road providing
access to the building.
(2) Manner and location of property addresses. When separate
property addresses are required, they shall be displayed on a post,
gate, driveway marker, mailbox, accessory structure or other
sturdy and permanent surface that is within 20 feet of, and closer
to, the private road or driveway providing access to the buildings
than any other private road or driveway and is located on the same
side of the road as that building. Property addresses shall be at
least four feet above ground level and be readily visible from a
vehicle traveling in a forward direction on the right side of the
road. Continuous visibility of property addresses shall be
maintained by the maintenance, clearance or removal of
§ 101-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-2
1:29
§ 101-3. Administration and enforcement.
§ 101-4. Violations and penalties.8
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and subject to a civil fine as set
forth in Chapter 1, Article I, Definitions; General Penalty, of the Code of the
Charter Township of Oakland. In addition to ordering a person determined
to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs,
damages and expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue
any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or enjoin violation of this
chapter. Each act of violation, and on each day which any such violation
shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 109
vegetation, accumulations of ice or snow and other obstructions to
view.
D. Compliance responsibility and timing.
(1) Owner-occupant liability. Compliance with this chapter shall be the
joint and several responsibility of all owners and occupants.
(2) Existing buildings. The building and property address
requirements of this chapter for existing buildings shall be
complied with within one year of the effective date of the ordinance
from which this chapter is derived or, as provided in Subsection
D(3) of this section, whichever is earlier.
(3) New buildings and building permits. All building and other permit
applications to the Township for any purpose shall include a plan or
description of existing or proposed address displays that do, or
upon completion will, comply with the requirements of this chapter.
Compliance with this chapter shall be a condition of any such
permits that are issued and a condition precedent to the issuance of
a certificate of occupancy or use for the permitted activity, property
or building.
A. Authorized officers. This chapter shall be administered and enforced by
the Township building director and/or such other persons as may be
designated by resolution of the Township Board of Trustees.
B. Interpretations; waivers; variances. Interpretations, variances and
waivers of the requirements of this chapter may be made by the
Township on a case-by-case basis where it is demonstrated by an owner
or occupant that the purpose and intent of this chapter will be served
and satisfied by an alternative to the standards in this chapter.
8. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 101-2 OAKLAND CODE § 101-4
1:30
ALARMS, FALSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency response cost recovery — See Ch.
190.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 203.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 320.
§ 109-1. Intent and authorization.
§ 109-2. Scope and application.
The civil fees required under this chapter shall apply in addition to any
other civil or criminal law or ordinance.
§ 109-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
FALSE ALARM — The activation of any alarm signaling for a response by
Township personnel, including police and/or fire, and including contracted
personnel, where there is no reasonable basis for believing that a condition
exists for which an emergency response from the Fire or Police Department
is necessary or appropriate.
PERSON — Any human being, partnership, corporation, association, or any
other entity recognized by the law, and/or any combination thereof, who is
the owner and/or the occupant of the premises where the alarm is situated.
§ 109-4. Obligation to pay civil fees.
A. It is the intent of this chapter to deter false alarms, and to provide for
the reimbursement to the Township for the expense of responding to
false alarms, and to establish a lien, and for the collection of a civil fee
in the event of a failure to pay a civil fee as required under this chapter.
B. The civil fees required to be paid under this chapter are authorized by
Section 6a of Act 33 of the Public Acts of 1951 (MCLA § 41.806a), and
other statutes and laws of the state.
A. A person shall be obligated to pay the civil fees required in this chapter
if a false alarm is intentionally activated by such person.
B. A person shall be obligated to pay the civil fees required in this chapter
if a false alarm is activated by such person as a result of mistake,
mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, lack of prudent
maintenance, or negligence of the occupant or the occupant's agents,
employees or contractors, with regard to a residence and/or building or
portion of a building in which the alarm is activated.
§ 101-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-4
1:31
§ 109-5. Civil fee schedule.
In the event of the obligation to pay a civil fee under this chapter, a civil
fee in the amount of $100 shall be payable within 30 days of the date of the
notice of such obligation to the obligated party.
§ 109-6. Collection of civil fees.
C. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsections A and B of this section:
(1) One false alarm caused during any ninety-day period shall not
result in an obligation to pay a civil fee under this chapter;
(2) The Township Supervisor shall be authorized to waive the
obligation to pay a civil fee under this chapter if reliable written
evidence is presented demonstrating all of the following:
(a) The false alarm resulted exclusively from a mechanical
malfunction;
(b) A waiver of a civil fee under this chapter has never been
granted with respect to the premises in question;
(c) The cause of the mechanical malfunction has been fully and
completely repaired, or a new alarm system has been installed;
and
(d) It is certified that the alarm system is in good and workable
condition, and it is reasonably anticipated that the system will
function properly in the foreseeable future.
A. A notice of the obligation to pay a civil fee under this chapter shall be
transmitted by regular mail to the person obligated to pay, using the
last known address for such person at the premises at which the false
alarm occurred. Such address shall be based upon the address on the
tax records of the Township for the premises in question.
B. If a civil fee has not been fully paid within 30 days of the date of the
notice, the fee shall be deemed to be delinquent. A penalty of 5% of the
unpaid amount of the fee shall be added during the first month or any
part of the first month following delinquency, and an additional penalty
of 1 1/2% per month shall be added on the unpaid balance thereafter.
C. A delinquent civil fee under this chapter shall constitute a lien on the
property at which the false alarm occurred. On or before September 1
of each year, the delinquent and unpaid civil fee obligations shall be
presented by the Township Clerk to the Township board for certification
as being delinquent, and upon such certification, the delinquent fees
shall be placed upon the general property tax roll of the Township in
relation to the respective properties at which the false alarms occurred,
and collected with the general Township taxes.
§ 109-4 OAKLAND CODE § 109-6
1:32
Chapter 115
ALCOHOL BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Traffic accidents involving alcohol — See Ch.
190, Art. I.
Intoxicated persons and firearms — See Ch.
285, Part 6, Art. X.
Open house parties — See Ch. 285, Part 8, Art.
XIII.
Offenses pertaining to underage
persons — See Ch. 285, Part 8, Art. XV.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 299.
§ 115-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and cited as the Charter Township of Oakland
"Alcohol Beverages Ordinance," and it shall be deemed sufficient in any
action for enforcement of the provisions hereof to define the same by such
short title and by reference to the number hereof.
§ 115-2. Purpose
The purpose of this chapter shall be:
§ 115-3. Application for new license.
A. To secure economic development and protect the general welfare and
safety of the citizens and other persons within the Charter Township of
Oakland.
B. To establish procedures and standards for review of applications,
renewals, transfers, and revocations/renewals of licenses to sell beer,
wine, and/or spirits.
C. To establish procedures and standards for issuance or retention of
available, but unissued, quota licenses.
A. Application. An application for a new license to sell beer, wine, and/or
spirits within the Township shall be sent to the Township
Superintendent. The application shall include a fee of $1,000 plus the
estimated cost of the notice mailing; and the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, or the
names, addresses and telephone numbers of the officers and
directors of the corporation, if applicable.
(2) The length of time said applicant has been in a business of that
character; or, in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter
was issued.
§ 109-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-3
1:33
(3) The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license.
(4) A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony
and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter
or thing contained in this chapter or the laws of the State of
Michigan.
(5) A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
State of Michigan or of the United States or any ordinances of the
Township in the conduct of its business.
(6) The sources of all funds which will be relied upon in the
establishment and operation of the entity sought to be licensed.
(7) Whether a new building is proposed or an existing structure will be
utilized.
(8) A general operational statement outlining the proposed manner in
which the establishment will be operated, including a schedule of
the hours of operation, food service, crowd control, use of facilities,
parking facilities, and estimated cost of development.
(9) A statement demonstrating that the location proposed and the
methods of operation will not detrimentally and unreasonably
impact nearby property owners, businesses and residents and an
outline of the economic impact the requested license will have on
the surrounding area.
(10) Any other information deemed relevant to the applicant or the
Township.
B. Township action.
(1) After receiving the application, the Township Superintendent shall
refer a copy of the application to any applicable Township
department (i.e., Building Department, Fire Department, Police
Department) for an investigation relating to its areas of
responsibility. Each department shall issue a report to the
Township Superintendent with its findings and a recommendation
regarding the application.
(2) After receiving the reports from any applicable Township
department, the Township Superintendent shall submit the
application and any investigatory reports to the Township Board for
review.
(3) The Township Board shall grant a public hearing on the license
application to consider whether approving the license is in the best
interests of the Township.
(4) At least seven days before the public hearing, the Township shall
send notice of the public hearing, at the expense of the applicant, to
§ 115-3 OAKLAND CODE § 115-3
1:34
all property owners located within 300 feet of the applicant's
proposed permit address.
(5) Following the hearing, the Board will determine whether to
approve or disapprove the issuance of a new liquor license, and
issue written notice of its decision to the applicant. The Board may
consider the following factors in making its determination:
(a) The economic impact the issuance of the license could have on
the Township.
(b) Whether the property values or character of the adjoining
neighborhood will be adversely affected.
(c) Consistency with the Building Code, Zoning Ordinance, Zoning
Map, Land Use Plan, Master Plan and the anticipated impact
on nearby businesses and residences.
(d) Whether or not the location of the proposed licensed premises
is, when considering the location of licensed locations already
in existence, in the best interest of the Township.
(e) Whether it is in the best interest of the Township to approve of
the issuance of another liquor license at the time an
application is before it for consideration.
(f) The application shall be accompanied by building and plot
plans showing the entire structure and premises, and, in
particular, the specific areas where the license is to be utilized.
The plans shall demonstrate adequate off-street parking,
lighting, refuse disposal facilities and, where appropriate,
adequate plans for screening and noise control.
(g) Whether an applicant's business, whether existing or
proposed, will generate at least 50% of its gross revenues from
the sale of food for on-site consumption and whether the
applicant's premises are or will be, prior to commencing liquor
sales, equipped to serve the required volume of food sales.
(h) Proximity to residences, schools and churches, with
consideration of any adverse effect the proposed establishment
may have on such land uses.
(i) Whether traffic and parking requirements generated by the
proposed licensed premises will cause unnecessary congestion
or inconvenience on the public highways.
(j) The applicant's experience, if any, in conducting a business
holding a license from the State Liquor Control Commission.
(k) Crowd control, and pedestrian and vehicle movement.
(l) Public safety and policing requirements.
§ 115-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-3
1:35
(6) If the Township Board votes to approve the application for a new
liquor license, the Board may condition the approval on the
satisfaction of any of the conditions stated below. Any conditions
set by the Board must be set forth in the Board's resolution.
Approval of the license can be granted with the following
conditions:
(a) In the Township's discretion, the applicant agrees not to
change the classification of its license (i.e., changing from a
tavern license to a Class C liquor license).
(b) In the Township's discretion, a contract setting forth
restrictions acceptable to the Township and agreed to by the
applicant. Said contract may provide regulations as to the use
of the license in conjunction with entertainment, prohibit or
restrict the transfer of the license for a period of time, and any
other provision allowed by law and agreed to by the Township
and the applicant.
(c) Issuance of licenses shall be contingent upon the application
for, and receipt of, site plan approval, building permits, zoning
changes and other necessary approvals required by the
Township within six months after the issuance.
(d) Construction shall be pursued within six months after the
issuance of a license, at which time the progress of the
applicant in meeting all of the above-stated conditions shall be
reported by the Township Superintendent, and his
subordinates, to the Township Board.
(e) The Township Board may extend, upon a showing of special or
unusual circumstances not the fault of the applicant, the time
period set forth in Subsection B(6)(b) and (c) above, upon a
request made before expiration of said time periods.
(f) No floor plans, building elevation, site plan, seating
arrangement, kitchen layout or other pertinent facts, drawings
or documents considered by the Township in granting its
approval may be changed, unless the change reasonably
improves the design or service function of the facility, and the
applicant receives approval for the change from the Township
Board. There shall be no fee charged under this chapter for
Township review of such an approval request.
(g) When any building or remodeling is complete, it must meet all
state and local laws, ordinances and regulations, and must
comply with any representations made to the Township Board
by the applicant.
(h) Failure of any applicant to meet any of the conditions set forth
in the Board's resolution for approval of the liquor license shall
§ 115-3 OAKLAND CODE § 115-3
1:36
§ 115-4. Objection to renewal or transfer of license.
§ 115-5. Revocation of license.
The Township Board may, at any time, request that the MLCC revoke an onpremises
liquor license, for any of the following reasons:
be reason for the Township Board to deny the annual renewal
of any of the licenses issued.
A. Procedure. Prior to filing an objection to a renewal of a license or the
transfer of a license, the Township Board shall give the licensee notice
of a public hearing, not less than 10 days prior to the hearing. The
notice shall include the reasons for the hearing, notice of the proposed
action, and a statement that the licensee may present evidence and
testimony on its behalf.
B. Determination. If the Township Board decides to recommend
nonrenewal or object to the transfer of a license to the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission ("MLCC"), it shall pass a resolution to that effect,
stating the specific reasons for that determination. The resolution shall
be forwarded to the MLCC in a timely fashion.
A. Violations of the state liquor laws.
B. Violation of state law or local ordinances.
C. Refusal to respond to written warnings that revocation proceedings
may be commenced unless the licensee or his representative appear
before the Township Board and show cause why revocation should not
be initiated.
D. Maintenance of a nuisance upon, or in connection with, the licensed
premises, including, but not limited to, any of the following:
(1) Existing violations of Building, Electrical, Mechanical, Plumbing,
Zoning, Health, Fire or other applicable Regulatory Codes;
(2) A pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of the licensed
premises which is in violation of the law and/or disturbs the peace,
order and tranquility of the neighborhood;
(3) Excessive police contacts with licensed premises, or its patrons off
the premises, and determined to be the fault of the licensee; and
(4) Repeated reports that the licensee is serving minors or intoxicated
persons.
E. The Township Board shall implement the same procedure outlined in
§ 115-4 of this chapter for a recommendation of revocation to the
MLCC.
§ 115-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 115-6
1:37
§ 115-6. Adoption of § 703 of Public Act 58 of 1998, MCLA
§ 436.1703. [Added 3-27-2018 by Ord. No. 107]
Chapter 122
ASSEMBLIES, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 274. Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 299.
A. Purpose and intent. This is a section to adopt § 703 of Public Act 58 of
1998, MCLA § 436.1703, as amended at this time or as may be amended
in the future, by reference, for the purpose of regulating purchase,
consumption, or possession of alcoholic liquor by minor; attempt;
violation; fines; sanctions; furnishing fraudulent identification to minor;
use of fraudulent identification by minor; prior violation; screening and
assessment; chemical breath analysis; notice to parent, custodian, or
guardian; exceptions; definitions.
B. Adoption by reference. Section 703 of Public Act 58 of 1998, MCLA
§ 436.1703, as amended at this time or as may be amended in the
future, is hereby adopted by reference.
C. Definition of "minor." As defined in § 109 of Public Act 58 of 1998,
MCLA § 436.1109, as amended, "minor" means an individual less than
21 years of age.
D. Limitations. Violations of § 703 of Public Act 58 of 1998, MCLA
§ 436.1703, as amended at this time or as may be amended in the
future, for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than
93 days shall not be enforced by the Township of Oakland as an
ordinance violation.
E. Penalties. The penalties provided in § 703 of Public Act 58 of 1998,
MCLA § 436.1703, as amended at this time or as may be amended in the
future, are adopted by reference, subject to the limitations stated in
Subsection D above.
F. Repealer. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are
hereby repealed only to the extent necessary to give this section full
force and effect.
§ 115-6 OAKLAND CODE § 115-6
1:38
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 122-1. Findings.
The Township Board finds and declares that the interests of the public
health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the Township require the
regulation, licensing and control of assemblages of large numbers of people
in excess of those normally drawing upon the health, sanitation, fire, police,
transportation, utility and other public services regularly provided in this
Township.
§ 122-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ATTENDANT — Any person who obtains admission to an outdoor assembly
by the payment of money or by the rendering of services in lieu of the
payment of money for admission.
LICENSEE — Any person to whom a license is issued pursuant to this
chapter.
OUTDOOR ASSEMBLY — Hereinafter referred to as "assembly" means any
event, attended by more than 500 attendants, all or any part of which
includes a theatrical exhibition, public show, display, entertainment,
amusement or other exhibition, including, but not limited to, musical
festivals, rock festivals, peace festivals or similar gatherings, but does not
mean:
SPONSOR — Any person who organizes, promotes, conducts, or causes to
be conducted an outdoor assembly.
§ 122-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-8-1999 by Ord. No.
81]
An event which is conducted or sponsored by a governmental unit or
agency on publicly owned land or property;
A.
An event which is conducted or sponsored by any entity qualifying for
tax exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code
of 1954, being 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3), as incorporated by reference in
Section 201 of the Michigan Income Tax Act of 1967, Public Act No. 281
of 1967 (MCLA § 206.201); or
B.
An event held entirely within the confines of a permanently enclosed
and covered structure.
C.
A. It shall be unlawful for a licensee, his employee, or agent, to knowingly:
(1) Advertise, promote or sell tickets to, conduct, or operate an
assembly without first obtaining a license as herein provided;
§ 122-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-3
1:39
(2) Conduct or operate an assembly in such a manner as to create a
public or private nuisance;
(3) Conduct or permit, within the assembly, any obscene display,
exhibition, show, plan, entertainment or amusement;
(4) Permit any person on the premises to cause or create disturbance
in, around, or near the assembly by obscene or disorderly conduct;
(5) Permit any person to unlawfully consume, sell, or possess,
intoxicating liquor while on the premises; and
(6) Permit any person to unlawfully use, sell, or possess, any narcotics,
narcotic drugs or other controlled substances defined in Article VII
of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCLA § 333.7101 et seq.).
B. Any of the enumerated violations in Subsection A of this section is a
separate offense, is a nuisance per se immediately adjoinable in the
Circuit Courts, and, shall constitute municipal civil infraction, except
where otherwise provided by state law. A person determined to be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction for violation of any of the
above-enumerated violations shall be subject to a civil fine as set forth
in Chapter 1, Article I, Definitions; General Penalty, of the Code of the
Charter Township of Oakland. In addition to ordering a person
determined to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction to pay a
civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall
be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce
or enjoin violation of this chapter.9
C. It is further provided that any of the violations specified in this section
is a sufficient basis for revocation of the license and for the immediate
enjoining of the assembly by filing the appropriate action in the Circuit
Court.
9. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 122-3 OAKLAND CODE § 122-3
1:40
ARTICLE II
License Requirements
§ 122-4. License required.
A person shall not sponsor, operate, maintain, conduct or promote an
outdoor assembly in the Township unless he shall have first made
application for, and obtained, as hereinafter prescribed, a license for each
such assembly.
§ 122-5. Application for license.
Application for a license to conduct an outdoor assembly must be made in
writing on such forms and in such manner as prescribed by the Clerk of the
Township and shall be made at least 60 days prior to date of the proposed
assembly. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as
currently established or hereafter adopted by resolution of the Township
Board from time to time and shall include at least the following:
§ 122-6. Explanations, diagrams and maps.
A. The name, age, residence and mailing address of the person making the
application. Where the person making the application is a partnership,
corporation or other association, this information shall be provided for
all partners, officers and directors, or members. Where the person is a
corporation, a copy of the Articles of Incorporation shall be filed, and
the names and addresses shall be provided of all shareholders having
financial interest greater than $500.
B. A statement of the kind, character, and type of proposed assembly.
C. The address, legal description and proof of ownership of the site at
which the proposed assembly is to be conducted. Where ownership is
not vested in the prospective licensee, he shall submit an affidavit from
the owner indicating his consent to the use of the site for the proposed
assembly.
D. The date and hours during which the proposed assembly is to be
conducted.
E. An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected at the
assembly for each day it is conducted and a detailed explanation of the
evidence of admission which will be used and of the sequential
numbering or other method which will be used for accounting
purposes.
A. Each application shall be accompanied by a detailed explanation,
including drawings and diagrams where applicable, of the prospective
licensee's plans to provide for the following:
(1) Police and fire protection.
§ 122-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-6
1:41
§ 122-7. Investigation and report.
On receipt by the Clerk, copies of the application shall be forwarded to
the chief law enforcement and health officers for the county, the state Fire
Marshal, and to such other appropriate public officials as the Clerk deems
necessary. Such officers and officials shall review and investigate matters
relevant to the application and within 20 days of receipt thereof shall report
their findings and recommendations to the Township Board.
§ 122-8. Issuance of license; conditions.
Within 30 days of the filing of the application, the Township Board shall
issue, set conditions prerequisite to the issuance of, or deny, a license.
The Township Board may require that adequate security or insurance be
provided before a license is issued. Where conditions are imposed as
prerequisite to the issuance of a license, or where a license is denied, within
five days of such action, notice thereof must be mailed to the applicant by
certified mail, and, in the case of denial, the reasons therefor shall be stated
in the notice.
§ 122-9. Denial of license.
A license may be denied if:
(2) Food and water supply and facilities.
(3) Health and sanitation facilities.
(4) Medical facilities and services including emergency vehicles and
equipment.
(5) Vehicle access and parking facilities.
(6) Camping and trailer facilities.
(7) Illumination facilities.
(8) Communications facilities.
(9) Noise control and abatement.
(10) Facilities for cleanup and waste disposal.
(11) Insurance and bonding arrangements.
(12) Provisions for shelter during inclement weather.
B. In addition, the application shall be accompanied by a map or maps of
the overall site of the proposed assembly.
A. The applicant fails to comply with any or all requirements of this
chapter, or with any or all conditions imposed pursuant hereto, or with
any other applicable provision of state or local law; or
§ 122-6 OAKLAND CODE § 122-9
1:42
§ 122-10. Contents of license; posting.
A license under this article shall specify the name and address of the
licensee, the kind and location of the assembly, the maximum number of
attendants permissible, the duration of the license and any other conditions
imposed pursuant to this chapter. The license shall be posted in a
conspicuous place upon the premises of the assembly, and shall not be
transferred to any other person or location.
§ 122-11. Required facilities and services.
In processing an application, the Township Board shall, at a minimum,
require the following:
B. The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent
statement in the application or in any supporting document.
A. Security personnel. The licensee shall employ at his own expense such
security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide for the
adequate security and protection of the maximum number of attendants
at the assembly and for the preservation of order and protection of
property in and around the site of the assembly. No license shall be
issued unless the chief law enforcement officer for the county in
cooperation with the director of state police is satisfied that such
necessary and sufficient security personnel will be provided by the
licensee for the duration of the assembly.
B. Water facilities. The licensee shall provide potable water, sufficient in
quantity and pressure to ensure proper operation of all water using
facilities under conditions of peak demand. Such water shall be
supplied from a public water system, if available and, if not available,
then from a source constructed, located, and approved in accordance
with Part 127 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCLA § 333.12701 et seq.),
and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in
accordance with any other applicable state or local law, or from a
source and delivered and stored in a manner approved by the county
health officer.
C. Restroom facilities.
(1) The licensee shall provide separate enclosed flush-type water
closets as defined in Public Act No. 733 of 2002 (MCLA § 338.3511
et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto,
and in accordance with any other applicable state or local law. If
such flush-type facilities are not available, the county health officer
may permit the use of other facilities which are in compliance with
Section 12771 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCLA § 333.12771),
and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in
accordance with any other applicable state or local law.
§ 122-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-11
1:43
(2) The licensee shall provide lavatory and drinking water facilities
constructed, installed, and maintained in accordance with Public
Act No. 733 of 2002 (MCLA § 338.3511 et seq.), and the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any
other applicable state or local law. All lavatories shall be provided
with hot and cold water and soap and paper towels.
(a) The number and type of facilities required shall be determined,
on the basis of the number of attendants, in the following
manner:
Facilities Male Female
10 toilets for each 1,500 1,000
5 urinals for each 500
10 lavatories for each 1,200 1,200
10 drinking fountains 1,500 1,500
10 taps or faucets 1,500 1,500
(b) Where the assembly is to continue for more than 12 hours, the
licensee shall provide shower facilities, on the basis of the
number of attendants, in the following manner:
Facilities Male Female
10 shower heads for each 1,100 1,100
(3) All facilities shall be installed, connected, and maintained free from
obstructions, leaks and defects and shall at all times be in operable
condition as determined by the county health officer.
D. Food service. If food service is made available on the premises, it shall
be delivered only through concessions licensed and operated in
accordance with the provisions of Public Act 92 of 2000, MCLA
§ 289.1101 et seq., Food Law, and the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable state or
local law. If any assembly is distant from food service establishments
open to the public, the licensee shall make such food services available
on the premises as will adequately feed the attendants.10
E. Medical facilities. If the assembly is not readily and quickly accessible
to adequate existing medical facilities, the licensee shall be required to
provide such facilities on the premises of the assembly. The kind,
location, staff strength, medical and other supplies and equipment of
such facilities shall be as prescribed by the county health officer.
F. Liquid waste disposal. The licensee shall provide for liquid waste
disposal in accordance with all rules and regulations pertaining thereto
established by the county health officer. If such rules and regulations
10.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 122-11 OAKLAND CODE § 122-11
1:44
are not available or if they are inadequate, then liquid waste disposal
shall be in accordance with the United States Public Health Service
Publication No. 526, entitled "Manual of Septic Tank Practice." If liquid
waste retention and disposal is dependent upon pumpers and haulers,
they shall be licensed in accordance with Part 117 of Public Act No.
451 of 1994 (MCLA § 324.11701 et seq.), and the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable
state or local law, and, prior to issuance of any license, the licensee
shall provide the county health officer with a true copy of an executed
agreement in force and effect with a licensed pumper or hauler, which
agreement will ensure proper, effective and frequent removal of liquid
waste from the premises so as to neither create nor cause a nuisance
or menace to the public health.
G. Solid waste disposal. The licensee shall provide for solid waste storage
on, and removal from, the premises. Storage shall be in approved,
covered, flytight and rodent-proof containers, provided in sufficient
quantity to accommodate the number of attendants. Prior to issuance of
any license, the licensee shall provide the county health officer with a
true copy of an executed agreement in force and effect with a licensed
refuse collector, which agreement will ensure proper, effective and
frequent removal of solid waste from the premises so as to neither
create nor cause a nuisance or menace to the public health. The
licensee shall implement effective control measures to minimize the
presence of rodents, flies, roaches and other vermin on the premises.
Poisonous materials, such as insecticides or rodenticides shall not be
used in any way so as to contaminate food, equipment, or otherwise
constitute a hazard to the public health. Solid waste containing food
waste shall be stored so as to be inaccessible to vermin. The premises
shall be kept in such condition as to prevent the harborage or feeding of
vermin.
H. Public bathing beaches. The licensee shall provide or make available or
accessible public bathing beaches only in accordance with Sections
12541 through 12546 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCLA § 333.12541
et seq.), and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in
accordance with any other applicable provision of state or local law.
I. Public swimming pools. The licensee shall provide or make available
public swimming pools only in accordance with Sections 12521 through
12534 of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCLA § 333.12521 et seq.), and
the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance
with any other applicable provision of state or local law.
J. Access and traffic control. The licensee shall provide for ingress to and
egress from the premises so as to ensure the orderly flow of traffic onto
and off of the premises. Access to the premises shall be from a highway
or road which is a part of the county system of highways or which is a
highway maintained by the state. Traffic lanes and other space shall be
provided, designated and kept open for access by ambulance, fire
equipment, helicopter and other emergency vehicles. Prior to the
§ 122-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-11
1:45
issuance of a license, the Director of the Department of State Police and
the Director of the Department of State Highways must approve the
licensee's plan for access and traffic control.
K. Parking. The licensee shall provide a parking area sufficient to
accommodate all motor vehicles, but in no case shall he provide less
than one automobile space for every four attendants.
L. Camping and trailer parking. A licensee who permits attendants to
remain on the premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
shall provide for camping and trailer parking and facilities in
accordance with Sections 12501 through 12516 of Public Act No. 368 of
1978 (MCLA § 333.12501 et seq.), and the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, and in accordance with any other applicable
provision by state law and as provided pursuant to the Zoning
Ordinance, pertaining to zoning.
M. Illumination. The licensee shall provide electrical illumination of all
occupied areas sufficient to ensure the safety and comfort of all
attendants. The licensee's lighting plan shall be approved by the
Township Building Inspector.
N. Insurance. Before the issuance of a license, the licensee shall obtain
public liability insurance with limits as currently established or
hereafter adopted by resolution of the Township Board from time to
time from a company or companies approved by the Commissioner of
Insurance of the state, which insurance shall insure liability for death or
injury to persons or damage to property which may result from the
conduct of the assembly or conduct incident thereto and which
insurance shall remain in full force and effect in the specified amounts
for the duration of the license. The evidence of insurance shall include
an endorsement to the effect that the insurance company shall notify
the Clerk of the Township in writing at least 10 days before the
expiration or cancellation of said insurance.
O. Bonding. Before the issuance of a license, the licensee shall obtain,
from a corporate bonding company authorized to do business in the
state, a corporate surety bond in the amount as currently established or
hereafter adopted by resolution of the Township Board from time to
time in a form to be approved by the Township Attorney, conditioned
upon the licensee's faithful compliance with all of the terms and
provisions of this chapter and all applicable provisions of state or local
law, and which shall indemnify the Township, its agents, officers, and
employees and the Township Board against any and all loss, injury or
damage whatever arising out of or in any way connected with the
assembly and which shall indemnify the owners of property adjoining
the assembly site any costs attributable to cleaning up and/or removing
debris, trash, or other waste resultant from the assembly.
P. Fire protection. The licensee shall, at his own expense, take adequate
steps as determined by the state Fire Marshal, to ensure fire protection.
§ 122-11 OAKLAND CODE § 122-11
1:46
§ 122-12. Revocation of license.
The Township Board may revoke a license whenever the licensee, his
employee or agent fails, neglects or refuses to fully comply with any and all
provisions and requirements set forth herein or with any and all provisions,
regulations, ordinances, statutes, or other laws incorporated herein by
reference.
Q. Sound-producing equipment. Sound-producing equipment, including,
but not limited to, public address systems, radios, phonographs,
musical instruments and other recording devices, shall not be operated
on the premises of the assembly so as to be unreasonably loud or
raucous, or so as to be a nuisance or disturbance to the peace and
tranquility of the citizens of the Township and shall be controlled by the
limits as imposed by Chapter 274, Noise.
R. Fencing. The licensee shall erect a fence completely enclosing the site,
of sufficient height and strength as will preclude persons in excess of
the maximum permissible attendants from gaining access and which
will have sufficient gates properly located so as to provide ready and
safe ingress and egress.
S. Communications. The licensee shall provide public telephone
equipment for general use on the basis of at least one unit for each 500
attendants.
T. Miscellaneous. Prior to the issuance of a license, the Township Board
may impose any other conditions reasonably calculated to protect the
health, safety, welfare and property of attendants or of citizens of the
Township.
§ 122-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 122-12
1:47
Chapter 143
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency response cost recovery — See Ch.
190.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 203.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 299.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 320.
Solid waste — See Ch. 355.
Tree protection, preservation and
removal — See Ch. 389.
§ 143-1. Permit required.
A. No person shall kindle, set or maintain any fire or authorize any open
fire in which rubbish or waste materials would be burned on any
privately owned land or on any public land, road, street or alley within
the Township without first having secured a permit therefor from the
Chief of the Fire Department, or his representative, servicing the area
in which such fire is to be set.
B. No person shall start, or maintain any fire within the Township to burn
leaves, grass, rubbish or waste materials unless such person shall have
secured a permit as heretofore provided, and then in such event no
such fire shall be closer than 15 feet from any wood or frame structure,
fence, tree, hedge or property line and adequate provision is made to
prevent such fire from spreading. Any person setting or maintaining
such a fire shall remain at such fire until the same is completely
extinguished and shall do whatever is necessary to prevent such fire
from spreading to other lands.
C. No person shall start or maintain without a permit any fire on land
owned by another without written permission from such owner or his
authorized agent.
D. The Fire Chief or his representative may make reasonable conditions in
any permit to burn as provided herein to prevent the spreading of such
fires, and he may prohibit any burning of leaves, grass or rubbish when
atmospheric conditions or local circumstances may make such fire
hazardous.
E. Any person owning or operating a place of business within the
Township may burn paper and other wastes which accumulate as an
incident to the operation of such business, providing the burning is in
an approved burner, but no such person may burn any waste materials
which accumulate on other premises or are brought to the place of
business for disposal.
F. No person shall burn or dispose of waste materials in such a manner as
to cause or permit the smoke, dust, cinders or ashes to escape and
§ 122-12 OAKLAND CODE § 143-1
1:48
settle upon or permeate the air above any adjoining or nearby premises
in such a manner as to become a nuisance or a danger to health.
G. Any person, real or corporate, who starts or permits any other person to
start, without a permit, a fire on their property; or neglectfully or
carelessly permits a fire within the Township to spread or go out of
control shall be liable to the Township for the actual costs of
extinguishing such fire, and shall be liable to other persons damaged
thereby.
H. In order to more fully comply with the requirements as set out in Part
55 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCLA § 324.5501 et seq.), it is hereby
provided that the following guidelines shall be adhered to by the Fire
Chief, or his representative, in the administration of this chapter and
the issuance of burning permits:
(1) The burning of refuse shall be allowed without permit in
incinerators that comply with the air pollution control laws cited
above and the rules and regulations of the state Fire Marshal.
(2) The open burning of refuse from a multiple dwelling is prohibited.
(3) The open burning of refuse at commercial and industrial sites is
prohibited.
(4) The open burning of building demolition material is prohibited.
(5) The open burning of automobile bodies is prohibited.
(6) The burning of trees, logs, brush and stumps at land-clearing
operations may be permitted in rural areas unless it creates a
nuisance or hazard to health. Trees, plastics, and similar materials
are not to be used in such fires.
(7) The burning of trees, logs, brush and stumps may be permitted at a
licensed disposal site on an intermittent basis under a schedule
approved by the local health department. Tires, plastics and similar
materials are not to be used in such fires.
(8) The burning of highly flammable, toxic, or explosive materials is
prohibited without special approval.
(9) The plans and construction of all refuse incinerators, except for
household use, must be reviewed and approved by the Air Pollution
Control Section of the State Department of Environmental Quality.
Permit application forms are available on request.
(10) Special or unusual burning problems not covered in the above
listing should be reviewed with local health department
representatives or representatives of the state department of
environmental quality, and the Fire Chief, or his representative.
§ 143-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-1
1:49
§ 143-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-8-1999 by Ord. No.
8111]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or who
shall fail to comply therewith shall be responsible for a municipal civil
infraction, and upon a determination of responsibility shall be subject to a
civil fine as set forth in Chapter 1, Article I, Definitions; General Penalty,
of the Code of the Charter Township of Oakland. In addition to ordering
a person determined to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction to
pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall
be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or
enjoin violation of this chapter. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 148
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Electricity and natural gas providers — See
Ch. 184.
(11) A controlled fire permit fee as currently established or hereafter
adopted by resolution of the Township Board from time to time
shall be paid to the Fire Chief, or his representative, upon
application for such a permit, which fee shall be deposited to the
general fund of the Township.
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 143-1 OAKLAND CODE § 143-2
1:50
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 148-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote and encourage the furnishing of a
high quality but economical cable communications service to the residents
of the Township and to regulate such service in the public interest.
§ 148-2. Necessity of franchise.
No person shall own or operate a cable system, as defined in § 148-3, in
the Township except by franchise granted by the Township, which franchise
shall comply with all the requirements of this chapter.
§ 148-3. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, any subsequent ordinance dealing with cable
communications, any franchise agreement between the Township and a
cable communications company, and any application or proposal submitted
pursuant to an RFP, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will" are
mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning.
ACCESS CABLECASTING — Services provided by a cable television system
on its public, education, local government, licensed or other access
channels.
APPLICANT — Person or company submitting a proposal for the franchise
of a cable communications system.
BASIC SERVICE — All subscriber services provided by the grantee,
including the delivery of broadcast signals, covered by the regular monthly
charge, if any paid by all subscribers, excluding optional services for which
a separate charge is made.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — The business, in whole or in part,
of receiving directly or indirectly over the air, and amplifying or otherwise
modifying signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more signals,
sound signals, pictures, visual images, digital signals, telemetry, or any
other type of closed circuit transmission by means of electrical or light
impulses, whether or not directed to originating signals or receiving signals
off the air, and redistributing such signals by wire, cable or other means to
members of the public.
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM, CATV or SYSTEM
— A system of coaxial cables or other electrical conductors or fiber optical
cables and equipment used or to be used to originate or receive television
or radio signals directly or indirectly off the air and to transmit them via
§ 148-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-3
1:51
cable to subscribers for a fixed or variable fee, including the origination,
receipt, transmission, and distribution of voices, sound signals, pictures,
visual images, digital signals, telemetry, or any other type of closed circuit
transmission by means of electrical impulses, whether or not directed to
originating signals or receiving signals off the air.
CABLECAST — To distribute programs (both from broadcasting sources and
original programs) through the community system by means of coaxial cable
or other electrical conductors or fiber optical transmitters.
COMMUNITY SPECIFIC CABLECASTING — Programming or channel
allocation which selectively cablecasts to individual communities to meet
their unique needs or interests. The term "community" refers to any unit
with common needs or interests such as individual cities or neighborhoods,
school districts or groups with common characteristics.
CONNECTION — The attachment of the drop to the first radio or television
set of the subscriber.
CONVERTER — An electronic device, which converts signals to a frequency
not susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber,
and by an appropriate channel selector also permits a subscriber to view
all basic subscriber signals included in the basic service delivered at
designated converter dial locations. The converter may also allow reception
of additional programming and/or services at extra cost to the subscriber.
DROP — The cable that connects the subscriber terminal to the nearest
feeder cable of the cable system.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission and any legally
appointed, designated or elected agent or successor.
FEEDER — Intermediate line of a cable system that carries signals from
trunk line to drops.
FRANCHISE — The rights of a grantee to construct and operate a cable
system in the Township, subject to the laws of the state, this chapter and
the franchise agreement.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — An agreement between a cable operator
and the Township setting specific rights and responsibilities of each for
construction and operation of cable system.
FRAUD or DECEIT — Shall not be limited to common law fraud and deceit
but shall include the meaning of those words under federal securities law.
GRANTEE — A person to whom a cable communications franchise has been
granted.
GROSS REVENUES — All revenue derived directly or indirectly by a
grantee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parent, and/or any person in which the
grantee has a financial interest of 5% or more from or in connection with the
operation of the system in the Township, including, but not limited to, basic
subscriber service monthly fees, pay cable fees, converter rentals, studio
rental, production equipment and personnel fees, and advertising revenues.
The term does not include:
§ 148-3 OAKLAND CODE § 148-3
1:52
HEAD END — The equipment at the antenna site in a master antenna or
cable system. The point of origination that collects all the signals (from
broadcast stations, cable stations, and satellite stations) and sends them to
the subscribers.
HUB — One of two or more elements in a large cable system from which
trunk lines originate, from which programming and data is sent out via
trunk lines, and where upstream messages are received and where
switching is accomplished. Large systems have multiple hubs linked to each
other and/or to master head end.
INSTALLATION — The connection of the system from feeder cable to the
point of connection.
INTERACTIVE SYSTEM — A two-way operational system. See also "two-way
capability."
INTERCONNECT — To link cable head ends, so that subscribers to different
cable systems can see the same programming simultaneously.
LOCAL ORIGINATION — Programs produced locally, the content of which
may be original or produced elsewhere and sold or licensed to a grantee for
use.
LOCAL PUBLIC ACCESS — The public opportunity to use cable channels
which are dedicated to that purpose and are not under control of the
grantee.
LOCKOUT DEVICE — A device which prevents reception of one or more
channels at an individual drop provided by the grantee.
LOOP — A completely interactive closed-circuit net connecting specified
municipal, educational, medical or commercial facilities within a system
which should also have the capacity to be interconnected to the main cable
system.
PAY TV — Cable channels that require an additional subscriber fee.
POINT-TO-POINT TRANSMISSION — A signaling path provided by a system
to transmit signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to another point
in the system.
PRODUCER — A user providing input services to the cable system for
receipt by subscribers.
PROPOSAL — An applicant's response to an RFP.
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNELS — Channels which are dedicated to the public
interest, according to the following categories:
Any taxes on services furnished by the grantee and imposed directly
upon any subscriber or user by the state, Township or other
governmental unit and collected by the grantee on behalf of said
governmental unit; and
A.
Any dividends, distributions, interest or payments for services between
a grantee and its affiliates, subsidiaries and parent.
B.
§ 148-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-3
1:53
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Any real property owned or controlled by the
Township other than a street.
RFP — A request by the Township for a proposal from applicants for a cable
system.
SECURITY SYSTEM — Optional two-way service offered to cable
subscribers which may alert authorities and/or subscribers of potential
emergencies in the subscriber's home, or public or private building.
SENIOR CITIZEN — A person 62 years of age or older.
STREET, HIGHWAY — The surface of and the space above and below any
public or private street, road, highway, freeway, land, path, public way, alley,
court, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, drive or any easement or right-of-way
now or hereafter held by the Township which shall, within its proper use
and meaning in the sole opinion of the Township, entitle the grantee to
the use thereof for the purpose of installing, or transmitting over, poles,
wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers,
appliances, attachments and other property as may be ordinarily necessary
and pertinent to a system.
SUBSCRIBER — A person who pays an installation charge and/or monthly
fee to a cable system operator for connections to the system and for
programs and services carried on the cable.
SUBSCRIBER SERVICE DROP — The same as "drop."
TOWNSHIP — The local government of the Township, a Michigan
municipality, including all other constitutional or statutory public
authorities within its jurisdiction.
TRUNK, TRUNK LINE — The main line of cable system that carries signals
from the head end to extremities of cable system.
TWO-WAY CAPABILITY — The ability of cable system to conduct signals to
the head end as well as from the head end. See also "loop."
USER — A person or organization utilizing a system channel as a producer,
for purposes of production and/or transmission of material, or as a
subscriber, for purposes of receipt of material.
§ 148-4. Administration; advisory body.
A. Community.
B. Education.
C. Local government.
D. Health and medical.
E. Other.
A. Administrator. The Township Board may appoint an administrator who
shall serve at the pleasure of the Board and who shall be responsible for
the continuing administration of the franchise on the part of the
§ 148-3 OAKLAND CODE § 148-4
1:54
Township. The Township shall provide written notice to the grantee
of the initial appointment of the administrator and any subsequent
appointments.
B. Advisory body. The Township Board may appoint a cable
communications advisory committee to perform such duties and to have
such powers as the Township Board may determine. The composition
and terms of office of the members of the committee, as well as the
duties and powers of the committee, shall be determined and
established by resolution of the Township Board.
C. Delegation of authority by Township. The Township reserves the right
to delegate from time to time any of its rights or obligations under the
franchise to any body or organization. Any such delegation shall be
effective upon written notice thereof to the grantee. Upon receipt of
such notice the grantee shall be bound by all terms and conditions of
the delegation not in conflict with the franchise. Any such delegation or
revocation thereof, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed to
be an amendment to the franchise or require grantee's consent.
§ 148-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-4
1:55

ARTICLE II
Selection of Franchisee
§ 148-5. Award of franchise.
The Township Board may award a franchise to an applicant only after a
public hearing on the application and proposal, notice of which hearing
shall be published in a local newspaper of general circulation at least 20
days prior to the date of the hearing. The Township Board may reject all
applicants.
§ 148-6. Franchise application; fees.
All proposals shall be submitted in writing and shall be accompanied by
a nonrefundable fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the
Township Board. All proposals shall contain the information called for by
the RFP in the manner prescribed by the RFP.
A. Such information shall include, without limitation, the following:
(1) Information regarding the identity of the applicant.
(2) Biographical data of the applicant's principal owners and proposed
management, including the experience of such persons in the cable
communications field.
(3) Audited financial statements for the applicant's last fiscal year
together with the applicant's most current interim financial
statements, which interim statements need not be audited but
which shall be reviewed by a certified public accountant in
accordance with standards established by the American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants and which interim statements shall be
accompanied by the accountant's report thereon.
(4) A financing plan for the proposed system and a projection, covering
the term of the franchise, of revenue and expense in sufficient
detail to permit a determination to be made of the financial viability
of the applicant's proposal.
(5) A detailed description of the system and facilities proposed for the
Township, including the matters to which a response is specifically
required by Articles IV and V of this chapter, and including a
schedule of projected rates for all charges and fees to subscribers.
(6) A detailed timetable for the construction and commencement of
operation of the system, including the matters to which a response
is specifically required by Article VI of this chapter.
B. The RFP shall consist of an application which may be adopted by
Township Board resolution.
C. The Township shall be entitled to verify any information furnished by
the applicant in response to the RFP or in response to other requests for
§ 148-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-6
1:57
§ 148-7. Criteria for selection.
The award of a franchise to an applicant shall be based upon the
information contained in the applicant's proposal and such other relevant
information as may be obtained by the Township regarding such applicants
and the proposals. Such award shall be based upon the following criteria set
forth in this section together with such other factors as the Township may
deem relevant:
information regarding the applicant and the applicant's affairs. The
Township may exercise such right by requiring reports from the
applicant, or from third parties having knowledge of the applicant, or
by conducting such other kinds of investigation as the Township may
deem proper. In such cases, the applicant shall furnish the Township
with such written authorization regarding release of information as
may be necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of the foregoing
provisions. All of the foregoing provisions shall also be applicable to a
grantee as well as an applicant, it being deemed to be in the public
interest that the Township remain knowledgeable regarding the
grantee and the operation of the system throughout the term of the
franchise.
D. No applicant, nor any person on behalf of any applicant, shall, in
responding to an RFP or in responding to any other request for
information by the Township or by any officer or agency thereof, make
any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact
necessary in order to make the statements made, in the light of the
circumstances under which they are made, not misleading. A violation
of this provision shall constitute a fraud upon the Township.
A. The experience of the applicant in the cable communications field and
the credentials of its owners and managers.
B. The applicant's financial resources, including both present financial
condition and the availability of committed funding to finance the
applicant's proposed system; and the specificity and credibility of the
applicant's projections of the revenue and expenses attributable to the
construction and operation of the system.
C. The applicant's system design including channel capacity and ability to
provide a broad range of services in conformity with the highest quality
standards of the cable industry.
D. The applicant's schedule of rates and the length of time the applicant is
committed to maintain such rates.
E. The applicant's response to specific local concerns or needs, whether
formulated by the Township and made known to applicants or whether
ascertained by the applicant.
§ 148-6 OAKLAND CODE § 148-7
1:58
ARTICLE III
Franchise Agreement; Grant of Franchise
§ 148-8. Franchise agreement.
The franchise agreement shall be in such form and contain such terms and
provisions as shall be approved by the Township Board. The agreement may
be adopted, and amended, by resolution of the Township Board or by any
other mode of adoption or amendment authorized or required by law.
§ 148-9. Grant of franchise.
A grantee shall be awarded a franchise, pursuant to the provisions of
§ 148-5, either by resolution of the Township Board or by any other means
authorized or required by law. The grantee shall be promptly notified of
the award by the Township by written notice thereof, sent by registered or
certified mail, which notice shall be accompanied by one or more copies of
the franchise agreement.
§ 148-10. Execution and delivery of agreement by grantee.
§ 148-11. Execution and delivery of agreement by Township.
A. The franchise agreement shall be properly executed and delivered to
the Township by the grantee on or before 15 days after the date the
Township sends written notice of the award to the grantee, which
fifteen-day period may be extended by the Township Board for good
cause; provided, however, that the franchise agreement shall not
become effective until that specific date set forth in the franchise
agreement.
B. At the time of the delivery of the franchise agreement by the grantee to
the Township, the grantee shall pay to the Township all costs incurred
by the Township in the franchise process as provided in the franchise
agreement. All other payments which are to be made to the Township
by grantee shall similarly be made in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the franchise agreement.
C. At the time of delivery of the franchise agreement as provided in this
section, the grantee shall also deliver all other monies and all
documents and instruments required by this chapter or by the franchise
agreement.
A. Upon timely receipt by the Township from the grantee of the properly
executed franchise agreement, together with the acceptance fee and
such other monies, documents and instruments as may be required in
accordance with § 148-10, the Township may execute the agreement
and, upon execution thereof, shall deliver one fully executed copy to the
grantee; provided, however, nothing herein shall prohibit the Township
from revoking the award of the franchise prior to delivery of an
executed copy of the franchise agreement to the grantee.
§ 148-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-11
1:59
§ 148-12. Term and provisions of franchise agreement.
§ 148-13. Negotiated provisions.
The franchise agreement shall contain such further conditions or provisions
as may be negotiated between the Township and the grantee except that no
such conditions or provisions shall conflict with any provision of this chapter
or other law. In the case of such conflict, the provisions of this chapter
or other law shall prevail over the conflicting provision of the franchise
agreement.
§ 148-14. Rights reserved by Township.
B. In the event of any such revocation, which shall be accomplished in the
same manner as that used in granting the award, any funds and all
documents and instruments delivered by the grantee to the Township in
connection with the grantee's acceptance of the award shall be
returned forthwith to the grantee.
A. The franchise agreement shall provide for a nonexclusive franchise for
a term of not less than 10 years, which term shall commence as of the
date set forth in the franchise agreement.
B. The franchise agreement shall provide that, throughout the term of the
franchise, the grantee shall pay the Township a franchise fee within 90
days after the end of each fiscal year of the grantee. The fee shall not be
less than 3% of the grantee's gross revenues for each month. The
grantee shall take any action with respect to any federal or state agency
which may be necessary or appropriate to make the payment and
receipt of such fees lawful. Acceptance of any payment by the Township
shall not be construed as a release of or as an accord and satisfaction
regarding any claim the Township may have for further and additional
sums payable as a franchise fee or for the performance of any other
obligation of the grantee under this chapter or the franchise
agreement.
C. The franchise agreement shall, in substance, contain the following
express undertakings by the grantee:
(1) That the grantee agrees to and accepts all provisions of this
chapter and waives any claim that any provision hereof is
unreasonable, arbitrary, invalid, or void;
(2) That the grantee recognizes the right of the Township to make
amendments to this chapter during the term of the franchise
pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement.
A. Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the
right of the Township, by resolution of the Township Board, to revoke
the franchise for just cause. Just cause shall include, without limitation:
§ 148-11 OAKLAND CODE § 148-14
1:60
(1) A material violation by a grantee of any provision of the franchise
agreement or this chapter, or any rule, order, or determination of
the Township made pursuant thereto, where such violation shall
remain uncured pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
franchise agreement.
(2) Any attempt by a grantee to dispose of any of the facilities or
property of the system in contravention of the franchise agreement.
(3) The commission of any fraud or deceit upon the Township.
B. Any franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to all applicable
provisions of other Township ordinances made pursuant to the police
power of the Township, and any amendments thereto, whether made
prior to or after the inception of the franchise.
C. Any franchise granted hereunder shall be subject to the following
additional rights of the Township:
(1) To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and
maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of
efficiency, pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise
agreement.
(2) To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of
products, and to prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates.
(3) To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in
accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire
period thereof.
(4) To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the
Township Board to be conducive to the safety, welfare and
accommodation of the public.
(5) Through its appropriately designated representatives, to inspect all
construction or installation work performed subject to the
provisions of the franchise and this chapter, and make such
inspections as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with the
terms of the franchise, this chapter, and other pertinent provisions
of law.
(6) At the expiration of the term for which a franchise is granted or
upon termination and cancellation as provided therein, to require
the grantee to remove at grantee's sole expense any and all
portions of the system from the public ways within the Township.
(7) To require the grantee to safeguard and keep private all individual
home subscriber information.
§ 148-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-15
1:61
§ 148-15. Procedure for termination.
Any termination or cancellation of the franchise prior to the expiration of
the term thereof shall be made by resolution of the Township Board only
after a public hearing thereon. The grantee shall be entitled to 30 days'
written notice of such hearing and the notice shall specify with reasonable
particularity the grounds upon which the contemplated termination is
based. Any such termination shall be subject to any requirements of higher
law and any limitation contained in the franchise agreement between the
Township and the grantee.
§ 148-16. Contravention of franchise.
Any breach by the grantee of the franchise agreement, in addition to
constituting a breach of contract, shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
The costs of any litigation, including attorney fees, incurred by the
Township to enforce this chapter or franchise granted pursuant hereto shall
be reimbursed to the Township by the grantee, in respect of such litigation
or part thereof in which the Township is the prevailing party.
§ 148-17. Franchise extension. [Added 10-14-1997 by Ord. No.
41-B]
The term of a franchise and franchise agreement may be extended one time
for a period not to exceed six months on terms and conditions that are
set forth in a franchise extension agreement that is approved by resolution
of the Township Board. Any such extension shall not be considered as a
franchise award or renewal, with the franchise designated as revocable
during the extension term for purposes of Public Act No. 322 of 1996 (MCLA
§ 460.602 et seq.), if applicable.
§ 148-15 OAKLAND CODE § 148-17
1:62
ARTICLE IV
Design of System
§ 148-18. Channel capacity.
The grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise the number
of channels specified in its proposal to be initially activated in the franchise
agreement. The grantee shall also activate additional channel capacity
as required by public access or institutional users. The grantee shall
continually upgrade the system's facilities, equipment, and service pursuant
to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement.
§ 148-19. Picture quality and technical requirements.
§ 148-20. Two-way capacity.
A. The system shall produce a picture upon each subscriber's television
screen in black and white or color, depending upon whether color is
being telecast and provided the subscriber's television set is capable of
producing a color picture, which is undistorted and free from ghost
images, without material degradation of color fidelity. The system shall
produce a sound which is undistorted on a properly operating standard
receiver of a subscriber.
B. The system shall transmit or distribute signals to all television and radio
receivers of all subscribers without causing cross-modulation in the
cables or interfering with other electrical or electronic systems or the
reception of other television or radio receivers.
C. The system shall at all times meet not less than minimum FCC technical
standards.
D. The system shall be designed for and operated on a twenty-four-hour-aday
continuous operation basis.
E. A grantee's RFP response shall specify the procedure for initially and
subsequently testing the technical capacity of the system.
Representatives of the Township may be present during testing. The
tests may be done annually at such times as may be determined by the
Township, with notice to the grantee. All expenses for all such tests
shall be paid by the grantee.
A. The grantee shall provide and maintain an operational two-way system
(audio, video and data impulse).
B. The grantee will not install or permit the installation of any equipment
that will permit transmission of two-way services utilizing audio, video
or digital signals without first obtaining written permission of the
subscriber. This provision is not intended to prohibit the transmission of
signals useful only for the control or measurement of the system
performance, or utility meter reading.
§ 148-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-21
1:63
§ 148-21. Facilities.
A grantee's proposal shall describe, in detail, the location of its head end,
hubs, distribution system, studios, equipment and other facilities and a plan
for implementing the construction, utilization and maintenance of those
facilities including plans for accommodating future growth and changing
needs and desires of the community as determined by the Township.
§ 148-22. Special channel and access requirements.
A. A grantee shall carry broadcast stations in accordance with FCC rules
as from time to time revised.
B. A grantee's proposal shall describe, in detail, the utilization of
converters or other special equipment which subscribers are to receive
and any charges for them.
C. A grantee shall designate an emergency channel to be operated by the
Township.
D. A grantee shall provide adequate channels for public access. All
residential subscribers who receive all or any part of the total services
offered on the system shall also receive all public access channels at no
additional charge. These channels shall be activated upon system
activation and thereafter maintained as needed. A grantee shall
establish rules and regulations for the use of community access
channels which shall be approved by the Township before
implementation and thereafter shall not be altered or amended without
approval of the Township. In preparing such rules:
(1) A grantee shall provide an equal opportunity for use of access
services.
(2) A grantee shall present a needs assessment of the community to be
served and provide a plan to meet those needs.
(3) A grantee shall develop a plan to allocate to the Township a
reasonable use and fair schedule of channel time and use of
equipment and facilities so that the Township can send and receive
programming fitted to its needs. Such plan shall be approved by the
Township before implementation and thereafter shall not be altered
or amended without approval of the Township.
(4) A grantee shall describe all equipment and facilities and any
charges for their use.
(5) A grantee shall comply, at a minimum with the requirements of the
Township now or hereafter adopted or determined regarding
access channels.
E. The grantee's proposals shall describe in detail all other channel
offerings and charges for the same.
§ 148-21 OAKLAND CODE § 148-23
1:64
§ 148-23. Service to public buildings.
A grantee's proposal shall designate all publicly owned buildings in the
Township (Township Hall, Police Department, Fire Department, schools,
library, etc.) and any buildings owned or leased for governmental use
by any state, federal or local government in the Township to which the
grantee intends to provide service. The provisions for such service shall
be described in detail and shall be provided without charge. A grantee's
proposal shall include in such designation plans for existing as well as
future publicly owned buildings.
§ 148-24. Interconnection.
§ 148-25. Community specific cablecasting.
A grantee's proposal shall describe the means and manner of providing
community specific cablecasting over the system and the time of activation
and points of delivery.
§ 148-26. Computer services.
A grantee shall design and construct a system so that A and B cables
(serving residential and institutional users) accommodate interactive data
communications and so that the total network transmission time is less
A. Required. The grantee shall interconnect origination and access
channels of the cable system with any or all other systems in adjacent
areas, pursuant to the terms and conditions of the franchise agreement.
Interconnection of systems may be done by direct cable connection
microwave link, satellite, or other appropriate method.
B. Procedure. Upon receiving the directive of the Township to
interconnect, a grantee shall immediately initiate negotiations with the
other affected system or systems in order that costs may be shared
equitably for both construction and operation of the interconnection
link.
C. Relief. The grantee may be granted reasonable extensions of time to
interconnect or the Township may rescind its order to interconnect
upon petition by the grantee to the Township. The Township shall grant
said request if it finds that the grantee has negotiated in good faith and
has failed to obtain an approval from the system or systems of the
proposed interconnection, or that the cost of the interconnection would
cause an unreasonable or unacceptable increase in subscriber rates.
D. Cooperation required. The grantee shall cooperate with any
interconnection corporation, regional interconnection authority or
Township, county, state and federal regulatory agency which may be
hereafter established for the purpose of regulating, financing, or
otherwise providing for the interconnection of cable systems beyond
the boundaries of the Township.
§ 148-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-26
1:65
than 1/10 of a second. Further, the system shall accommodate interactive
communications of point-to-point, point-to-multipoint, and multipoint-tomultipoint
communications between subscribers or potential subscribers.
§ 148-27. All channels emergency alert.
In case of any emergency or disaster, the grantee shall make its entire
system available, without charge, to the Township or to any other
governmental or civil defense agency that the Township may designate.
The system shall be engineered to provide an audio alert system to allow
authorized officials to override automatically the audio signals on all
channels and to transmit and report emergency information. The system
shall also have the capability for visual transmission of emergency
messages.
§ 148-26 OAKLAND CODE § 148-27
1:66
ARTICLE V
Services and Programming; Complaints
§ 148-28. Services and programming.
A grantee's proposal shall state the extent of its commitment to provide for
the following: a variety of origination programming; automated channels
carrying information from local sources; local access programming; a home
security package (with mechanisms to decrease incidents of false alarms);
access support including color broadcast studio and location production
equipment, post-production equipment, access promotion plans, use of
video facilities; plans accommodating growth of access, production centers;
a system to accommodate data, audio and video transmissions between
institutions; service to public buildings; expanding distant signal offerings
as FCC rules allow; broadcast station signals in late night and early morning
hours; an FM service with individual station processing; a means for using
the system during emergencies; and needs of schools and other learning
institutions.
§ 148-29. Local organization and cablecasting.
A grantee's proposal shall include detailed information on plans for local
origination, origination cablecasting, automated channels carrying
information from local sources, variety of origination programming, review
of and incorporation of the needs and reports of the Township, channel
allocations, estimated programming hours, equipment, personnel and other
resources committed to local origination production.
§ 148-30. Use of channels.
§ 148-31. Marketing.
A grantee's proposal shall describe a marketing plan, advertising policy and
means to promote the use of the access channels.
§ 148-32. Interruption of service.
Whenever it is necessary to shut off or interrupt service, a grantee shall do
so during periods of minimum use of the system. Unless such interruption
A. Charges made by the grantee to a user, except for public access
channels, which shall be free, shall be based upon the fair value of the
service to the user and no other criteria. A grantee shall not
discriminate on any other grounds among users or in favor of itself.
B. Advertising for any candidate for political office, or for parties
sponsoring such candidates, shall be granted only upon the basis that
all such other candidates for the same office, or other parties
sponsoring such candidate (where a party itself so advertises in the first
instance), shall be provided with comparable advertising time and at a
comparable rate.
§ 148-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-32
1:67
is unforeseen and immediately necessary, the grantee shall give reasonable
notice thereof to subscribers. All costs incurred in repairing the system
shall be paid by the grantee, and, if service is interrupted or disconnected,
rebates and/or reductions in charges will be made pursuant to the terms
and conditions of the franchise agreement. The cause for any such
interruption shall be removed, and service restored as promptly as
reasonably possible.
§ 148-33. Complaints.
A. A grantee shall maintain an office in or proximate to the Township
which shall be open during all usual business hours, have a listed local
telephone, and be so operated that complaints and request for repairs
or adjustments may be received at any time, seven days per week.
Notice of this information shall be provided to all new subscribers at
time of subscription and to existing subscribers annually.
B. All complaints by the Township, subscribers, or other interested
persons regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunction, billing
disputes, and any other matters relative to the system, shall be
investigated and responded to by a service representative of the
grantee within 24 hours. If reasonably possible, the grantee shall
promptly rectify the cause of all valid complaints.
§ 148-32 OAKLAND CODE § 148-33
1:68
ARTICLE VI
Initial Service Area; Line Extension; Construction Standards
§ 148-34. Initial service area.
§ 148-35. Construction timetable.
A. A grantee's proposal shall clearly indicate the date by which system
engineering and design shall be completed and dates on which each
stage of system construction shall be completed.
B. The energized cable shall be extended substantially throughout the
Township (as determined by the Township) within 18 months after
commencement of construction. All persons along the route of the
energized cable who desire them shall have individual drops installed
within the same period of time.
C. A map prepared by the grantee reflecting the areas within the Township
initially served by the system along with the schedule for development
of the system shall be included in the grantee's proposal. A grantee
shall provide service to all areas within the Township.
D. The Township shall cooperate with a grantee in the development of its
proposed service area by making available to a grantee for copying all
maps, data and other statistical information, then in possession of the
Township, needed for the preparation of a map defining the initial
service area.
A. A grantee's construction timetable as set forth in the franchise
agreement shall reflect the specific method and schedule of
construction of the system. The plan of a grantee shall reflect the
following:
(1) Location of all facilities including studios, head ends, microwave
receivers and senders and all hubs and wiring.
(2) A timetable reflecting when each area within the initial service
area will be served.
(3) A grantee shall provide in its timetable, a construction pattern that
will allow the utilization of service to the greatest number of people
in the shortest time period.
B. Within 30 days after the commencement of the franchise term, a
grantee shall apply for all necessary permits, licenses, certificates and
authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business,
including, but not limited to, any joint use attachment agreement,
microwave carrier licenses, or any other permits, licenses and
authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the operation of cable communications
systems, or their associated microwave transmission facilities. If, after
six months from the commencement of franchise term, a grantee has
§ 148-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-35
1:69
§ 148-36. Construction standards.
not received the permits, licenses, certificates and authorizations
described in this subsection, the Township may assess penalties
pursuant to the franchise agreement without regard to fault for delay
in obtaining such permits, licenses, certificates and authorization.
C. Within 30 days after obtaining all necessary permits, licenses,
certificates and authorizations, a grantee shall give written notice
thereof to the Township and commence construction and installation of
the system.
D. The grantee shall promptly notify the Township of all delays known or
anticipated in the construction of the system. The Township may extend
the construction time table in the event a grantee, acting in good faith,
experiences delays by reason of circumstances beyond its control.
E. The grantee will annually review the Township for additional areas
meeting the initial service requirements, and implement accordingly.
A. A grantee shall not open or disturb the surface of any streets, or public
property, without first obtaining a permit from the Township for which
permit the Township may impose a reasonable fee to be paid by the
grantee. The lines, conduits, cables and other property placed in the
streets, and public property pursuant to such permit shall be located in
such part of the street or public property as shall be determined by the
Township. A grantee shall, upon completion of any work requiring the
opening of any streets or public property, restore the same including
the pavement and its foundations to as good a condition as formerly and
in a manner and quality approved by the Township, and shall exercise
reasonable care to maintain the same thereafter in good condition.
Such work shall be performed with diligence and due care, and, if a
grantee shall fail to perform the work promptly, to remove all dirt and
rubbish and to put the street or public property back into the condition
required hereby, the Township shall have the right to put the streets or
public property back into such condition at the expense of the grantee.
The grantee shall, upon demand, pay to the Township the cost of such
work done.
B. All wires, conduits, cable and other property and facilities of a grantee
shall be so located, constructed, installed and maintained as not to
endanger or unnecessarily interfere with the usual and customary
trade, traffic, and travel upon, or other use of, the streets and public
property of the Township. A grantee shall keep and maintain all of its
property in good condition, order and repair so that the same shall not
menace or endanger the life or property of any person. The Township
shall have the right to inspect and examine at all reasonable times and
upon reasonable notice the property owned or used, in part or in whole
by the grantee. A grantee shall keep accurate maps and records of all
its wires, conduits, cables and other property and facilities located,
constructed and maintained in the Township. Further, a grantee shall
§ 148-35 OAKLAND CODE § 148-36
1:70
furnish copies of such maps and records from time to time as requested
by the Township without charge.
C. All wires, conduits, cables and other property and facilities of the
grantee shall be constructed and installed in an orderly and
workmanlike manner. All wires, conduits and cables shall be installed,
where possible, parallel with electric and telephone lines. Multiple
cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due
respect for engineering considerations.
D. Codes, rules and regulations.
(1) A grantee shall at all times comply with the following codes, rules,
regulations, as amended, and any others supplemental to or in
substitution thereof:
(a) National Electric Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards).
(b) National Electrical Code (National Fire Protective
Association).
(c) Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction.
(d) Applicable FCC and other applicable federal, state and local
regulations and ordinances.
(2) In any event, the installation, operation or maintenance of the
system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or
property in the Township.
E. Whenever the Township shall undertake any public improvement which
affects a grantee's equipment or facilities, the Township may, with due
regard to reasonable working conditions and with reasonable notice,
direct a grantee to remove or relocate its wires, conduits, cables and
other property located in streets, or public property. A grantee shall
relocate or protect its wires, conduits, cables and other property at its
own expense.
F. A grantee's plans for constructing its system, and the construction of
the system, shall be in accordance with its proposal as modified by the
franchise agreement. However, a grantee shall comply with the
following minimum requirements:
(1) A grantee shall construct underground in any area where both the
electrical and telephone line have been installed underground.
(2) A grantee shall change from aerial to underground, at its own
expense, in any area where both the telephone and electric utilities
are hereafter changed from aerial to underground.
(3) To enable a grantee reasonable opportunity to change its wiring
from aerial to underground, and also to allow it to prewire all new
subdivisions or new development areas, the Township shall provide
§ 148-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-36
1:71
§ 148-37. Conditions on use.
a grantee with written notice of the following (but without liability
for failure to provide such notice):
(a) Any changes of which the Township has knowledge, or which
the Township may order, regarding a change from aerial to
underground of any line (telephone or electrical) within its
boundaries.
(b) Any underground trenching that may be pending.
(c) New subdivisions and development. All of such subdividers or
developers shall be notified of the franchise and the system.
(d) All ordinance changes affecting the wiring of the system.
G. A grantee shall, upon completion of any work on private property (or
easements thereon), restore the same including any and all landscape
features, plantings, turf, buildings, pipes, and wires (overhead and
underground) pavements, sidewalks, foundations or other features
whatsoever, to as good a condition as existed before construction.
H. A grantee shall prior to construction make a clear videotape record of
all underground construction and other specially designated areas.
Such tapes are to be preserved for three years after completion of the
applicable construction.
A. A grantee shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will
interfere with any gas, electric, or telephone fixture, water hydrant or
main, or other utility system.
B. A grantee, at the request of any person holding a building moving
permit and with not less than five days' advance notice, shall
temporarily remove, raise or lower its wires, conduits and cables. The
expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires,
conduits and cables shall be paid by the person requesting the same,
and the grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in
advance.
C. A grantee shall have the authority, to the extent the Township has
authority to grant the same, to trim trees upon or overhanging any
street or public property so as to prevent the branches of such trees
from coming in contact with the wires, conduit and cables of the
grantee. All trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction
of the Township and at the expense of the grantee.
§ 148-36 OAKLAND CODE § 148-37
1:72
ARTICLE VII
System Operations
§ 148-38. Information availability.
A. Throughout the term of the franchise, a grantee shall maintain books
and records in accordance with normal and accepted bookkeeping and
accounting practices for the cable communications industry, and allow
for inspection and copying of the same at reasonable times at its
designated office. The books and records to be maintained by a grantee
shall include the following:
(1) A record of all requests for service;
(2) A record of all subscriber or other complaints, and the action taken;
(3) A file of all subscriber contracts; provided, however, that the
grantee will not have to disclose subscriber records which would
tend to invade subscriber privacy;
(4) A grantee's policies, procedures and company rules; and
(5) Financial records pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
franchise agreement.
B. The Township shall give a grantee at least 24 hours' notice before
making inspections of any books or records of the grantee.
C. A grantee shall file with the Township, at the time of its payment of the
franchise fee, the following:
(1) A financial statement, certified by the grantee as correct, showing
in such detail as may be required by the Township the gross
operating revenues of the grantee for the period to which the fee
relates, together with all other financial information customarily
contained in such statements and such other financial information
as may be required by the Township.
(2) An annual certified financial statement prepared by an independent
certified public accountant showing in such detail as may be
required by the Township the gross operating revenues of the
grantee for the period to which the annual fee relates, together
with all other financial information customarily contained in such
statements and such other financial information as may be required
by the Township.
(3) Current list of names and addresses of each officer and director
and other managerial and supervisory personnel, as well as each
shareholder, having legal or beneficial ownership of 1% or more of
the grantee's stock if changed from a prior filing.
(4) A copy of each document filed with all federal, state and local
agencies during the preceding fiscal year and not previously filed
§ 148-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-38
1:73
§ 148-39. Service contract.
§ 148-40. Subscriber practices.
with the Township (each of which filings are to be provided at the
time the filing is made).
(5) A statement of its current billing practices if changed from a prior
filing.
(6) A copy of its current rules if changed from a prior filing.
(7) A copy of its current subscriber service contract if changed from a
prior filing.
D. The Township, its agents and representatives shall have authority to
arrange for and conduct an audit of and copy the books and records of
the grantee; provided, however, that all books and records so audited
shall remain the sole and exclusive property of the grantee. The grantee
shall first be given five days' notice of the audit request, the description
of and purpose for the audit, and the description, to the best of the
Township's ability, of the books, records and documents it wishes to
review.
A. The grantee shall receive approval from the Township of the form and
content of the service contract to be used by the grantee prior to
entering into any such service contracts with subscribers, and the
grantee shall make no changes in the approved service contract without
prior approval of the Township. The service contract shall include, at a
minimum, a schedule of all rates and charges, a description of services,
instructions on the use of the system, and billing and collection
practices.
B. The grantee shall have authority to promulgate such rules, regulations,
terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be
reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and
perform its obligations under the franchise and to ensure an
uninterrupted service to each and all of its subscribers; provided, such
rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the
provisions of the franchise, ordinances of the Township, and laws of the
state or the United States.
C. Each subscriber shall be provided with instructions on filing complaints
or otherwise obtaining information or assistance from the grantee.
D. All items described in this section shall be provided to each new
subscriber at the time a contract is entered or service begun and to all
existing subscribers forthwith upon any changes therein.
E. The term of a subscriber contract shall not be for more than 12 months'
duration unless after 12 months the contract may be terminated by the
subscriber at his option at any time without penalty.
§ 148-38 OAKLAND CODE § 148-40
1:74
§ 148-41. Rates and procedures.
A. There shall be no charge for disconnection of any installation or outlet.
If any subscriber fails to pay a properly due monthly subscriber fee or
any other proper fee or charge when due, the grantee may discontinue
service to such subscriber; provided, however, the grantee may not
remove any of its equipment until after the later of: i) 30 days after the
due date of said delinquent fee or charge; or ii) 10 days after delivery to
subscriber of written notice of the intent to disconnect. If a subscriber
pays before expiration of the later of i) or ii), the grantee shall not
disconnect. After disconnection, upon payment in full of the delinquent
fee or charge and the payment of a reconnection charge, the grantee
shall promptly reinstate the subscriber's cable service.
B. Refunds to subscribers shall be made or determined in the following
manner:
(1) If the grantee fails, upon request by a subscriber, to provide any
service then being offered, the grantee shall promptly refund all
deposits or advance charges paid for the service in question by said
subscriber. This provision does not alter the grantee's
responsibility to subscribers under any separate contractual
agreement or relieve the grantee of any other liability.
(2) If any subscriber terminates any monthly service because of failure
of the grantee to render the service in accordance with the
franchise, the grantee shall refund to such subscriber the
proportionate share of the charges paid by the subscriber for the
services not received. This provision does not relieve the grantee of
liability established in other provisions of the franchise.
C. If any subscriber terminates any monthly service prior to the end of a
prepaid period, a proportionate portion of any prepaid subscriber
service fee, using the number of days as a basis, shall be refunded to
the subscriber by the grantee.
A. Rates and charges.
(1) Limitations on rates. The charges made for services of the grantee
shall be fair and reasonable and no higher than necessary to meet
all costs of the service (assuming efficient and economical
management), and to provide a fair return to the grantee. The
grantee shall receive no consideration whatsoever from its
subscribers for or in connection with its service to its subscribers
other than in accordance with this section, without approval of the
Township Board.
(2) Adjustments to rates. The Township Board shall have the power,
authority and right to cause the grantee's rates and charges to
conform to the provisions of Subsection A(1) of this section, and for
this purpose it may deny or institute changes in such rates and
§ 148-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-41
1:75
charges when it determines that, in the absence of such action on
its part, the grantee's rates and charges or proposed rates and
charges will not conform to such subsection.
B. Rate schedule. The grantee's proposal shall include a detailed schedule
of all rates and charges applicable to the system as required by the RFP.
There shall be no charge for disconnection of any installation or
connection and no charge for maintenance or repair service unless such
service is required as a result of damage caused by the subscriber. The
rates and charges set forth in the grantee's proposal shall not be
exceeded during 3 1/2 years from the date of the franchise agreement
or two years after completion of construction of the system, whichever
first occurs.
C. Rate changes. The criteria and standards relating to the establishment
of rate changes, whether initiated by the Township or by the grantee,
shall include the following:
(1) The ability of the grantee to render system services and to derive a
reasonable profit therefrom under the existing rate schedule and
proposed rate schedule;
(2) The revenues and profits derived from system services;
(3) The efficiency of the grantee;
(4) The quality of the service offered by the grantee;
(5) The original cost of the system, less depreciation;
(6) A fair rate of return with respect to investments having similar
risks to that of providing cable communications services;
(7) The extent to which the grantee has adhered to the terms of the
franchise;
(8) Fairness to residents and subscribers;
(9) Capital expenditures by the grantee in providing updated
technology and service to subscriber; and
(10) Such other factors as the Township may deem relevant.
D. Procedure for rate changes. The procedure for reviewing and
establishing a proposed rate change, whether initiated by the Township
or by the grantee, shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) No rate change shall be established except after a public hearing of
which the grantee and the grantee's subscribers in the Township
have received notice as provided herein.
(2) If the proposed change is initiated by the grantee, it shall be
initiated by written application of the grantee submitted to the
Township which application shall describe the proposed change
§ 148-41 OAKLAND CODE § 148-41
1:76
and the proposed effective date of such change. Within a
reasonable time after receipt of the application, the Township
Board shall schedule the public hearing thereon required by
Subsection D(1) of this section and cause written notice thereof to
be sent to the grantee by registered or certified mail. The Township
shall cause notice of the public hearing to be furnished to the
grantee's subscribers by publishing notice thereof in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Township not more than 10 nor less
than five days prior to the hearing. In addition, the grantee shall
notify its subscribers in the Township of the hearing by announcing
the time, date, and place thereof, one week immediately prior
to the hearing, each day between 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. on
two channels. The public hearing shall be scheduled within a
reasonable time after receipt of the grantee's application, but
nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent the Township Board
from referring such application to a committee or organization
referred to in § 148-4 prior to such public hearing.
(3) If the proposed change is initiated by the Township, the Township
Board shall cause written notice thereof to be sent to the grantee
by registered or certified mail. The notice shall describe the
proposed change, and the proposed effective date thereof, and
shall further set forth the time, date and place of the hearing. The
Township and the grantee shall cause notice of the proposed
change to be sent to the grantee's subscribers in the Township as
provided in Subsection D(2) of this section.
(4) The grantee's application shall be accompanied by the following
(and such supplemental information as the Township may request):
The grantee's most current year-end and interim financial
statements; a list of current rates and charges of the grantee in
other areas franchised to the grantee; a list of current rates and
charges applicable to systems owned or operated by the grantee's
parent, or other subsidiaries or affiliates of the grantee's parent
corporation or of the grantee; a list of current rates and charges for
other systems in Wayne, Oakland and Macomb Counties.
(5) In reviewing an application of the grantee, the Township may
utilize a rate consultant selected by it. All costs for review of the
application, including, without limitation, reasonable fees of the
consultant, reasonable attorney fees, and the reasonable value of
the services rendered by other agents, employees, and
representatives of the Township, shall be paid by the grantee.
(6) The Township Board shall make its determination regarding any
rate change, whether initiated by it or by the grantee, within a
reasonable time after the closing of the public hearing thereon. Any
change shall become effective upon the date determined by the
Township Board.
§ 148-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-41
1:77
§ 148-42. Subliminal advertising or transmission.
The grantee is expressly prohibited from any form of subliminal advertising
or transmission at any time.
§ 148-43. Tampering in fraudulent connections or sales.
No person, whether or not a subscriber to the cable system, may
intentionally or knowingly remove or damage or cause to be damaged any
wire, cable conduit, equipment, or apparatus of the grantee, or to commit
any act with an intent to cause such removal or damage, or tap, tamper
with, or otherwise connect any wire or device to a wire, cable, conduit,
equipment and apparatus, or appurtenances of the licensee with the intent
to obtain a signal or impulse from the cable system without authorization
from or compensation to the grantee, or obtain cable television or other
communications, service or sell, rent, lend, offer or advertise for sale,
rental or use any instrument, apparatus, device or plans, specifications, or
instructions for making or assembling the same to connect to the grantee's
cable system with intent to cheat or defraud the grantee of any lawful
charge to which it is entitled.
§ 148-44. Landlord and tenant relationship.
E. No change required. Nothing herein shall be deemed to require any
proposed rate change initiated by the grantee.
A. The Township hereby declares that this chapter has as one of its
principal objectives, the lawful public purpose of rapidly developing and
maximizing the educational, community service, cultural and public
safety potential of cable television in order to benefit all of the residents
of the Township. The Township further finds that the public interest and
necessity require that no owner of any multiple-unit residential
dwelling (nor his agent or representative) be permitted to directly or
indirectly prevent any resident of such dwelling from receiving cable
communications service installation, maintenance and services from a
grantee operating under a valid franchise issued by the Township.
B. Multiple-unit residential dwellings.
(1) In order to provide the opportunity for the residents of any
multiple-unit residential dwelling to obtain service from a grantee,
such grantee may negotiate an agreement with the owner of that
dwelling or, failing agreement, may request that the Township
exercise its power of eminent domain for the necessary public
purpose of enabling the grantee to serve residents of that multipleunit
residential dwelling. Upon request of such grantee, the
Township may commence condemnation proceedings in
accordance with applicable law. In the event of such proceeding, in
preparing its good faith offer of just compensation, the Township
may consider.
§ 148-41 OAKLAND CODE § 148-44
1:78
(a) The amount and fair market value of space occupied by the
grantee's cable and related facilities. The fair market value of
the space shall be assessed in light of the prior use, if any, of
that space, together with any evidence of nonspeculative
alternative uses;
(b) The present value of any funds that the owner will reasonably
expend over time in ensuring that the grantee conforms to all
laws, regulations and reasonable conditions necessary to
ensure the safety, convenient functioning, and appearance of
the multiple-unit residential dwelling;
(c) The continued physical availability of other space on the
premises for the installation of alternative modes of television
program reception or delivery;
(d) As an offset to the amounts set forth in Subsection B(1)(a) and
(b) of this section, any increase in the fair market value of the
multiple-unit residential dwelling attributable to the
availability of the grantee's service to the property's tenants;
and
(e) Any other reasonable, nonspeculative factors which the
Township may find relevant.
(2) The requesting grantee shall indemnify the Township for all
expenses and costs incurred by the Township in the condemnation
proceedings as well as for the full amount of the condemnation
award made to the owner if such condemnation proceedings are
completed or otherwise settled.
C. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter or
the franchise agreement, the grantee shall be permitted to charge each
resident of a multiple-unit residential dwelling an additional charge,
above and beyond the service rate for a single-family dwelling as
specified in the franchise agreement, solely to defray the exact
additional per-resident cost to the grantee of compensating the owner
for access to the multiple-unit residential dwelling. Any such additional
charge shall be subject to the approval of the grantor. Such additional
charge shall not be included in the computation of franchise fees due to
the Township pursuant to this chapter or the franchise agreement.
D. Notwithstanding any other language in this section or elsewhere in this
chapter, the grantee shall not be obligated to provide service to any
multiple-unit residential dwelling so long as the owner of that dwelling
demands compensation from the grantee in an amount that is
unreasonable or imposes financial or other conditions that would, in the
grantee's reasonable business judgment, render provision of service to
that dwelling uneconomic. Should the grantee, subsequently, agree to
render service to such multiple-unit residential dwelling, there shall be
no installation charges to the residents of such dwelling beyond those
set forth in the franchise agreement. The grantee shall not be obligated,
§ 148-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-44
1:79
in such circumstances, to request the Township to institute
condemnation proceedings.
E. Neither the owner of any multiple-unit residential dwelling nor his
agent or representative shall penalize, charge or surcharge a tenant or
resident or forfeit or threaten to forfeit any right of such tenant or
resident or discriminate in any way against such tenant or resident who
requests or receives cable communications service from a company
operating under a valid and existing cable communication franchise
issued by the Township. Any person convicted of violating any provision
of this section is subject to a fine as set forth in Chapter 1, Article I,
Definitions; General Penalty, of the Code of the Charter Township of
Oakland.12
F. No person shall resell, without the express written consent of both the
grantee and the Township, any cable service, program or signal
transmitted by a grantee operating under a franchise issued by the
Township.
G. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a person from requiring that cable
communications system facilities conform to laws and regulations and
reasonable conditions necessary to protect safety, functioning and
appearance.
H. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a person from requiring a grantee
from agreeing to indemnify the owner, or his agents or representatives,
for damages or for liability for physical damages caused by installation,
operation, maintenance, or removal of cable television facilities.
12.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 148-44 OAKLAND CODE § 148-44
1:80
ARTICLE VIII
Consumer Protection
[Added 10-12-1993 by Ord. No. 41-A]
§ 148-45. Customer service.
The grantee shall maintain a local office which provides the necessary
facilities, equipment, and personnel to comply, under normal operating
conditions, with the customer service standards set forth in Subsections A
through E of this section. For purposes of this section, the term "normal
operation conditions" embrace all conditions which are within the control
of the grantee, including special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate
increases, and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system, but excluding
conditions outside the grantee's control, such as, natural disasters, civil
disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and extreme
weather:
A. On a monthly basis, provide sufficient customer service representatives
and toll-free telephone-line capacity during normal business hours to
ensure that a minimum of 90% of all calls will be answered within 30
seconds and 90% of all calls for service will not be required to wait
more than 30 seconds after such call has been answered before being
connected to a service representative. All incoming customer service
lines shall not be simultaneously busy more than 3% of the total time
the cable office is open on any business day.
B. Staffed emergency toll-free telephone-line capacity on a twenty-fourhour
basis, including weekends and holidays.
C. Maintenance of an office in the franchise area of the intergovernmental
cable communications authority (hereinafter "the authority") with
adequate office hours to meet public demand. The authority may
require the grantee to alter or extend these hours if there is significant
evidence through subscriber complaints that the posted hours are not
adequate.
D. An emergency system maintenance and repair staff, capable of
responding to and repairing system malfunctions on a twenty-four-hour
basis.
E. An installation staff, capable of furnishing standard installation to any
subscriber within seven days after receipt of a request. "Standard
installations" shall mean those located up to 175 feet from where trunk
and feeder cable have been activated. The grantee shall, at its sole
expense, cause all drops required to be buried to be properly buried
within 15 days of installation of service unless conditions during such
period make burial impracticable, in which case the drop shall be
buried within 15 days after physical conditions reasonably allow for
such burial. In the event of any dispute between the grantee and the
subscriber as to when conditions permit burial of the drop, such dispute
§ 148-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-45
1:81
§ 148-46. Cable service.
shall be resolved by the decision of the Township's Building Official or
other official designated by the Township to resolve such disputes.
F. The grantee shall provide written instructions and information at the
time of installation and reinstallation, and at least annually thereafter,
to all subscribers on products and services, prices and options,
installation and service maintenance policies, instructions for using the
system, and billing and complaint procedures. Such instructions and
information shall include the grantee's business address, applicable
phone number, and the name of the appropriate official or department
of the grantee to whose attention the subscriber should direct a request
for service, request for billing adjustment or complaint. Such
instructions and information shall also include the name, business
address and telephone number of the authority's executive director and
the title, business address and telephone number of the designated
Township employee to whom they can call or write for information
regarding the terms, conditions, and provisions governing the grantee's
franchise if the grantee fails to respond within a reasonable period of
time to the subscriber's complaint or request for installation, service or
billing adjustment.
(1) The grantee shall promptly furnish revised written instructions and
information to each subscriber whenever the instructions and
information previously provided have been changed.
(2) The written instructions and information provided for herein shall
be subject to the review and approval of the authority which shall
not withhold its approval unreasonably. The authority shall have
the power to compel changes in such material if the authority
deems the same to be misleading, incorrect, or inadequate in any
material respect, and the grantee shall promptly institute any
changes so required by the authority.
A. The grantee shall interrupt system service only with good cause and for
the shortest time possible and, except in emergency situations, only
after periodic cablecasting notice of service interruption for two days
prior to the anticipated interruption. Services may be interrupted
between 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. for routine testing, maintenance and
repair, without notification, any night except Friday, Saturday, Sunday,
holidays, or the night preceding a holiday.
B. The grantee shall maintain a written log, or an equivalent stored in
computer memory and capable of access and reproduction in printed
form, of all subscriber complaints. Such log shall list the date and time
of such complaints, identifying the subscribers and describing the
nature of the complaints and when and what actions were taken by the
grantee in response thereto. Such log shall be kept at the grantee's
local office, reflecting the operations to date for a period of at least
three years, and shall be available for public inspection during regular
§ 148-45 OAKLAND CODE § 148-46
1:82
business hours. The grantee shall submit a summary of such complaints
monthly to the authority for its review or a copy thereof if the authority
so requests.
C. For purposes of this section, the term "service interruption" means any
loss or distortion of picture and/or sound on one or more channels; the
term "subscriber problem" means a service interruption affecting a
single subscriber; the term "outage" means a service interruption
affecting two or more subscribers. Under normal operation conditions
as specified in § 148-45, the grantee shall maintain a sufficient repair
force of competent technicians so as to respond effectively to any
subscriber problem or outage within the following time periods, unless
the applicable period is extended at the request of the subscriber or
extended pursuant to the requirements of any applicable law or
regulation:
(1) Subscriber problem. "Same day" service, seven days a week for all
requests for service received prior to 12:00 noon each day. In no
event shall the response time for notice received after 12:00 p.m.
(noon) exceed 24 hours, including weekends and holidays, from the
time grantee receives notice of the problem.
(2) Outage. Within two hours, including weekends and holidays, from
the time the grantee discovers or receives notice of the outage.
D. Upon receipt of a request for service, the grantee shall establish a fourhour
appointment window with the subscriber (or adult representative
of the subscriber). The grantee shall respond to the request for service
within such established appointment window. In the event access to the
subscriber's home is not made available to the grantee's technician
when the technician arrives during the established appointment
window, the response time for the request for service shall be 24 hours
from the time the grantee is contacted to establish the new
appointment window. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the grantee's
technician telephones the subscriber's home before or during the
appointment window and is advised that the technician will not be given
access to the subscriber's home during the appointment window, then
the technician shall not be obliged to travel to the subscriber's home or
to leave the written notification referred to above, and the burden shall
again be upon the subscriber (or adult representative of the subscriber)
to contact the grantee to arrange for a new appointment window, in
which case the required response time for the request for service shall
again be 24 hours from the time the grantee is contacted to establish
the new appointment window.
E. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection D of this section, the
grantee, under the provisions of this section and § 148-45, shall be
deemed to have responded to a request for service, a subscriber
problem, or an outage only when sufficient technicians arrive at the
service location, begin work on the request for service or remedial
§ 148-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-46
1:83
§ 148-47. Billings.
§ 148-48. Disconnect and downgrade charges.
work, as the case may be, and proceed diligently to complete such
work.
F. No charge shall be made to the subscriber for any service call unless
the problem giving rise to the service request can be demonstrated by
the grantee to have been:
(1) Caused by subscriber negligence;
(2) Caused by malicious destruction of cable equipment; or
(3) A problem previously established as having been non-cable in
origin.
G. All service personnel of the grantee or its contractors or subcontractors
who have as part of their normal duties contact with the general public
shall wear on their clothing a clearly visible identification card bearing
their name and photograph. The grantee shall account for all
identification cards at all times. Every service vehicle of the grantee
shall be clearly identifiable by the public as such a vehicle.
A. The grantee's bills to its subscribers shall be clear, concise and
understandable and shall be itemized as to each charge reflected
thereon. The bill and any accompanying communication from the
grantee to its subscribers, and any other communication from the
grantee to its subscribers, shall not contain any false or misleading
statements. Such other communication referred to above shall be
deemed to be a "report" under applicable sections of the franchise
agreement, specifically, under the franchise agreement in effect as of
the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived,
subsections (G), (J) and (K) of section 19 of such franchise agreement.
B. The billing form and content in use by the grantee as of the date of
adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall be
subject to the approval of the authority. Any modification of the form
and content of the grantee's bills to subscribers shall also be subject to
the authority's approval.
C. The authority shall not withhold its approval of the form and content of
the grantee's bills unreasonably. If the authority disapproves of the
form or wording of any of the grantee's bills to subscribers, it shall so
notify the grantee and shall specify the basis for such disapproval. The
grantee shall then modify the bills so as to remedy the defects specified
by the authority. The modification shall be implemented by the grantee
effective with the first billing after the expiration of 45 days after
receipt by the grantee of the authority's notice of disapproval, unless
the authority extends such time.
§ 148-46 OAKLAND CODE § 148-48
1:84
§ 148-49. Late payment charges.
Late payment charges imposed by the grantee upon subscribers shall be
fair and shall be reasonably related to the grantee's cost of administering
delinquent accounts. No late payment charge shall be imposed upon a
subscriber, and a subscriber shall not be deemed to be in arrears on a
bill, unless at least 21 days have elapsed after the due date specified on
the bill; and, for purposes of this section and the prior section, the due
date of administering delinquent accounts. No late payment charge shall be
imposed upon a subscriber, and a subscriber shall not be deemed to be in
arrears on a bill, unless at least 30 days have elapsed after the due date
specified on the bill; and, for purposes of this section and the prior section,
the due date specified on the bill shall not be earlier than the first day of the
monthly period to which the bill is attributable.
§ 148-50. Notice of programming or channel change.
The grantee shall provide at least 45 days' written notice to subscribers
prior to disconnecting any channel or programming service or to realigning
any channel and shall provide written notice of the same to the authority
no later than the grantee's notice to subscribers. This provision shall not
preclude the right of the Township, or the authority on behalf of the
Township, to contest or prohibit any such action by the grantee if, and to
the extent, such right exists. The foregoing notice requirement shall not
apply in cases in which a programming service is discontinued because
A. The grantee shall make no charge to any subscriber on account of
either complete discontinuance of service or net downgrade of service
whereby the subscriber requests a lower tier of basic service and/or a
net reduction in premium service.
B. The grantee may only disconnect a subscriber if at least 45 days have
elapsed after the due date for payment of the subscriber's bill and the
grantee has provided at least 10 days' written notice to the subscriber
prior to disconnection, specifying the effective date after which cable
services are subject to disconnection; provided, however,
notwithstanding the foregoing, the grantee may disconnect a
subscriber at any time if the grantee in good faith and on reasonable
grounds determines that the subscriber has tampered with or abused
the grantee's equipment, or is or may be engaged in the theft of cable
services.
C. The grantee shall promptly disconnect any subscriber who so requests
a disconnection. No period of notice prior to requested termination of
service may be required of subscribers by the grantee. If the subscriber
fails to specify an effective date for disconnection, the effective date
shall be deemed to be the day following the date the disconnect request
is received by the grantee. No charge may be imposed upon the
subscriber for any cable service delivered after the effective date of the
disconnect request.
§ 148-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-50
1:85
a nonaffiliated provider thereof discontinues furnishing the same to the
grantee on less than 45 days' notice to the grantee. In any such case
the grantee shall nevertheless furnish notice to its subscribers and the
authority promptly upon the grantee receiving notice of the discontinuance
of the programming service from such unaffiliated provider.
§ 148-51. Notice of price increase or reduction of service.
The grantee shall provide at least 45 days' written notice to subscribers
prior to implementing any increase in subscriber rates or reduction in
subscriber services and shall provide written notice of the same to the
authority no later than the grantee's notice to subscribers. The provisions
of this section shall not preclude the right of the Township, or the authority
on behalf of the Township, to contest or prohibit any such action by the
grantee if, and to the extent, permitted by law. Announcing or explaining
any increase in subscriber rates or reduction in programming services,
the grantee shall furnish a copy of such communication to the authority.
The copy of the communication required to be furnished to the authority
hereunder shall be deemed to be a report under applicable sections of the
franchise agreement, specifically, under the franchise agreement in effect
as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived,
subsections (G), (J) and (K) of section 19 of such franchise agreement.
§ 148-52. Disclosure of information on grantee's costs.
In the event the grantee, in any communication to the general public, to the
Township, to subscribers, or to the authority, justifies a price increase or
reduction in service on the basis of increased costs to which the grantee has
been subjected, then the grantee, on written request of the authority, shall
promptly furnish the authority the underlying information on which such
claim of increased costs is based in such form as the authority may request.
The information so furnished by the grantee to the authority hereunder
shall also be deemed to be a report under applicable sections of the
franchise agreement, specifically, under the franchise agreement in effect
as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived,
subsections (G), (J) and (K) of section 19 of such franchise agreement.
§ 148-53. Subscriber rebates.
A. Except for planned outages where subscribers are provided reasonable
notification in advance, upon a subscriber's request the grantee shall
provide not less than a one-day credit for each day in which there is a
period of four hours or more during which the subscriber experienced a
significant impairment of cable service not attributable to any action or
omission of the subscriber or to any defect in the subscriber's
equipment. The credit specified herein shall be equal to 1/30 of the
subscriber's total monthly bill for all services and equipment other than
pay-per-view; provided, however, if such monthly bill includes a charge
for a pay-per-view program subject to such outage or significant
§ 148-50 OAKLAND CODE § 148-53
1:86
§ 148-54. Security fund.
impairment, then the credit shall be increased by the amount of such
charge.13
B. In the event of a violation of the provisions of this article by the grantee
which results in a subscriber not receiving cable programming service
or receiving only significantly impaired service, the authority may order
and direct the grantee to issue a rebate to such subscriber in an amount
determined by the authority to provide monetary relief to the
subscriber substantially equal to the subscriber's unliquidated
detriment or loss resulting from such violation, not to exceed the
subscriber's monthly bill.
C. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude a subscriber from
requesting and receiving from the grantee a rebate greater than that
provided in Subsections A and B of this section.
A. Subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this
chapter is derived, within 10 days after the award of a new franchise or
the transfer, extension or renewal of an existing franchise, the grantee
thereunder shall furnish the authority, on behalf of all of the authority's
member communities, and thereafter maintain with the authority,
throughout the term of the franchise, a cash deposit of $25,000 as
security for:
(1) The faithful performance by it of all the provisions of this chapter
and the franchise;
(2) Compliance with all orders, permits and directions;
(3) The payment by the grantee of any claims, liens and taxes due the
Township which arise by reason of the construction, operation or
maintenance of the system.
B. Within 10 days after notice to it that any amount has been withdrawn
from the security fund, the grantee shall pay to or deposit with the
authority a sum of money in the full amount withdrawn.
C. If the grantee fails to pay to the Township any fees within the time fixed
herein; or fails, after 10 days' written notice, to pay to the Township any
taxes due and unpaid; or fails to repay the Township within such 10
days, any damages, costs, or expenses which the Township shall be
compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the grantee in
connection with a franchise; or fails, after three days' notice of such
failure, to comply with any provisions of the franchise which the
Township reasonably determines can be remedied by the withdrawal
from the security fund, the authority, on request of the Township, may
immediately withdraw the amount thereof, with interest and any
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 148-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-54
1:87
§ 148-55. Liquidated damages.
additional charges, from the security fund. Upon such withdrawal, the
authority shall notify the grantee of the amount and date thereof and
shall remit to the Township the amount so withdrawn.
D. The security fund deposited pursuant to this section, including all
interest thereon, if any, shall be held by the authority, for the benefit of
its member communities, in the event that the franchise is rescinded or
revoked by reason of the default of the grantee. The grantee, however,
shall be entitled to the return of such security fund, or such portion
thereof as remains on deposit at the expiration of the term of the
franchise, provided that there is then no outstanding default on the part
of the grantee. Any interest earned by the investment of the security
fund shall become part of the security fund and unless consumed by the
payment of liquidated damages, fees or other charges under this
chapter, shall be returned to the grantee at the expiration of the
franchise term, provided that there is then no outstanding default on
the part of the grantee.
E. The authority shall maintain the security fund in a segregated account
and shall not commingle the same with any other monies of the
authority. The authority may, but shall not be required to, invest the
security fund so as to earn interest thereon and shall not be liable to the
grantee on any claim based upon the lack or insufficiency of interest
earned by such fund.
F. Payment from the security fund shall not constitute a cure of any
violation or any act of noncompliance by the grantee. The rights
reserved to the Township with respect to the security fund are in
addition to all other rights of the Township, whether reserved by this
chapter or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a
right with respect to such security fund shall affect any other right the
Township may have.
G. The security fund provided for in this section shall be in addition to any
performance bond, letter of credit or other security provided for in the
franchise agreement.
A. The authority may assess liquidated damages of up to $100 per day
against the grantee for each day the grantee is in violation of this
article. Such assessment may be levied against the security fund
specified in § 148-54 or any letter of credit, performance bond, or other
security provided for in the franchise agreement.
B. Assessment of liquidated damages shall not constitute a waiver by the
Township or any other right or remedy it may have under the franchise
agreement or applicable law, including the right to recover from the
grantee any costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees,
which are incurred by the Township on account of the grantee's
violation of this article.
§ 148-54 OAKLAND CODE § 148-56
1:88
§ 148-56. Evaluation of violations.
§ 148-57. Remedies available.
If the authority determines that the grantee has violated this article, the
authority may order appropriate rebates to subscribers as provided in
§ 148-53 and/or assess liquidated damages against the grantee as provided
in § 148-55. In addition, the Township may pursue any additional or other
legal or equitable remedies available to it under the franchise agreement or
any applicable law.
§ 148-58. Appeal process.
With respect to matters affecting the Township individually, and excluding
matters affecting all of the authority's member communities equally, the
grantee may appeal any action of the authority to the Township by
submitting a written appeal within 21 days from the date of the authority's
action to which the grantee objects. Upon such appeal, the Township Board
shall conduct a de novo review of the action of the authority being appealed
and shall set a hearing date within 60 days of the date of receipt of the
appeal. The grantee may present any information, data or other evidence to
the Township Board either prior to or at the time of the hearing. Hearings
shall be open to the public and members of the public and representatives
of the authority may also present any evidence or information pertinent to
the matter appealed. The Township Board shall then determine whether to
uphold, reverse, or modify the action of the authority. The appeal shall stay
any further action on the matter appealed until the appeal has been decided
by the Township Board.
A. The violation of this article by a cable operator, an operator's agents,
employees and/or independent contractors employed or retained by the
cable operator shall be grounds for evaluating:
(1) A cable operator's compliance with any existing agreement and
with applicable law;
(2) The quality of a cable operator's service and whether it has been
reasonable in light of community needs;
(3) The technical ability of a cable operator to provide the services,
facilities, and equipment as set forth in an operator's proposal for
future or renewed cable services; and
(4) The reasonableness of an operator's proposal to meet the future
cable-related community needs and interests of the residents and
cable television consumers of the Township.
B. These evaluations shall be proper and germane for the Township to
consider formally when reviewing a proposal for renewal of any
agreement to provide cable services within the Township.
§ 148-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 148-58
1:89
Chapter 165
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 68.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 203.
Floodplains and wetland protection — See Ch.
210.
Historic districts and preservation — See Ch.
228.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 320.
Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 364.
§ 148-58 OAKLAND CODE § 148-58
1:90
ARTICLE I
Enforcing Agencies
[Adopted 6-12-2001 by Ord. No. 96 (Ch. 4, Art. II, of the 2007 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 165-1. Purpose and intent. [Amended 9-26-2006 by Ord. No.
96-2006A]
The intent of this article is to designate enforcing agencies to discharge
the responsibility of the Charter Township of Oakland, located in Oakland
County, under the provisions of the State Construction Code Act, Public Act
No. 230 of 1972 (MCLA § 125.1501 et seq.), as amended, and to designate
regulated flood-prone hazard areas within the Township as set forth in
the most recent Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Oakland
County, Michigan, Flood Insurance Study (FIS), and Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRMs) for the purpose of enforcing the State Construction Code
regulations pertaining to flood zones in those regulated flood-prone hazard
areas.
§ 165-2. Enforcing agency designated. [Amended 9-26-2006 by Ord.
No. 96-2006A]
The Township assumes responsibility for the administration and
enforcement of the State Construction Code Act, Public Act No. 230 of 1972
(MCLA § 125.1501 et seq.), as amended.
§ 165-3. Agency designations. [Amended 9-26-2006 by Ord. No.
96-2006A]
A. Building Code. Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Building
Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Public Act No. 230 of 1972
[MCLA § 125.1508b(6)], as amended, the Township Building
Department, its building officials and supporting administrative staff
and consultants, the Township Board of Trustees, the Planning
Commission, and the Construction Board of Appeals are hereby
designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of
the Township under Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCLA § 125.1501 et
seq.), as amended.14
B. Electrical Code. Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Electrical
Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Public Act No. 230 of 1972
[MCLA § 125.1508b(6)], as amended, the Township Building
Department, inclusive of its electrical officials and supporting
administrative staff and consultants, are hereby designated as the
enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the Township under
Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCLA § 125.1501 et seq.), as amended.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 165-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-3
1:91
C. Mechanical Code. Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan
Mechanical Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Public Act No.
230 of 1972 [MCLA § 125.1508b(6)], as amended, the Township
Building Department, inclusive of its mechanical officials and
supporting administrative staff and consultants, are hereby designated
as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the Township
under Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCLA § 125.1501 et seq.), as
amended.
D. Plumbing Code. Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Plumbing
Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Public Act No. 230 of 1972
[MCLA § 125.1508b(6)], as amended, the Township Building
Department, inclusive of its plumbing officials and supporting
administrative staff and consultants, are hereby designated as the
enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the Township under
Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCLA § 125.1501 et seq.), as amended.
E. Residential Code. Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan
Residential Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Public Act No.
230 of 1972 [MCLA § 125.1508b(6)], as amended, the Township
Building Department, its building officials and supporting
administrative staff and consultants, the Township Board of Trustees,
the Planning Commission, and the Construction Board of Appeals are
hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the
responsibility of the Township under Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCLA
§ 125.1501 et seq.), as amended.15
F. Code Appendix enforced. Pursuant to the provisions of the State
Construction Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Public Act No.
230 of 1972 [MCLA § 125.1508b(6)], as amended, Appendix G of the
State Construction Code16 shall be enforced by the Township Building
Department, its building officials and supporting administrative staff
and consultants, the Township Board of Trustees, the Planning
Commission, and the Construction Board of Appeals within the
Township.17
G. Designation of regulated flood-prone hazard areas. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
entitled "Flood Insurance Study, Oakland County, Michigan, and
Incorporated Areas" and dated September 29, 2006, the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) panel numbers of 26125C0237F,
26125C0239F, 26125C0241F, 26125C0242F, 26125C0243F,
26125C0244F, 26125C0263F, 26125C0275F, 26125C0377F,
26125C0379F, 26125C0381F, 26125C0382F, 26125C0383F,
26125C0384F, 26125C0401F, 26125C0403F, and dated September 29,
15.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
16.Editor's Note: See the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, Appendix G, Flood-
Resistant Construction.
17.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 165-3 OAKLAND CODE § 165-3
1:92
§ 165-4. Fees.19
Permit fees for the enforcement of the State Construction Code shall be
adopted from time to time by resolution of the Township Board in
accordance with the fee structure set by the state.
§ 165-5. Construction Board of Appeals.20
A Township Construction Board of Appeals is created and shall consist of
three members appointed by the Township Board for two-year terms. The
Construction Board of Appeals is granted those powers and duties as set
forth in Public Act No. 230 of 1972 (MCLA § 125.1501 et seq.).
§ 165-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-26-2006 by Ord. No.
96-2006A]
2006, are adopted by reference and declared to be part of Section
1612.3 of the State Construction Code.18
H. Planning Commission and Township Board review. The Planning
Commission and the Township Board shall conduct the review for
permit issuance pursuant to Section G104 of the State Construction
Code, Appendix G, for any proposed development in the Township
within the flood hazard areas delineated on the Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) and Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) set forth in Subsection G
of this section. The Planning Commission and Township Board review
will focus on whether development in the flood hazard areas, special
flood hazard areas and floodways should be permitted pursuant to
Sections G301 through G701 of Appendix G based on compliance with
State Construction Code requirements. The Township building official
shall review and approve the building plans pursuant to the State
Construction Code as part of the building permit issuance. Applications
for variances from decisions made by the Township Board shall be made
to the Township Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to Section G105 of
Appendix G. Applications for variances from decisions made by the
Township building official shall be made to the Township Construction
Board of Appeals pursuant to Section G105 of Appendix G.
A. Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 8b(2) and 23(3) of the State
Construction Code Act, Public Act No. 230 of 1972 [MCLA
§ 125.1508b(2), 125.1523(3)], any person who violates any provision of
the State Construction Code as enforced by the Township and the
Township enforcing agencies under this article shall be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction as set forth in Chapter 52, Ordinance
18.Editor's Note: See the International Building Code, 2012 Edition, Section 1612.3,
Establishment of flood hazard areas.
19.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
20.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 165-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 165-6
1:93
Enforcement, Article II, Municipal Civil Infractions; Citations, and upon
a determination of responsibility shall be subject to a civil fine as set
forth in Chapter 1, Article I, Definitions; General Penalty, of the Code
of the Charter Township of Oakland. In addition to ordering a person
determined to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction to pay a
civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall
be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce,
abate and/or enjoin violation of the State Construction Code. Each
day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
violation.21
B. In addition to any remedies provided for by Township ordinance, any
equitable or other remedies available may be sought.
21.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 165-6 OAKLAND CODE § 165-6
1:94
Chapter 177
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcohol beverages — See Ch. 115.
Outdoor assemblies — See Ch. 122.
Offenses — See Ch. 285.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 299.
§ 177-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA —
All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used,
intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, producing, processing, preparing, concealing, injecting,
ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into a human body a
controlled substance in violation of state or local law. It includes, but is
not limited to:
Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of
plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived;
(1)
Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;
(2)
Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant that is a controlled
substance;
(3)
Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in
identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;
(4)
Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substance;
(5)
Dilutent and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochlorine, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed
for use in cutting controlled substances;
(6)
Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for
use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or
refining marijuana;
(7)
A.
§ 165-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-1
1:95
Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled
substances;
(8)
Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;
(9)
Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
(10)
Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended
for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled
substances into the human body;
(11)
Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish,
hashish oil, or other controlled substances, into the human body,
such as:
Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured metal bowls;
(a)
(b) Water pipes;
(c) Carburetion tubes and devices;
(d) Smoking and carburetion masks;
Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials,
such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand;
(e)
(f) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
(g) Chamber pipes;
(h) Carburetor pipes;
(i) Electric pipes;
(j) Air-driven pipes;
(k) Chillums;
(l) Bongs; or
(m) Ice pipes or chillers.
(12)
In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or
other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:
B.
§ 177-1 OAKLAND CODE § 177-1
1:96
§ 177-2. Possession of drug paraphernalia.
It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of state or local law.
§ 177-3. Delivery or sale.
It is unlawful for any person to deliver, sell, possess with intent to deliver
or sell or manufacture with intent to deliver or sell drug paraphernalia
knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that
it will be used to plant, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze,
Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
(1)
The proximity of the object, in time and space, to direct violation of
state law;
(2)
(3) The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
(4) The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he
knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of state or
local law. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of
the object, as to a direct violation of state law shall not prevent a
finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as
drug paraphernalia;
(5)
Instruction, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its
use;
(6)
Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
(7)
(8) National or local advertising concerning its use;
(9) The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such
as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
(10)
Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the objects
to the total sales of the business enterprise;
(11)
The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; or
(12)
(13)Expert testimony concerning its use.
§ 177-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 177-3
1:97
pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise
introduce to the human body a controlled substance in violation of state or
local law.
§ 177-4. Advertisement.
It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill,
sign, poster, or other publication any advertisement, knowing that the
purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of
objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
§ 177-5. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers,
licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research
teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic
physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians, pharmacists and
embalmers in the normal legal course of their respective business or
profession, nor shall it apply to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma
or any other medical conditions requiring use of an instrument otherwise
characterized in this chapter as drug paraphernalia for purposes of selfinjection.
§ 177-6. Forfeiture of drug paraphernalia.
Any drug paraphernalia used, sold, possessed with intent to use or sell, or
manufactured with intent to sell in violation of this chapter shall be seized
and forfeited to the Township.
§ 177-7. Violations and penalties.22
A violation of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in MCLA
§ 333.7455.
Chapter 184
ELECTRICITY AND NATURAL GAS PROVIDERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Cable communications providers — See Ch.
148.
22.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 177-3 OAKLAND CODE § 177-7
1:98
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 184-1. Purpose and findings.
§ 184-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CUSTOMER — A residential, commercial or industrial end user of
electricity or natural gas in the Township.
DISRUPTION — A physical change, modification, alteration, disturbance,
injury and/or damage to or in a right-of-way, including but not limited to,
construction, installation, location, maintenance, modification, alteration,
replacement or repair of facilities, and the removal or alteration of a rightof-
way surface grade or material, tree, sign, marker, hydrant or other
material or object.
A. Pursuant to Section 29 of Article 7 of the Michigan Constitution of
1963, use of the highways, streets, alleys and other public places for
operation of a public utility requires the consent of the Township and
the transaction of local business in the Township by a public utility
requires that a franchise first be obtained. This chapter is adopted for
the purpose of confirming and providing the process, terms and
conditions for suppliers of electricity and natural gas to obtain the
required consents and franchises and to fully exercise the Township's
constitutional authority which includes the reasonable control of its
highways, streets, alleys and public places.
B. As a result of regulatory changes that have or may occur, and
interpretations of existing laws, at the state and federal levels,
specifically including the Michigan Public Service Commission
(deregulation), the persons that may be authorized to supply electricity
and natural gas to customers in the Township are no longer limited to
the public utility that owns and operates the facilities used to deliver
electricity and natural gas to customers. This chapter is adopted in
recognition of the deregulation which has and may continue to occur,
with the intent and purpose of confirming that all persons supplying
electricity or natural gas to customers in the Township are required to
have a franchise as provided in this chapter, regardless of whether it is
required as a condition of state or federal regulatory permits, approvals
or certificates.
C. The Township will incur costs and expenses in reviewing and acting on
franchise requests, and upon granting a franchise, monitoring and
enforcing its terms and conditions. Such costs and expenses should be
paid by franchise applicants and holders as provided in this chapter.
§ 184-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-2
1:99
FACILITY or FACILITIES — Any overhead or underground cable, wire line,
main, pipe, pole, building, structure, equipment and all other man-made or
placed materials or objects or combinations thereof, for the transmission or
distribution of electricity or natural gas to customers.
FRANCHISE — A nonexclusive limited authorization to transact a local
business and the right to incidental use of right-of-way under this chapter.
GRANTEE — The holder of a valid and effective franchise granted by the
Township.
MPSC — The Michigan Public Service Commission.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any and all public rights-of-way, streets, highways, roads,
sidewalks, alleys, thoroughfares, public easements and public places
located within the Township.
SUPPLIER — A person that supplies electricity (electric generation) or
natural gas to customers in the Township through facilities in the Township
in which it has no ownership, operation, leasehold, repair or maintenance
rights or responsibilities.
UTILITY — A person that owns, operates, and maintains facilities used to
provide electricity or natural gas to customers in the Township.
§ 184-3. Rights of Township.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver of any of the rights,
remedies and/or authority of the Township pursuant to any laws, ordinance,
codes or regulations of the Township, and the Township reserves the right
to exercise all authority and take any and all action granted to it by any
constitution, law, Township ordinance, code and/or regulation. Nothing in
this chapter shall be construed to limit and/or preclude the Township from
exercising its right of eminent domain.
§ 184-4. Notices.
Any notices required to be sent to the grantee by this chapter may be
delivered, or may be sent by first class mail to the grantee at the address
listed in the franchise application or such other address as grantee has
provided to the Clerk in writing.
§ 184-5. Franchise requirement.
Being a supplier of electricity or natural gas to customers in the Township is
the transaction of local business of a public utility, which shall not be done
without a franchise.
§ 184-6. Right-of-way limitations.
A franchise granted under this chapter constitutes the Township's consent
to grantee's limited and incidental use of right-of-way to the extent that
facilities are located within it.
§ 184-2 OAKLAND CODE § 184-6
1:100
ARTICLE II
Franchise Application Requirements and Process
§ 184-7. Application information.
Applications for franchises shall be made to the Clerk by providing the
following written information and documents:
§ 184-8. Application processing.
A. A nonrefundable franchise application fee.
B. The name, age if an individual, and address of the applicant, and if the
applicant is not a natural person, the date, state and form of business
organization.
C. A description of the local business the applicant proposes to transact.
D. Copies or certificates, articles, permits, approvals, licenses, last annual
report and other written documentation of applicant's lawful
incorporation, organization, existence, authorization and good standing
to conduct its proposed business in the state. If any of the listed items
have not been received, documentation they have been applied for must
be provided.
E. If applicable, applicant's minimum quantity requirements of existing
and potential customers.
F. The length of the franchise term being requested, which shall have a
duration of not longer than 10 years.
G. An acknowledgment and agreement to accept and comply with a
franchise in the form of an ordinance that contains and incorporates by
reference all of the terms and conditions contained in Article III of this
chapter.
A. Upon receipt of a franchise application, the Clerk shall schedule the
application and a proposed ordinance that would grant the franchise
requested, for introduction at the first available Township Board of
Trustees meeting.
B. The applicant or its representative shall receive notice and may appear
at the meeting when its franchise request is introduced. If the
application meets the requirements of this chapter, the proposed
ordinance will be accepted for introduction and scheduled for possible
adoption at the first meeting thereafter that allows time to satisfy any
publication and legal requirements for adoption of a valid franchise
ordinance.
C. After all publications and other legal requirements for adoption of a
valid franchise ordinance have been satisfied, at a regular or special
meeting, the Township Board of Trustees may adopt, reject or table
adoption of a proposed franchise ordinance.
§ 184-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-9
1:101
§ 184-9. Franchise approvals.
After a franchise ordinance is adopted and all publication and other legal
requirements for it to become effective are satisfied, a certified copy of the
ordinance shall be delivered or mailed to the approved grantee together
with a written acceptance for the approved grantee to sign under oath,
confirming its acknowledgement, agreement and acceptance of the
franchise and all of its terms and conditions. If the required signed and
notarized acceptance is not delivered to the Clerk within 30 days of the
delivery or mailing of the franchise ordinance and agreement to grantee,
the effectiveness of the ordinance will be automatically terminated. Upon
the approved grantee's timely acceptance of the franchise ordinance, it
shall constitute a contract between the Township and the grantee.
§ 184-10. Applicability; franchise terms and conditions.
Unless amended by the individual franchise ordinance, all of the definitions
in Article I of this chapter, terms and conditions in Articles II and III of this
chapter and penalties and relief in §§ 184-34 and 184-35 shall apply and be
incorporated by reference as part of every supplier's individual franchise
ordinance. Any amendments to this chapter shall be automatically included
in every franchise.
§ 184-9 OAKLAND CODE § 184-10
1:102
ARTICLE III
Franchise Terms and Conditions
§ 184-11. Franchise rights.
Subject to all terms and conditions in this article and the individual
franchise ordinance, a franchise grants the grantee the right to transact a
local business of supplying electricity or gas, as designated in the individual
franchise ordinance, to customers in the Township using facilities of an
identified utility to the extent that it is lawful under applicable legislation,
administrative rules, including those of the MPSC, and express or implied
contract or agreement with the utility. A franchise does not grant the right
to own, construct, operate, maintain or repair facilities in the Township.
§ 184-12. Term; revocation and termination.
The term of a franchise, which shall be stated in the individual franchise
ordinance, is subject to revocation at the will of the Township and may be
surrendered and terminated by the grantee on 30 days' written notice to the
Township. Any unsatisfied obligations of the grantee to the Township shall
survive revocation or termination and be enforceable by the Township as
provided in the franchise, as amended.
§ 184-13. Franchise nonexclusive.
A franchise is nonexclusive and does not restrict the Township from
approving additional franchises or establish any priority between grantees
to transact local business and the incidental use of right-of-way.
§ 184-14. Assignment.
A franchise may not be sold, leased, assigned, transferred or used by any
person other than the grantee without the written approval of the Township
by ordinance amendment.
§ 184-15. Compliance with other provisions.
A franchise requires grantee compliance with all applicable current and
future Township, state and federal ordinances, laws, rules and regulations
and any permit, approval, certificate or license requirements and conditions
under such laws and shall not be construed as a waiver by the grantee of
any of its rights under state or federal law.
§ 184-16. Disruption of right-of-way prohibited.
Disruption or obstruction of, and physical entry in or upon a right-of-way by
a grantee, its personnel or equipment is prohibited.
§ 184-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-17
1:103
§ 184-17. Township rights paramount.
A franchise and the rights granted by it shall at all times be subject to the
paramount rights of the Township in its right-of-way, and shall be subject to
immediate suspension or termination by the Township in the interest of the
public health, safety and welfare.
§ 184-18. Vacation of right-of-way.
If a right-of-way is vacated, discontinued, abandoned, terminated or
released, a grantee's incidental right to use the right-of-way shall
immediately terminate.
§ 184-19. Public emergencies.
Without prior notice, the Township has the right to remove, damage, destroy
or otherwise disrupt and/or order a cessation of use of facilities used
by grantee or its customers, when necessary due to a public emergency.
"Public emergency" means any situation which, in the opinion of the
Township official authorized to declare an emergency, presents an
immediate threat to persons or property in the Township. The Township
shall have no liability or responsibility for repairing or restoring facilities
damaged by actions taken under this section.
§ 184-20. Interpretation.
A franchise shall not be construed in any manner as a waiver or limitation
of the Township's discretion and authority or rights to regulate and control
the use of right-of-way.
§ 184-21. Assumption of risk.
A grantee assumes all risks of damages or injuries to its officers, employees,
agents and contractors from dangerous right-of-way conditions, if any.
§ 184-22. Nonliability of Township.
The Township and its officials, employees, agents and contractors shall have
no liability for damages or injuries to any person or property, including the
grantee, that arise from the granting, enforcement or exercise of rights
under a franchise.
§ 184-23. Indemnity.
A grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, defend, indemnify and hold
harmless the Township and its officials, employees, agents, contractors,
right-of-way and property from all claims and liability for damages or injury
to persons or property caused by or resulting from the actions or omissions
of the grantee and/or its officers, employees, agents and contractors. This
obligation extends to all costs and expenses, including attorney fees that
may be incurred by the beneficiaries of the grantee's obligation. The
§ 184-17 OAKLAND CODE § 184-23
1:104
Township shall notify the grantee of any claim or liability that is covered by
the grantee's obligation, and shall not be prevented from participating in
the defense of any claim by its own attorney, the cost of which shall be the
grantee's responsibility.
§ 184-24. Insurance.
The Township reserves the right to require the grantee to have, maintain
and provide specified liability insurance coverages.
§ 184-25. Disclosures.
A grantee shall provide and update written disclosure to the Township
of its contact person, address, telephone numbers, fax numbers, e-mail
addresses, if applicable, and procedures for service requests and
complaints, together with a written disclosure of pricing, billing, warranty
and contract rates, terms, policies and procedures.
§ 184-26. Supply requirements.
A grantee shall supply electricity or natural gas in accordance with all
applicable laws.
§ 184-27. Franchise fees.
Every three years commencing after December 31, 2001, the Township has
the right, after providing prior notice and an opportunity to comment to
a grantee, to require the payment by a grantee on a periodic basis, of a
franchise fee, provided that any such fee is applied equally to all grantees
under this chapter that are supplying the same commodity (electricity or
natural gas) as a grantee. Such a franchise fee would be an additional
franchise term and condition, to be adopted and presented to the grantee
for acknowledgement, agreement and acceptance as an ordinance
amendment as provided in § 184-9. In any such fee review, the grantee shall
disclose and the Township may consider if the grantee pays a franchise
fee, charge or other periodic payment for a franchise to any other state
municipalities and the manner in which such fees are computed. It is a
condition of a franchise that the grantee notify the Township of any such
fees that are paid and the Township shall have the right to inspect a
grantee's books and records to monitor, enforce and determine a grantee's
compliance and the accuracy of amounts paid or to be paid by a grantee
under this section.
§ 184-28. Township costs.
A grantee shall reimburse the Township for any costs it incurs, including
reasonable attorney fees, in enforcing franchise terms and conditions.
§ 184-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-29
1:105
§ 184-29. Reservation of Township rights.
A franchise shall at all times be subject to the rights of the Township, which
are hereby reserved, to make all regulations, take all actions and do all
things provided for in the Charter Township Act23 or by law.
§ 184-30. Franchise term.
No franchise granted under this chapter shall be for longer than 10 years.
The term of each franchise shall be stated in the individual franchise
ordinance.
§ 184-31. Renewals and extensions.
There is no right to a franchise renewal or extension. Franchise renewal or
extension may be applied for and approved as provided in Article II of this
chapter.
23.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 42.1 et seq.
§ 184-29 OAKLAND CODE § 184-31
1:106
ARTICLE IV
Enforcement
§ 184-32. Transaction of business without franchise.
Any person transacting business without a franchise required by this
chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall pay a
fine in the following amount:
§ 184-33. Right-of-way restoration.
Any person in violation of the franchise requirement of this chapter or a
franchise issued under it who damages a right-of-way shall be responsible
for restoration of the right-of-way to the condition that existed prior to
the violation. If such person fails or refuses to restore the right-of-way
after 30 days notice from the Township, and if the Township determines
that the civil infraction remedy is inadequate under the circumstances, the
Township may initiate proceedings in the appropriate court to recover the
cost estimated to accomplish the restoration, or recover such costs as have
been actually expended by the Township in achieving the restoration, as the
case may be. Such costs shall include finance and reasonable administrative
costs estimated or incurred.
§ 184-34. Separate offenses.
Each occurrence of a violation of this chapter, and each day a violation of
this chapter exists, shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 184-35. Injunctive relief.
Violations of this chapter or a franchise issued under it are considered to
be a nuisance per se with such violations and correction of any conditions
resulting from violations subject to abatement by injunctive or other
appropriate order by a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 184-36. Election of remedies.
Violations of this chapter and franchises issued under it subject the violator
to franchise revocation, if applicable, and Township enforcement through
one or more of the remedies provided in this chapter, and the election by
the Township to pursue one form of remedy does not waive or restrict the
Township's option to pursue other remedies at the same or later time.
A. First offense: $3,500.
B. Second or subsequent offense: $5,000.
§ 184-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 184-36
1:107
Chapter 190
EMERGENCY RESPONSE COST RECOVERY
GENERAL REFERENCES
False alarms — See Ch. 109.
Alcohol beverages — See Ch. 115.
Open burning — See Ch. 143.
Drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 177.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 203.
Offenses — See Ch. 285.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 400.
§ 184-36 OAKLAND CODE § 184-36
1:108
ARTICLE I
Traffic Accidents Involving Impairment or Intoxication; Violators of
Protection Orders
[Adopted 4-27-2004 by Ord. No. 101 (Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 4, of the
2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 190-1. Purpose and intent.
The Township finds that a significant number of traffic arrests and traffic
accidents in the Township involve drivers who operate a motor vehicle while
intoxicated or visibly impaired as such terms are defined in the Michigan
Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCLA § 257.1 et seq.); or, that
involve drivers under 21 who operate a motor vehicle with a blood alcohol
level of 0.02 through 0.07, who are arrested and/or involved in accidents.
In addition, the Township finds that when a traffic accident involves drivers
who are operating a motor vehicle as stated above, there is a greater
likelihood of personal injury and property damage. As a result of these
determinations, a greater operational and financial burden is placed upon
the Township's police, firefighting and rescue services. Additionally, the
Township has determined that the protection and promotion of the public
health, safety, and, welfare requires the adoption of this article to provide
a means for the Township to recover costs and expenses of emergency
response from persons who are arrested for and/or are convicted of
violating personal and foreign protection orders; and, to provide a means
for the Township to recover costs of extradition of persons from other
states.
§ 190-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
EMERGENCY RESPONSE —
The dispatch, provision or utilization of the police, firefighting and/
or medical and rescue services by the Township to or at an accident
involving a motor vehicle where one or more of the drivers was
operating a motor vehicle while intoxicated or visibly impaired as such
terms are defined in the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCLA § 257.1 et seq.);
or is a person under 21 who was operating a motor vehicle with a blood
alcohol level of 0.02 through 0.07.
A.
The making of a traffic stop and arrest by a police officer when the
driver was either operating a motor vehicle while intoxicated or visibly
impaired as such terms are defined in the Michigan Vehicle Code
(MCLA § 257.1 et seq.), or was a person under 21 operating a motor
vehicle with a blood alcohol level of 0.02 through 0.07.
B.
The dispatch, provision or utilization of the police, firefighting and/or
medical and rescue services by the Township, resulting in the arrest,
C.
§ 190-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-2
1:109
EXPENSES AND COSTS OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE — The direct and
reasonable costs incurred by the Township associated with the occurrence
of an emergency response including, but not limited to the following:
§ 190-3. Presumptions.
For the purpose of this article, a person is presumed to be operating while
intoxicated or visibly impaired if he meets the standards of intoxicated or
visibly impaired as they are defined in the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCLA
§ 257.1 et seq.); or, if that person is under 21 and operating a motor vehicle
with a blood alcohol level of 0.02 through 0.07.
and/or finding of guilt for criminal contempt for a violation of a personal
protection order issued under Section 2950 or 2950a of the Revised
Judicature Act of 1961, Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCLA §§ 600.2950,
600.2950a), or for the violation of a foreign protection order that
satisfies the conditions of validity provided in Section 2950i of the
Revised Judicature Act of 1961, Public Act No. 236 of 1961 (MCLA
§ 600.2950i).
The salaries or wages, including overtime pay of law enforcement
personnel for time spent responding to the emergency, arresting and
processing the person after an arrest for a crime causing the
emergency, preparing reports on the emergency, investigating the
emergency, and collecting and analyzing evidence, including, but not
limited to, determining bodily alcohol level and determining the
presence of and identifying controlled substances in the blood, breath,
or urine.
A.
The salaries, wages, or other compensation, including overtime pay, of
Fire Department and emergency medical service personnel, including
volunteer firefighters or volunteer emergency medical service
personnel, for time spent in responding to and providing firefighting,
rescue, and emergency medical services in relation to the emergency.
B.
The cost of medical supplies lost or expended by Fire Department and
emergency medical service personnel, including volunteer firefighters
or volunteer emergency medical service personnel, in providing
services in relation to the emergency.
C.
The salaries, wages, or other compensation, including, but not limited
to, overtime pay of prosecution personnel for time spent investigating
and prosecuting the crime or crimes creating the emergency.
D.
The cost of extraditing a person from another state to this state,
including, but not limited to, all of the following:
(1) Transportation costs.
The salaries or wages of law enforcement and prosecution
personnel, including overtime pay, for processing the extradition
and returning the person to this state.
(2)
E.
§ 190-2 OAKLAND CODE § 190-4
1:110
§ 190-4. Liability for costs.
§ 190-5. Schedule of costs.
The Township Board of Trustees shall by resolution adopt a schedule of
the costs included within the expense of an emergency response. This
schedule may be available to the public from either the Township Clerk or
the sheriff's substation.
§ 190-6. Bill for services.
A. Any person who is arrested for the following violations shall be liable
for the costs and expenses incurred by the Township for providing
emergency response services:
(1) Operating a motor vehicle while intoxicated or visibly impaired
pursuant to Section 625 of the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCLA
§ 257.625).
(2) Person under 21 operating a motor vehicle with a blood alcohol
level of 0.02 through 0.07, pursuant to Section 625(6) of the
Michigan Vehicle Code [MCLA § 257.625(6)].
(3) Violating the terms and conditions of a personal protection order
issued under Section 2950 or 2950a of the Revised Judicature Act
of 1961 (MCLA §§ 600.2950 and 600.2950a), or for the violation of
a foreign protection order that satisfies the conditions of validity
provided in Section 2950i of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961
(MCLA § 600.2950i).
B. The expense of an emergency response shall be a charge against the
person liable for costs and expenses under this article. The cost and
expense of an emergency response constitutes a debt of that person
and is collectible by the Township for incurring those costs and
expenses in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a
contract, express or implied, or as an assessment under the Charter of
the Township.
C. Alternatively, as part of the sentence for a conviction of violations set
forth in Subsection A of this section, in addition to any other penalty
authorized by law, the court may order the person convicted to
reimburse the Township for expenses incurred in relation to that
incident, including but not limited to expenses for emergency response,
and expenses for prosecuting the person as provided in this article.
A. The Township Clerk or the designee thereof, within 15 days of an
emergency response, shall prepare a list of itemized costs incurred for
an emergency response, and submit a bill for the same by first-class
mail or personal service to a person liable for the expenses as
enumerated under this article. The bill shall require full payment within
30 days from the date of service.
§ 190-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-6
1:111
§ 190-7. Failure to pay costs of emergency response.
§ 190-8. Nature of liability.
This article shall not be construed to conflict, contravene or enlarge any
criminal liability or responsibility on the part of the responsible person. In
the event that the responsible person is convicted and ordered by the court
to pay the costs and expenses of the emergency response in accordance
with § 190-4C, no additional payment to the Township pursuant to § 190-4B
shall be made. This section does not allow the Township to be fully
reimbursed more than once for any expense incurred by the Township.
B. Alternatively, the amount ordered to be paid pursuant to § 190-4B shall
be paid to the clerk of the court, who shall transmit the appropriate
amount to the Township to receive reimbursement. If not otherwise
provided by the court under this section, the reimbursement ordered
pursuant to § 190-4C shall be made immediately. However, the court
may require that the person make the reimbursement ordered under
this section within a specified period or in specified installments.
Additionally, the court may be authorized by resolution of the Township
Board to collect the subject debt for the Township and may charge a
reasonable service fee for such collection in an amount mutually agreed
upon by the court and the Township.
A. Any failure by the responsible person to pay the itemized costs within
30 days of service in accordance with § 190-4B shall be considered a
default. In case of default, the Township may commence a civil suit to
recover the unpaid costs and expenses of an emergency response
allowed by law.
B. Alternatively, as part of the sentence for a conviction of the violations
enumerated in § 190-4A, if the person convicted is placed on probation
or paroled, any reimbursement ordered under § 190-4C shall be a
condition of that probation or parole. The court may revoke probation
and the parole board may revoke parole if the person fails to comply
with the order and if the person has not made a good faith effort to
comply with the order. In determining whether to revoke probation or
parole, the court or parole board shall consider the person's
employment status, earning ability, number of dependents, and
financial resources, the willfulness of the person's failure to pay, and
any other special circumstances that may have a bearing on the
person's ability to pay. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
section, a person shall not be imprisoned, jailed, or incarcerated for a
violation of parole or probation, or otherwise, for failure to make a
reimbursement as ordered under this section unless the court
determines that the person has the resources to pay the ordered
reimbursement and has not made a good faith effort to do so.
§ 190-6 OAKLAND CODE § 190-8
1:112
ARTICLE II
Emergency Incidents
[Adopted 7-28-2009 by Ord. No. 63-2009A (Ch. 8, Art. V, of the 2007
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 190-9. Definitions.
The following words and terms shall, for purposes of this article, have the
meanings set forth below:
COSTS OF THE EMERGENCY RESPONSE — The actual costs incurred
by the Township, and by any other governmental or intergovernmental
entity providing services at the request or direction of the Township's Fire
Department, as the result of an emergency response, except as may be
limited by a policy adopted by the governing body. Such costs shall include,
without limitation, all labor costs (including wages, salaries, fringe benefits,
and reimbursable expenses) of all personnel responding to the incident
and all personnel engaged in the investigation, supervision and report
preparation relating to the incident; all costs for materials, supplies, and
equipment utilized or damaged in connection with an emergency incident
and emergency response; all costs for the repair or replacement of publicly
owned property (real and personal property), buildings, facilities and
infrastructure (such as utilities, roads, sidewalks, safety paths and other
infrastructure and public improvements) damaged or destroyed in
connection with or as a direct or indirect result of an emergency incident
and emergency response; investigation of an emergency incident and
firefighting, emergency services, cleaning up, inspecting, testing, abating,
mitigating, restoring and crowd control at the site of an emergency
response; all costs for labor and services for which the Township had to
contract in connection with or as a direct or indirect result of an emergency
incident and emergency response; and any other expenses incurred by
the Township, and by any other governmental or intergovernmental entity
providing services at the request or direction of the Township's Fire
Department, in connection with or as a direct or indirect result of an
emergency incident and emergency response.
EMERGENCY INCIDENT — A fire, accident, utility emergency, hazardous
material incident, arson, technical rescue, or other emergency situation.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE — The dispatch, provision, response and/or
utilization of police, fire, emergency medical, rescue services and/or other
emergency services by the Township, or by any other governmental or
intergovernmental entity providing any such services at the request or
direction of the Township's Fire Department, to an emergency incident
or any call for assistance from any person, property owner, government
agency, emergency service provider, or other entity.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENT — An incident involving any
chemical, substance, compound, mixture, or other material defined as,
designated as, listed as, or having the same characteristics as any
substance, compound, mixture or material listed as hazardous under the
§ 190-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-9
1:113
Fire Code adopted under Chapter 203, Fire Prevention, Article I, Adoption
of Standards, any other code adopted or enforced by the Township, or any
federal or state law or regulation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability
company, association, consortium, governmental entity, public utility
company, or any other legal entity.
UTILITY EMERGENCY — Downed power lines, gas pipeline breaks, or other
mishaps occurring in connection with the activities of public utilities or their
suppliers which necessitates an emergency response or monitoring by the
Township's police, firefighting and/or emergency medical/rescue services,
or causes damage to public property.
§ 190-10. Liability for costs of emergency response.
A. The owner, lessor and operator of any property to which there is an
emergency response shall be presumed liable for the cost of the
emergency response.
B. Any person or vehicle owner/lessee who owns, leases and/or operates a
motor vehicle, other transporter or equipment of any kind, the
operation of which results in an emergency response, shall be
presumed liable for the costs of the emergency response.
C. Any person owning, maintaining or operating a railroad shall be
presumed liable for the cost of the emergency response in the event of
an emergency incident involving the railroad.
D. Any person who is responsible for or whose actions are a cause of an
emergency incident giving rise to a need for an emergency response
shall be liable for the costs of the emergency response.
E. In the event of a utility emergency, the public utility whose activities or
facilities (including but not limited to, electric lines, telephone lines,
cable lines and pipelines) necessitated the emergency response shall be
liable for the costs of the emergency response.
F. If more than one person is liable for the expense of an emergency
response under the foregoing provisions, all such persons shall be
jointly and severally liable for the cost of the emergency response.
G. In the event of an emergency incident that involves a hazardous
materials incident, to the extent the Michigan Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act (being MCLA § 323.101 et seq.) or any
other law preempts the cost recovery provisions of this article, the
liability for and recovery of costs of the emergency response shall be
governed by the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act or such other law, and the Township may pursue
collection of such costs of the emergency response in a civil action,
pursuant to said laws.
§ 190-9 OAKLAND CODE § 190-11
1:114
§ 190-11. Payment of costs.
A. The cost of an emergency response shall be a charge against the person
or persons deemed liable for the expenses of an emergency response.
Such charge constitutes a debt of that person or persons and is
collectible by the Township in the same manner as in the case of an
obligation under an express or implied contract. The Township may,
within 30 days of receiving all or part of the itemized costs incurred by
the Township and any other jurisdiction providing mutual aid to the
Township for an emergency response, submit a bill for such costs by
first-class mail or personal service to the person or persons liable for
the expenses as enumerated under this article.
B. Any person receiving such a bill shall have the opportunity to appeal all
or any portion of the amount shown on such statement by filing a
written request for same with the Fire Chief within 30 days of receipt of
an invoice from the Township. The request must be accompanied by a
written explanation as to why the amount appealed should not be
charged to the appellant. The Fire Chief or his designee shall hear such
appeals. If the Fire Chief or his designee determines that the appellant
is not properly liable for any of the entire amount charged, the Fire
Chief, or his designee may waive such charge against the appellant. The
findings and decisions of the Fire Chief shall be in writing and filed with
the Township Clerk and Treasurer. If no written request for appeal is
received within the specified time, the Township may proceed in
accordance with applicable laws and ordinances to collect any monies
remaining unpaid at the expiration of 30 days from billing.
C. Any failure by any person or entity to either pay the bill within 30 days
of service, or file an appeal as set forth in Subsection B shall be
considered to be a civil default, and the Township may commence a civil
suit against such person or entity to recover the billed expenses of an
emergency response, plus the Township's attorney fees, court costs,
litigation expenses and all other costs allowed by law or equity. The
recovery of costs of an emergency response under this article is a
separate civil liability of any person liable for the emergency response,
and is separate from and in addition to any criminal proceedings that
may be brought against the person or persons.
D. In addition, the Township shall have any other remedy available to the
Township by law or equity, including but not limited to requesting the
Township Attorney to file a civil action for the recovery of costs as
provided in this article or otherwise.
§ 190-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 190-11
1:115
Chapter 203
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 143.
Construction standards — See Ch. 165.
Emergency response cost recovery — See Ch.
190.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 320.
§ 190-11 OAKLAND CODE § 190-11
1:116
ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 1-13-2009 by Ord. No. 63-2008A (Ch. 8, Art. II, of the
2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 203-1. Adoption of fire prevention standards.
The International Fire Code, 2006 Edition, including Appendix Chapters
A, B, C, D, E and G, as published by the International Code Council, is
hereby adopted by reference as an ordinance of the Charter Township of
Oakland, with the amendments provided in § 203-2; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of such International Fire
Code on file in the offices of the Charter Township of Oakland, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article.
§ 203-2. Code amendments.
The following sections of the code adopted in § 203-1 are amended, deleted
or clarified in the manner indicated.
A. Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Fire Prevention
Code Ordinance of the Charter Township of Oakland," hereinafter
referred to as "this code."
B. Section 105.1.2 is amended to read as follows:
105.1.2 Construction permit. A construction permit allows the
applicant to install or modify systems and equipment for which a permit
is required by Section 105.7.
C. Section 105.6 is deleted in its entirety.
D. Sections 105.7.1, 105.7.4, 105.7.5, 105.7.6, 105.7.8, 105.7.9, 105.7.10,
105.7.11, and 105.7.12 are deleted. The balance of Section 105.7
remains unaffected.
E. Section 109.3 is amended to read as follows:
109.3 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of
this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the
approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or
of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable of a fine of not more than $500
or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
F. Section 111.4 is amended to read as follows:
§ 203-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-2
1:117
111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work
after having been served with a stop-work order, except such work as
that person is directed by the Code Official to perform to remove a
violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor violation
of this code punishable in the same manner as set forth in Section
109.3.
G. Section 302.1 is amended to read as follows:
302.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the
purposes of this article and as used elsewhere in this code, have the
meanings shown herein.
BONFIRE. An outdoor fire utilized for ceremonial purposes.
HI-BOY. A cart used to transport hot roofing materials on a roof.
POWERED INDUSTRIAL TRUCK. A forklift, tractor, platform lift
truck or motorized hand truck powered by an electrical motor or
internal combustion engine. Powered industrial trucks do not include
farm vehicles or automotive vehicles for highway use.
H. Section 307 is deleted in its entirety. Open burning is addressed by
separate Township ordinance regulations.24
I. Section 502.1 is amended by adding the definitions of "driveway,"
"gate" and "private street," and amending the definition of "key box," to
read as follows:
DRIVEWAY. A private street or drive that provides a means of vehicle
access to one building.
GATE. Any movable fence, door, bar, gate, or other form of full or
partial blockable barrier or obstruction on or off a driveway, private
street or fire apparatus access road that is designed, used, intended
for or has the effect of prohibiting, limiting, controlling or restricting
vehicle or pedestrian access to the buildings or premises served by the
driveway, private street or fire apparatus access road.
KEY BOX. A device or container that has been approved by the Code
Official for purposes of compliance with Section 506, that contains or
may be operated with a key that is only accessible to or possessed by
the jurisdiction's Fire Department to use when immediate access to a
premises or building by Fire Department, police or emergency medical
personnel is necessary to respond to or verify the existence of a fire or
other emergency.
PRIVATE STREET. An area of land that is not owned, maintained or
required to be open to the public that provides a means of vehicle
access to more than one building.
24.Editor's Note: See Chapter 143, Burning, Open.
§ 203-2 OAKLAND CODE § 203-2
1:118
J. Section 506 is amended, in its entirety, to read as follows:
SECTION 506
FIRE DEPARTMENT ACCESS
506.1 Road and driveway obstructions prohibited. Except for
gates equipped with a key box and those which are under the
immediate and continuous (24 hours a day, seven days a week) control
of one or more persons with the authority and ability to move the
gate to allow immediate access by police, fire or emergency medical
vehicles and personnel, all driveways, private streets and fire
apparatus roads shall be maintained free from any and all natural or
man-made obstructions, encroachments and objects of any kind that
would in any way interfere with Fire Department, police or emergency
medical access to the buildings served by the driveway or private road.
506.2 Key boxes required. Key boxes shall be provided and
maintained in good working order for premises and buildings in the
following situations:
506.2.1 New buildings. All new commercial, business, office,
industrial and other nonresidential buildings shall be equipped with
a key box prior to any use or occupancy or issuance of any
certificate of occupancy.
506.2.2 Existing buildings. Existing commercial, business, office,
industrial and other nonresidential buildings, and those for which a
building permit has been issued, shall be equipped with a key box
within one year of the effective date of the ordinance which added
this section.
506.2.3 Existing premises. Gates shall be equipped with key
boxes within one year of the effective date of the ordinance
amendment that first added this requirement to Ordinance No. 63
(originally amended October 13, 1998, to add this requirement).
506.3 Key box location. Key boxes shall be located on or in the
immediate vicinity of the gate or entrance to the building for which
it is required so as to be readily visible and accessible to the Fire
Department, with the Code Official to approve all locations prior to
installation.
506.4 Key box alarms. For buildings having or required to have a
central station, proprietary or remove-station fire protective signaling
(alarm) system, any key box required shall include a tamper switch or
device that produces and transmits a tamper signal to the supervising
alarm company if the box is opened, attempted to be opened or
otherwise tampered with.
§ 203-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-2
1:119
506.5 Approved key boxes. No key box will satisfy or comply with
the requirements of this Section 506 unless, prior to its purchase and
installation, it is approved by the Code Official, who will give that
approval in written form by providing the key box applicant with the
application form necessary to acquire a key box that will satisfy the
requirements of this section.
506.6 Damage and tampering prohibited. It shall be unlawful
for any person to damage, destroy or tamper with a key box, with
violations punishable as provided in Section 109.3, with the violator(s)
also responsible for making restitution to the owner of the key box for
repair or replacement cost resulting from the damage, destruction or
tampering.
K. Section 2703.3.1.4 is amended to read as follows: [Added 7-28-2009
by Ord. No. 63-2009A]
2703.3.1.4 Responsibility for cleanup. The person, firm or
corporation responsible for an unauthorized discharge shall institute
and complete all actions necessary to remedy the effects of such
unauthorized discharge, whether sudden or gradual, at no cost to the
Township. When deemed necessary by the Fire Code Official, cleanup
may be initiated by the Fire Department or by an authorized individual
or firm. The liability for and recovery of costs of the cleanup shall
be governed by the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act (MCLA § 324.20101 et seq.) or any other that law
preempts the cost recovery provisions of this article, and the Township
may pursue collection of such costs of the cleanup in a civil action,
pursuant to said laws.25
L. The limits referred to in Sections 3204.3.1.1, 3404.2.9.5.2, 3406.2.4.4
and 3804.2 are hereby established as being the amounts that are
permitted by the applicable regulations of the Michigan Department of
Transportation, as they may be amended from time to time.
M. Section 3308 is deleted in its entirety. Fireworks displays are subject to
regulation by other Michigan law.
N. The text of Appendix Chapter B is replaced by the following reference:
"The fire flow requirements for buildings are provided in the Township
Engineering Design Standards adopted May 23, 1978, as they may be
amended from time to time."
O. The text of Appendix Chapter C is replaced by the following reference:
"The requirements for fire hydrant locations and distribution are
provided in the Township Engineering Design Standards adopted May
23, 1978, as they may be amended from time to time."
P. Appendix Chapter F is not applicable in the Township and is deleted.
25.Editor's Note: See Ch. also 190, Emergency Response Cost Recovery.
§ 203-2 OAKLAND CODE § 203-2
1:120
Chapter 210
FLOODPLAIN AND WETLANDS PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 68.
Construction standards — See Ch. 165.
Historic districts and preservation — See Ch.
228.
Land divisions and subdivisions — See Ch.
250.
Mining operations — See Ch. 267.
Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 364.
Tree protection, preservation and
removal — See Ch. 389.
§ 203-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-2
1:121

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 210-1. Purpose.
A. The Township Board finds that rapid growth, the spread of
development, and increasing demands upon natural resources have had
the effect of encroaching upon, despoiling, polluting, or eliminating
many of its watercourses and wetlands, and other natural resources
and processes associated therewith which, if preserved and maintained
in an undisturbed and natural condition, constitute important physical,
aesthetic, recreational and economic assets to existing and future
residents of the Township.
B. The Township Board further finds that the pollution impairment or
destruction of the Township's floodplains, watercourses, and wetlands
has and will continue to cause substantial harm to the property of other
landowners and to the rights of the public and that protection of the
natural resources is essential to the protection of the public health,
safety, and welfare within the Township.
C. The Township Board incorporates by this reference the findings of the
state legislation set forth in Part 303 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994
(MCLA § 324.30301 et seq.).
D. This chapter shall:
(1) Provide for the protection, preservation, proper maintenance, and
use of Township watercourses and wetlands in order to minimize
disturbance to them and to prevent damage from erosion, turbidity
or siltation, a loss of fish or other beneficial aquatic organisms, a
loss of wildlife and vegetation and/or from the destruction of the
natural habitat thereof;
(2) Provide for the protection of the Township's potable fresh water
supplies from the dangers of drought, overdraft, pollution, or
mismanagement which will affect human, animal, or plant life;
(3) Secure safety from damaging flood heights and velocities caused by
obstructed flows and reduced storage; reduce the financial burdens
imposed upon the community through rescue and relief efforts
occasioned by the occupancy or use of areas subject to periodic
flooding, prevent loss of life, property damage and other losses and
risks associated with flood conditions; preserve the location,
character, and extent of natural drainagecourses;
(4) Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to
minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in
specific areas by provisions designed to:
(a) Protect human life and health;
§ 210-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-1
1:123
§ 210-2. Definitions. [Amended 9-26-2006 by Ord. No. 44A-2006]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning. All terms, phrases and words
used within Article IV of this chapter regarding flood hazard protection,
including, but not limited to, terms such as "flood," "flooding," "Flood
Insurance Rate Map," "Flood Insurance Study," "flood hazard area," "special
flood hazard area," and "floodway" shall have the meaning given to them in
the State Construction Code composed of the State Construction Code and
the State Construction Code (and its appendixes, specifically Appendix G).
(b) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
(c) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the
general public;
(d) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(e) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and
bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
(f) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
(g) Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
E. In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
(1) Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which
result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or
velocities;
(2) Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;
(3) Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or
channel floodwaters;
(4) Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development
which may increase flood damage; and
(5) Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood
hazards in other areas.
§ 210-1 OAKLAND CODE § 210-2
1:124
With respect to Article IV of this chapter, in the event a term defined within
this chapter conflicts with a definition set forth in the State Construction
Code, the State Construction Code definition shall control.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given year.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
BOTTOMLANDS — The land area of a lake, stream, or watercourse which
lies below the ordinary high-water mark and which may or may not be
covered by water.
CHANNEL — The geographical area within the natural or artificial banks
of a watercourse required to convey continuously or intermittently flowing
water.
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Township organized
under Public Act No. 33 of 2008 (MCLA § 125.3801 et seq.), the Michigan
Planning Enabling Act.26
CONTIGUOUS —
DEPOSIT — To fill, place or dump.
DEVELOPMENT — Any human-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
DRAINAGE MAP — The Official Township Drainage, Floodplain and
Wetlands Map which delineates one-hundred-year floodplains, wetlands and
A permanent surface water connection or other direct physical contact
with an inland lake or pond, a river or stream.
A.
A seasonal or intermittent direct surface water connection to an inland
lake or pond, a river or stream.
B.
A wetland is partially or entirely located within 500 feet of the ordinary
high-water mark of an inland lake or pond or a river or stream, unless
it is determined by the Township in accordance with Rule 281.924
of the Administrative Rules adopted by the State Department of
Environmental Quality, Land and Water Management Division,
Wetlands Protection, that there is no surface or ground water
connection to these waters.
C.
Two or more areas of wetland separated only by barriers, such as dikes,
roads, berms, or other similar features, but with any of the wetland
areas contiguous under the criteria described in Subsection A, B or C
of this definition.
D.
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 210-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-2
1:125
watercourses in the Township (the composite of which is the Master
Drainage Plan), as amended and/or updated from time to time.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOOD BOUNDARY-FLOODWAY MAP — An Official Map of the Township,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated onehundred-
year flood boundaries and elevations and the floodway area.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Land which on the basis of available floodplain
information is subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any
given area.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An Official Map of a community,
on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both
the areas of special flood hazards and the risk of premium zones applicable
to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — The Flood Insurance Study for the
Township, dated December 1, 1982, which contains a Flood Boundary Map
and a Flood Insurance Rate Map, shall provide the floodplain information
used on these maps.
FLOODPLAIN — The relatively flat areas or lowlands adjoining the channel
or watercourse or a body of water which has been or may be covered
by floodwater when high amounts of precipitation or snowmelt are
experienced. Determinants of floodplain are as follows:
FLOODPROOFED — Watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas designated in the Flood Insurance Study which must be reserved
in order to discharge the base flood.
HIGH-WATER ELEVATION — The line between upland and bottomland
which persists through successive changes in water levels, below which
the presence and action of the water is so common or recurrent that the
A. The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface waters from
any source.
B.
Land subject to a one-percent or greater chance of being flooded in any
given year. (As defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
in Flood Insurance Study for the Township dated December 1, 1982.)
A.
Principal estuary courses of wetland areas that are considered part of
the river flow system.
B.
Contiguous areas paralleling major rivers or streams that exhibit
unstable soil conditions for development. (See definition of "wetlands"
for soil types.)
C.
§ 210-2 OAKLAND CODE § 210-2
1:126
character of the land is marked distinctly from the upland and is apparent in
the soil itself, the configuration of the surface of the soil and the vegetation.
On an inland lake which has a level established by law, it means the high
established level. Where water returns to its natural level as a result of the
permanent removal or abandonment of a dam, it means the natural ordinary
high-water mark.
LOCATE — To construct, place, insert or excavate.
MASTER DRAINAGE PLAN — A plan adopted by the Township showing
floodplains, floodways, watercourses, and wetlands in the Township.
MATERIAL — Soil, sand, gravel, clay, peat moss, and other organic material.
MOBILE HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"mobile home" does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
NATURAL OBSTRUCTION — Any rock, tree, gravel, or analogous natural
matter that is an obstruction and has been located within a floodway by a
nonhuman cause.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — A structure for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this
chapter is derived.
NONCONFORMING LOCATION — The location of an operation,
obstruction, or structure which lawfully existed upon the waters,
bottomlands, one-hundred-year floodplains at the time of adoption of the
ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendments thereto, and
which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING OPERATION — An operation or use which lawfully
occupied an obstruction, structure or land at the time of adoption of the
ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendments thereto, and
which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter.
OBSTRUCTION — Artificial obstructions such as any dam, wall, wharf,
embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, excavation, channel rectification,
bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, or
other analogous structure or matter in, along, across, or projecting into
any floodway which may impede, retard, change the direction of the flow
of water, or increase the flooding height, either in itself or by catching or
collecting debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the natural
flow of the water would carry the same downstream to the damage or
detriment of either life or property.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or BASE FLOOD — A flood having a onepercent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOODWAY — The calculated channel necessary to
carry and discharge the one-hundred-year flood.
OPERATION — The removal, deposition, or any construction use or activity,
or a combination thereof which in any way modifies the conditions of
§ 210-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-2
1:127
watercourses or lands subject to this chapter as they exist on the effective
date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived.
OWNER — Any person who has dominion over, control of, or title to, an
obstruction or to wetland properties.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including governmental
agencies, conducting operations within the Township.
REMOVE — To dig, dredge, suck, pump, bulldoze, dragline or blast.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on
the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground,
including but not limited to houses, buildings, bulkheads, piers, docks,
landings, dams, waterway obstructions, gas or liquid storage facility, as well
as a mobile home.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT —
UPLAND — The land area adjoining a lake, stream, or watercourse, above
the ordinary high-water mark, uses for which are essentially nonaquatic.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this
chapter which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by
this chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary
hardship.
WATERCOURSES — Any waterway or other body of water having
reasonably well-defined banks, including rivers, streams, creeks and
brooks, whether continually or intermittently flowing, and lakes and ponds,
as shown on the Master Drainage Plan Maps of the Township.
Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of
which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
either:
(1) Before the improvement or repair is started; or
If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the
damage occurred.
(2)
A.
For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor
or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term
does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places.
(2)
B.
§ 210-2 OAKLAND CODE § 210-2
1:128
WETLANDS — Land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency
and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances
does support, wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is commonly referred
to as a "bog," "swamp" or "marsh." For purposes of this chapter, a wetland
must be two acres, or more, in size, including the area of any contiguous
inland lake, pond, river, or stream. If the land area is less than two acres
in size, it shall nonetheless be considered a wetland if it is determined that
the protection of the area is essential to the preservation of the natural
resources of the state from pollution, impairment, or destruction and the
owner of the property has been so notified. In making this determination,
the Township must find that one or more of the following exist at the
particular site:
Lakes are those areas of inland depressions, consistently filled with
water that are supplied by groundwater or artesian springs. Such areas
exhibit inflow and outflow characteristics. Closed lakes are mainly
pothole or seepage lakes without inflowing or outflowing
characteristics.
A.
Streams are natural estuary flow systems of surface waters occurring
at the lowest points of the system, exhibiting consistent water flow
patterns from the highest levels of collection to the mouth or outflow
points.
B.
The site supports state or federal endangered or threatened plants,
fish, or wildlife appearing on a list specified in Section 36505 of Part
365 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCLA § 324.36505).
A.
The site represents what is identified as a locally rare or unique
ecosystem.
B.
C. The site supports plants or animals of an identified local importance.
The site provides groundwater recharge documented by a public
agency.
D.
The site provides flood and storm control by the hydrologic absorption
and storage capacity of the wetland.
E.
The site provides wildlife habitat by providing breeding, nesting, or
feeding grounds or cover for forms of wildlife, waterfowl, including
migratory waterfowl, and rare, threatened, or endangered wildlife
species.
F.
The site provides protection of subsurface water resources and
provision of valuable watersheds and recharging groundwater supplies.
G.
The site provides pollution treatment by serving as a biological and
chemical oxidation basin.
H.
The site provides erosion control by serving as a sedimentation area
and filtering basin, absorbing silt and organic matter.
I.
§ 210-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-2
1:129
§ 210-3. Construction of language.
The following rules of construction apply to the text of this chapter.
§ 210-4. Disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and
scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions.
Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris or increased runoff from
urbanization upstream. This chapter does not imply that areas outside the
floodplain districts or land uses permitted within such districts will be free
from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on
the part of the Township or any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 210-5. Abrogation and conflict of authority.
The site provides sources of nutrients in water food cycles and nursery
grounds and sanctuaries for fish.
J.
A. In case of a difference of meaning or implication between the text of
this chapter and any caption of illustration, the text shall control.
B. Particulars provided by way of illustration or enumeration shall not
control general language.
C. Ambiguities, if any, shall be construed liberally in favor of protecting
the resources indicated in § 210-1.
D. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural and
singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
E. Terms not specifically defined in this chapter shall have the meaning
customarily assigned to them.
F. In case of conflict between the Official Maps and the definitions in this
chapter, the definition shall control.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to conflict with present or
future state statutes in the same subject matter. Conflicting provisions
of this chapter shall be abrogated to, but only to, the extent of the
conflict. Moreover, the provisions of this chapter shall be construed, if
possible, to be consistent with and in addition to relevant state
regulations and statutes.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
§ 210-2 OAKLAND CODE § 210-5
1:130
§ 210-6. Compliance.
§ 210-7. Applicability. [Amended 9-26-2006 by Ord. No. 44A-2006]
This chapter shall apply to all lands within the jurisdiction of the Township
upon which any of the following conditions exist:
construed in favor of the Township Board and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.
C. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where
this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter
shall prevail. All other ordinances inconsistent with this chapter are
hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency only.
D. Concurrent jurisdiction.
(1) The Township shall have jurisdiction for the regulation of wetlands
under this chapter concurrent with the jurisdiction of the State
Department of Environmental Quality.
(2) Issuance of a permit under this chapter shall not relieve a property
owner from obtaining a permit from the State Department of
Environmental Quality and/or from the Army Corps of Engineers or
other agency, if required.
(3) Issuance of a permit by the State Department of Environmental
Quality and/or Army Corps of Engineers shall not relieve a property
owner from obtaining a permit under this chapter if a permit is
required by the terms of this chapter, and all permit requirements
under this chapter shall be met.
A. No structure, land or vegetation shall hereafter be used, altered, filled,
or dredged, and no structure shall be located, extended, converted or
structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations which apply to uses within the
jurisdiction of this chapter.
B. Obtaining other approvals or permits, including those referenced in
Subsection A of this section, shall be the sole responsibility of the
applicant, and no activities or operations shall be initiated by the
applicant until such approvals and permits have been issued.
A. Flood hazard areas, special flood hazard areas and floodway boundaries
shall be determined based on the Federal Emergency Management
Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) entitled "Flood Insurance
Study, Oakland County, Michigan, and Incorporated Areas" and dated
September 29, 2006, the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS) panel
numbers of 26125C0237F, 26125C0239F, 26125C0241F, 26125C0242F,
26125C0243F, 26125C0244F, 26125C0263F, 26125C0275F,
26125C0377F, 26125C0379F, 26125C0381F, 26125C0382F,
§ 210-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-7
1:131
§ 210-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-8-1999 by Ord. No.
81]
26125C0383F, 26125C0384F, 26125C0401F, 26125C0403F, and dated
September 29, 2006.
B. All areas of one-hundred-year frequency flood as shown on the Paint
Creek Flood Hazard Study and the West Branch Stony Creek and
McClure Drain Flood Hazard Study.
C. Watercourses as defined in this chapter and/or as identified on the
official Township Drainage, Floodplain and Wetland Maps.
D. Wetlands as defined in this chapter. (All wetland regulation in this
chapter shall apply only to the land meeting the definition of "wetland.")
A. Any person found responsible for violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a civil fine as set forth in Chapter 1, Article I,
Definitions; General Penalty, of the Code of the Charter Township of
Oakland. In addition to ordering the person determined to be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs,
damages and expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to
issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or enjoin
violation of this chapter. Each day a violation exists shall be deemed a
separate and distinct offense.27
B. The grant or denial of a development permit shall not have any affect on
any remedy of any person at law or in equity; provided that where it is
shown there is a wrongful failure to comply with this chapter, there
shall be a rebuttable presumption that the obstruction was the
proximate cause of the flooding of the land of any person bringing suit.
C. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall become liable
to the Township for any expense or loss or damage occasioned by the
Township by reason of such violation.
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 210-7 OAKLAND CODE § 210-8
1:132
ARTICLE II
Specific Maps Authorized
§ 210-9. Master Drainage Plan.
§ 210-10. Flood Hazard Maps. [Amended 9-26-2006 by Ord. No.
44A-2006]
Flood hazard areas, special flood hazard areas and floodway boundaries
shall be determined based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) entitled "Flood Insurance Study,
Oakland County, Michigan, and Incorporated Areas" and dated September
29, 2006, the Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS) panel numbers of
26125C0237F, 26125C0239F, 26125C0241F, 26125C0242F, 26125C0243F,
26125C0244F, 26125C0263F, 26125C0275F, 26125C0377F, 26125C0379F,
26125C0381F, 26125C0382F, 26125C0383F, 26125C0384F, 26125C0401F,
26125C0403F, and dated September 29, 2006. Specific site elevations
should be determined using the flood profiles from the Flood Insurance
Study for the Township.
§ 210-11. Wetland Map.
See § 210-36 regarding wetland mappings.
§ 210-12. Other specific studies.
A. The Township shall prepare and adopt a Master Drainage Plan showing
floodplains, floodways, watercourses and wetlands. The Master
Drainage Plan, as adopted by the Township Board on May 27, 1980, is
hereby incorporated by reference and shall be considered a part of this
chapter as though said map were completely reproduced herein.
B. The Master Drainage Plan delineating wetlands shall serve only as a
general guide for the determination of boundaries. The actual
boundaries of wetland areas shall be determined by the applicant in
accordance with generally accepted engineering methods and
standards.
C. The Township Board shall be empowered to change or alter the
boundaries established in the Master Drainage Plan after a public
hearing, provided new and substantiated data shows a change in the
one-hundred-year floodplain, floodway, watercourse or wetlands
designation. The public hearing shall be held in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Public Act No. 110 of 2006 (MCLA § 125.3101 et
seq.).
A. The Paint Creek Flood Hazard Study and the West Branch Stony Creek
and McClure Drain Flood Hazard Study are hereby incorporated into
this chapter by reference for use in determining specific flood hazards
by applicants and by the Township.
§ 210-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-12
1:133
B. The United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service
Soil Survey of Oakland County (Oakland Township), Michigan. issued
March 1982, is hereby incorporated in this chapter by reference.
§ 210-12 OAKLAND CODE § 210-12
1:134
ARTICLE III
Establishment of Development Permit in Identified Areas
§ 210-13. Requirements.
In conformance with the provisions of this chapter, all operations affecting
floodplains, floodways, watercourses, and wetlands shall require the filing
and approval of a development permit application and the issuance of
a development permit, unless this chapter grants an exemption for such
operations. The Township Board shall establish fees and escrow
requirements to cover processing costs.
§ 210-14. Application submittal and initial processing.
A. All development permit applications must be completed in full and
submitted to the Township Clerk with the accompanying fee.
B. For activities and operations requiring a wetland permit under this
chapter, the submission and processing of the application shall be as
follows:
(1) An application for a Township wetland permit shall be made on the
form supplied by the State Department of Environmental Quality.
(2) Each person applying for a Township wetland permit shall make
application directly with the Township through the Building
Department.
(3) Upon receipt, the Building Department shall forward a copy of each
application to the State Department of Environmental Quality.
(4) The Township, with the assistance of its consultants in those cases
deemed by the Township to be appropriate, shall review the
application pursuant to this chapter.
(5) The application shall be modified, approved or denied within 90
days after receipt, subject to the following provision.
(6) The applicant for an approval required in conjunction with site plan
review or subdivision approval shall, at the time of submission,
elect to have the application processed under either Subsection
B(6)(a) or (b) of this section:
(a) The wetland application shall be reviewed immediately, either
prior to or concurrent with the review of the site plan, plat or
other proposed land use submitted by the applicant, with the
understanding that the land use review may not be completed
at the time the decision is rendered on the wetland application.
Election of this alternative may require a reopening of the
wetland application if the land use approval is inconsistent
with the wetland approval; or
§ 210-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-14
1:135
§ 210-15. Application information for areas other than wetlands.
For activities and cases in areas other than wetlands, the following
information shall be provided with the application:
(b) The wetland application shall be reviewed and acted upon
concurrent with the review of the site plan, plat or other
proposed land use submitted by the applicant, and the ninetyday
review period limitation specified in Section 30307(7) of
Public Act No. 451 of 1994 [MCLA § 324.30307(7)] shall
thereby be extended accordingly.
(7) The denial of a permit shall be accompanied by a written reason for
denial. The failure to supply complete information with a permit
application may be reason for denial of a permit.
A. A detailed description and purpose of the proposed operation.
B. Amount and type of material to be removed or deposited.
C. A dimensional legal description, parcel identification number, zoning
classification (including zoning on adjacent parcels), existing features,
and the size and location of all parts of the proposed operation.
D. Where removal, depositing or grading is proposed, an accurate
topographical map of these disturbed areas should be drawn to scale of
not less than one inch equals 50 feet and shall be prepared and certified
by a registered landscape architect, land surveyor or civil engineer. The
topographical map shall contain:
(1) Name and address of the owner of record of the affected property,
and of the applicant if other than the owner.
(2) Location and dimensions of all boundary lines.
(3) Names of the owners of record of adjoining properties and of
properties directly across any road.
(4) Graphic scale.
(5) North arrow.
(6) Date.
(7) Existing contour data for the entire property with a vertical contour
interval of no more than five feet, and the vertical contour data at
an interval of no more than two feet for all areas to be disturbed by
the proposed operation, extending for a distance of at least 50 feet
beyond the limits of such areas. Indicated elevations shall be based
on United States Geological Survey datum.
(8) Location map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 2,000 feet
showing property lines, and general relationship of the proposed
property to the surrounding area within 1/2 mile.
§ 210-14 OAKLAND CODE § 210-15
1:136
§ 210-16. Review of application.
The method of review of the permit application shall be determined by the
Township Clerk, by the extent of the proposed operation as follows:
§ 210-17. Granting of variance and appeal of denial.
(9) Soil borings to determine extent of poorly drained and very poorly
drained soils. (See definition of "wetlands.")
(10) Location of proposed buildings, structures, driveways and septic
fields.
(11) Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures.
(12) Base flood elevation data where the proposed development is
subject to the Land Division Act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCLA
§ 560.101 et seq.) or if the area is greater than five acres in size.
(13) An area map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 200 feet
showing property lines, normal high-water line boundary and
elevation, wetlands, proposed changes in location and extent of
existing watercourses, flood lands and drainagecourses.
(14) Specification of the extent of all areas to be disturbed, the depth to
which removal or deposition operations are proposed, and the
angle of repose of all slopes of deposited materials and/or sides of
channels or excavations resulting from removal operations.
(15) Proposed contours at an interval of no more than two feet.
A. For construction of scenic ponds not exceeding one acre, and not
located in a wetland and for single-family residences and operations
and uses normally accessory thereto, the development permit
application shall be reviewed by the Building Department which, if the
proposed operation is found to conform with the requirements of this
chapter, may issue a development permit.
B. For any proposed operation not covered by § 210-15, the Township
Clerk shall forward the development permit application to the Planning
Commission and Township Board for review in conformance with the
requirements and standards of this chapter.
C. The Planning Commission shall submit its recommendation to the
Township Board which shall make the final determination of approval or
denial.
D. The Planning Commission shall obtain and maintain records of
elevation levels for all new or substantially improved structures and
whether or not such structures contain a basement.
§ 210-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-17
1:137
§ 210-18. Conditions of issuance.
§ 210-19. Permit contents.
The permit issued under this chapter shall contain at least the following:
A. The granting of a variance and/or the appeal from a decision of the
Building Director or the Township Board on a development permit
application shall be made to the Zoning Board of Appeals, hereinafter
called the "review board," within 45 days of that decision.28
B. The Township Board shall establish, by resolution, the membership of
the review board, requirements for notice, and any other standards for
review which are not mentioned herein.
C. In reviewing the appeal, the review board shall consider the standards
outlined in §§ 210-26, 210-27 and 210-28 before arriving at a decision.
D. The review board shall establish its own rules of procedure.
A. All operations permitted or approved by use permits shall be conducted
in such a manner as will cause the least possible damage and
encroachment or interference with natural resources and natural
processes within the flood hazard, floodplain, watercourses and
wetland areas in the Township as defined in this chapter.
B. The Township shall upon the issuance of a permit:
(1) Impose such conditions on the manner and extent of the proposed
operation, use or structure or use activity as are necessary to
ensure that the intent of this chapter is carried out;
(2) Fix a reasonable time within which any construction, removal, or
deposition operations must be completed; and
(3) Require the filing with the Township of a cash bond or irrevocable
letter of credit, in such form and amount as determined necessary
by the Township Board to ensure compliance with the approved
development permit.
C. Where a final preliminary subdivision plat, a final site plan, or a final
approval of a private road development containing work as defined in
this chapter has been reviewed and approved by the Township Board in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter, such approval,
together with any additional terms and conditions attached thereto
shall be considered to have completed the requirements for a permit.
D. Land shall not be divided in a manner creating parcels or lots which
cannot be used in conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 210-17 OAKLAND CODE § 210-19
1:138
§ 210-20. Posting of permit.
Upon issuance of a permit and prior to the undertaking of any site work, the
persons to whom the permit has been issued shall post a copy of the permit
on the property in a conspicuous place which is accessible for inspection
and reading by the public.
§ 210-21. Fees.
A. The name, address and telephone number of the person to whom the
permit has been issued.
B. The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property
on which the activity or operation shall occur.
C. A statement of all conditions imposed in connection with the issuance of
the permit.
D. Any required time period for commencement of one or more operations.
E. The date by which any construction, removal, deposit or operation must
be completed, i.e., the expiration date of the permit.
F. The amount of any cash bond or irrevocable letter of credit, and the
institution issuing such irrevocable letter of credit as determined
necessary by the Township to ensure compliance with the permit as
issued.
G. A statement that: "All activities and operations permitted or approved
by this permit shall be conducted in such a manner as will cause the
least possible damage and encroachment or interference with natural
resources and natural processes."
H. The legal description of the parcel to which the permit pertains.
I. All soil erosion permit requirements shall be met prior to any operation
or activity.
J. Any and all necessary temporary drainage measures, as approved, shall
be undertaken to ensure that no temporary or permanent blockages of
drainage result.
A. With the filing of an application, a deposit shall be made payable to the
Township in an amount specified by resolution of the Township Board,
entitled to cover all fees, including inspection, public hearing and
monitoring fees.
B. If an environmental statement, environmental assessment, or an
environmental impact study is required, or if other consultant fees are
required to be expended in reviewing the application, a further deposit
shall be made in an amount determined by the Township at the time the
Township learns of the requirement of such submission and/or
§ 210-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-21
1:139
§ 210-22. Other regulations.
This chapter does not obviate the necessity for the applicant to obtain a
permit required by any other agency before proceeding with operations
approved under this chapter. Obtaining such other approval or permits
as may be required is solely the responsibility of the applicant, and no
operations shall be initiated by the applicant until such permits have been
issued. The State Department of Environmental Quality shall be contacted
by the applicant regarding acts under the State Department of
Environmental Quality jurisdiction.
consultant based upon the nature and extent of the study and/or
consultations.
C. All amounts of deficiency shall be paid, and all amounts of overage shall
be returned, prior to or concurrent with final action on the application.
§ 210-21 OAKLAND CODE § 210-22
1:140
ARTICLE IV
Flood Hazard Protection
§ 210-23. Obstructions: public nuisance.
Any obstruction in the one-hundred-year floodplain is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance unless approval for such obstruction has been obtained
from the Township.
§ 210-24. Uses permitted by right.
Uses that may be permitted in the one-hundred-year floodplain:
§ 210-25. Regulated activities. [Amended 9-26-2006 by Ord. No.
44A-2006]
Except as hereinafter provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person to do any of the following without obtaining a development permit
from the Township in accordance with the standards set forth within the
State Construction Code and the procedure set forth in the State
Construction Code, Appendix G:
A. Cultivation and harvesting of crops according to recognized soil
conservation practices.
B. Pasture, grazing land, forestry, outdoor plant nursery, orchard and
harvesting of any wild crops.
C. Wildlife sanctuary, woodland preserves and arboretums.
D. Recreational uses such as: parks, day camps, picnic groves, golf
courses, provided no principal building is located in the floodway.
E. Open space portions of any use district.
A. Locate any operation, obstruction or structure on lands in a onehundred-
year floodplain.
B. Make substantial improvements of any obstruction or structure in a
one-hundred-year floodplain. Maintenance of an obstruction or
structure shall not be construed to be a substantial improvement.
C. Locate any public or private institution or place of assembly in a
floodplain.
D. Dredging and filling and/or dumping or backfilling with any material in
any manner is prohibited unless through compensating excavation and
shaping of the floodplain, the flow and impoundment capacity of the
floodplain will be maintained or improved.
E. Locate off-street parking, streets, roads, bridges, outdoor play
equipment, sheds and garages, boathouses, boat-hoists, utility lines,
pump houses, bleachers, bank protection structures, signs, fences,
§ 210-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-25
1:141
§ 210-26. Evaluation criteria. [Amended 9-26-2006 by Ord. No.
44A-2006]
The Planning Commission and the Township Board shall conduct the review
for permit issuance pursuant to Section G104 of the State Construction
Code Appendix G for any proposed development in the Township within
the flood hazard areas delineated on the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMS) set forth in this chapter. The Planning
Commission and Township Board review will focus on whether development
in the flood hazard areas, special flood hazard areas and floodways should
be permitted pursuant to Sections G301 through G701 of Appendix G based
on compliance with State Construction Code requirements. The Township
Building Official shall review and approve the building plans pursuant
to the State Construction Code as part of the building permit issuance.
Applications for variances from decisions made by the Township Board shall
be made to the Township Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to Section
G105 of Appendix G. Applications for variances from decisions made by
the Township Building Official shall be made to the Township Construction
Board of Appeals pursuant to Section G105 of Appendix G.
§ 210-27. Development permits: general standards.
gazebos and similar outdoor equipment and appurtenances in flood
hazard areas, special flood hazard areas, and or floodways unless
consistent with and constructed in accordance with the State
Construction Code requirements.
A. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
B. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
C. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
D. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
E. New and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
F. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
G. Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a structure
on which the start of construction was begun after the effective date of
the ordinance from which this chapter is derived shall meet the
requirements of new construction as contained in this chapter.
§ 210-25 OAKLAND CODE § 210-28
1:142
§ 210-28. Development permits: specific standards.
A. All structures shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
to at least one foot above the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
B. Construction, substantial improvements and encroachments, including
fill, are prohibited in regulatory floodways unless certification by a
registered professional engineer is provided which demonstrates that
the development will not result in any increase in the one-hundred-year
flood elevation.
§ 210-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-28
1:143

ARTICLE V
Watercourse Protection
§ 210-29. Permitted activities without permit.
The following operations and uses are permitted in watercourse areas of the
Township without requiring a permit:
A. Any fill or structure existing before April 1, 1966, in waters covered by
former Public Act No. 291 of 1965, and any fill or structures existing
before January 9, 1973, in waters covered for the first time by former
Public Act No. 346 of 1972.
B. A seasonal structure placed on bottomland to facilitate private
noncommercial recreational use of the water if it does not unreasonably
interfere with the use of the water by others entitled to use the water or
interfere with water flow.
C. Reasonable sanding of beaches to the existing water's edge by a
riparian owner.
D. Construction or maintenance of a private agricultural drain regardless
of outlet.
E. A waste collection or treatment facility that is approved for
construction by the State Department of Environmental Quality or
ordered or approved by the Department.
F. Construction and maintenance of minor drainage structures and
facilities which are identified by rule promulgated by the State
Department of Environmental Quality.
G. Maintenance and improvement of all drains legally established or
constructed prior to January 1, 1973, pursuant to the Drain Code of
1956, Public Act No. 40 of 1956 (MCLA § 280.1 et seq.), except those
legally established drains constituting mainstream portions of certain
natural watercourses identified in rules promulgated by the State
Department of Environmental Quality.
H. Projects constructed under the Watershed Protection and Flood
Prevention Act, Chapter 656, 68 Stat. 666, 16 U.S.C. §§ 1001 to 1008
and 1010.
I. Construction and maintenance of privately owned cooling or storage
ponds used in connection with a public utility except at the interface
with public waters.
J. Maintenance of a structure constructed under a permit issued pursuant
to Part 301 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCLA § 324.30101 et seq.)
and identified by rule if the maintenance is in place and in kind with no
design or materials modification.
§ 210-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-30
1:145
§ 210-30. Regulated activities requiring permit.
Except as hereinafter provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person to do any of the following without obtaining a development permit
from the Township:
§ 210-31. Temporary and seasonal uses.
Subject to the limitations of Article III of this chapter, the Township may
issue development permits for the following temporary, seasonal and
permanent operations on public lakes, ponds, rivers, and waterways of
the Township, with limitations and conditions as may be stipulated in the
development permit, for the following:
§ 210-32. Evaluation criteria. [Amended 9-26-2006 by Ord. No.
44A-2006]
A. Dredge or fill bottomland.
B. Construct, enlarge, extend, remove, or place a structure on bottomland.
C. Erect, maintain, or operate a marina.
D. Create, enlarge, or diminish an inland lake or stream.
E. Structurally interfere with the natural flow of an inland lake or stream.
F. Construct, dredge, commence, extend, or enlarge an artificial canal,
channel, ditch, lagoon, pond, lake, or similar waterway where the
purpose is ultimate connection with an existing inland lake or stream,
or where any part of the artificial waterway is located within 500 feet of
the ordinary high-water mark of an existing inland lake or stream.
G. Connect any natural or artificially constructed waterway, canal,
channel, ditch, lagoon, pond, lake, or similar water with an existing
inland lake or stream for navigation or any other purpose.
A. Publicly and/or privately owned boat launching and landing facilities,
and fishing docks.
B. Municipal or utility use such as parks and recreation facilities, when
involving any alteration of existing natural conditions of watercourses
or wetland areas.
C. Dams or other water-control devices, dredging or diversion of water
levels or circulation, or changes in watercourses for the purposes of
improving fish or wildlife habitat, recreation facilities or drainage
conditions, when consistent with the intent and objectives of this
chapter and otherwise permitted under county or state statutes.
D. Utility transmission lines.
E. Driveways and roads where alternative means of access are proven to
be impractical.
§ 210-30 OAKLAND CODE § 210-32
1:146
A. Subject to the limitations of Articles III and IV of this chapter, the
Township may issue development permits for certain acts in
watercourses of the Township, provided such development permit does
not violate the intent of this chapter or of other Township, county or
state statutes.
B. In reviewing such application, the Township shall consider the possible
effects of the proposed operation upon:
(1) Water quality, including filtering action;
(2) Fish or wildlife, including their habitats, damage or change;
(3) Effect upon adjoining wetland or drainage areas and water tables;
(4) Economic impact;
(5) Land use for which the property is zoned or planned; and
(6) Recreational impact.
§ 210-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-32
1:147

ARTICLE VI
Wetland Protection
§ 210-33. Activities allowed without permit.
The following uses are allowed in a wetland without a permit subject to the
laws of this state and the owner's regulation:
A. Fishing, trapping, or hunting.
B. Swimming or boating.
C. Hiking.
D. Grazing of animals.
E. Farming, horticulture, silviculture, lumbering, and ranching activities,
including plowing, irrigation, irrigation ditching, seeding, cultivating,
minor drainage, harvesting for the production of food, fiber, and forest
products, or upland soil and water conservation practices. Wetland
altered under this subsection shall not be used for a purpose other than
a purpose described in this subsection without a permit from the state.
F. Maintenance or operation of serviceable structures in existence on
October 1, 1980, or constructed pursuant to Part 303 of Public Act No.
451 of 1994 (MCLA § 324.30301 et seq.) or former Public Act No. 203 of
1975.
G. Construction or maintenance of farm or stock ponds.
H. Maintenance, operation, or improvement which includes straightening,
widening, or deepening of the following which is necessary for the
production or harvesting of agricultural products:
(1) An existing private agricultural drain.
(2) That portion of a drain legally established pursuant to the Drain
Code of 1956, Public Act No. 40 of 1956 (MCLA § 280.1 et seq.),
which has been constructed or improved for drainage purposes.
(3) A drain constructed pursuant to other provisions of Part 303 of
Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCLA § 324.30301 et seq.) or former
Public Act No. 203 of 1979.
I. Construction or maintenance of farm roads, forest roads, or temporary
roads for moving mining or forestry equipment, if the roads are
constructed and maintained in a manner to ensure that any adverse
effect on the wetland will be otherwise minimized.
J. Drainage necessary for the production and harvesting of agricultural
products if the wetland is owned by a person who is engaged in
commercial farming and the land is to be used for the production and
harvesting of agricultural products. Except as otherwise provided in
this part, wetland improved under this subsection after October 1,
§ 210-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-33
1:149
1980, shall not be used for nonfarming purposes without a permit from
the state. This subsection does not apply to a wetland that is contiguous
to a lake or stream, or to a tributary of a lake or stream, or to a wetland
that the state has determined by clear and convincing evidence to be
a wetland that is necessary to be preserved for the public interest, in
which case a permit is required.
K. Maintenance or improvement of public streets, highways, or roads,
within the right-of-way and in such a manner as to assure that any
adverse effect on the wetland will be otherwise minimized.
Maintenance or improvement does not include adding extra lanes,
increasing the right-of-way, or deviating from the existing location of
the street, highway, or road.
L. Maintenance, repair, or operation of gas or oil pipelines and
construction of gas or oil pipelines having a diameter of six inches or
less, if the pipelines are constructed, maintained, or repaired in a
manner to ensure that any adverse effect on the wetland will be
otherwise minimized.
M. Maintenance, repair, or operation of electric transmission and
distribution power lines and construction of distribution power lines, if
the distribution power lines are constructed, maintained, or repaired in
a manner to assure that any adverse effect on the wetland will be
otherwise minimized.
N. Operation or maintenance, including reconstruction of recently
damaged parts, of serviceable dikes and levees in existence on October
1, 1980, or constructed pursuant to Part 303 of Public Act No. 451 of
1994 (MCLA § 324.30301 et seq.) or former Public Act No. 203 of 1979.
O. Construction of iron and copper mining tailings basins and water
storage areas.
P. Until November 1, 2007, beach maintenance activities that meet all of
the following conditions:
(1) The activities shall not occur in environmental areas and shall not
violate Part 365 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCLA § 324.36501
et seq.) or rules promulgated under that part, or the Endangered
Species Act of 1973, Public Law 93-205, 87 Stat. 884, or rules
promulgated under that Act.
(2) The width of any mowing of vegetation shall not exceed the width
of the riparian property or 100 feet, whichever is less.
(3) All collected debris shall be disposed of properly outside of any
wetland.
Q. Until June 5, 2006, removal of vegetation as authorized under Section
32516 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCLA § 324.32516).29
§ 210-33 OAKLAND CODE § 210-34
1:150
§ 210-34. Regulated activities requiring permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to do or assist in any of the following
unless and until a written permit is obtained from the Township pursuant to
this chapter:
§ 210-35. Evaluation criteria.
In arriving at a determination with respect to the issuance of a permit under
this article, the Township shall take into consideration at least the following
standards and criteria:
A. Deposit or permit the placing of fill material in a wetland.
B. Dredge, remove, or permit the removal of soil or minerals from a
wetland.
C. Construct, operate, or maintain any use or development in a wetland.
D. Drain surface water from a wetland.
A. A permit shall be issued only if the proposed project or activity is clearly
in the public interest, and is otherwise lawful in all respects.
B. In determining whether the activity is in the public interest, the benefit
which would reasonably be expected to accrue from the proposal shall
be balanced against the reasonably foreseeable detriments of the
activity, taking into consideration the local, state and national concern
for the protection and preservation of natural resources from pollution,
impairment and/or destruction. If, as a result of such a balancing, there
remains a debatable question whether the proposed project and/or
activity is clearly in the public interest, a permit shall not be issued. The
following general criteria shall be applied in undertaking this balancing
test:
(1) The relative extent of the public and private need for the proposed
activity.
(2) The availability of feasible and prudent alternative locations and
methods to accomplish the expected benefits of the activity.
(3) The extent and permanence of the beneficial or detrimental effects
which the proposed activity may have on the public and private use
to which the area is suited, including the benefits the wetland
provides.
(4) The probable impact of the proposal in relation to the cumulative
effect created by other existing and anticipated activities in the
watershed.
29.Editor's Note: Section 32516 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCLA § 324.32516) was
repealed by P.A. 2012, No. 247.
§ 210-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-35
1:151
§ 210-36. Wetland mapping.
§ 210-37. Property tax assessment.
If a permit is denied for a proposed wetland use, a landowner may appear
at the annual board of review for the purpose of seeking a revaluation of
the affected property for assessment purposes to determine its fair market
value under the use restriction.
(5) The probable impact on recognized historic, cultural, scenic,
ecological, or recreational values, and the public health of fish or
wildlife.
(6) The size and quality of the wetland being considered.
(7) The amount and quality of remaining wetland in the area.
(8) Proximity to any waterway.
(9) Economic value, both public and private, of the proposed land
change to the general area.
(10) The necessity for the proposed project.
C. A permit shall not be issued unless it is shown that:
(1) An unreasonable disruption of the aquatic resources will not result;
(2) The proposed activity is primarily dependent upon being located in
the wetland; and
(3) A feasible and prudent alternative does not exist.
D. The manner in which the activity is proposed to be undertaken will
result in the minimum negative impact upon the wetland and attendant
natural resources under all of the circumstances.
A. The Township Board has adopted a Wetland Map, showing an inventory
of wetland within the Township.
B. Upon amendment of the Wetland Map, the Township shall notify each
record owner of property on the property tax roll of the Township that
the Wetland Map has been amended, where the map may be reviewed,
and that the owner's property may be designated as a wetland on the
inventory map and that the Township has an ordinance regulating
wetland. Such notice shall also inform the property owner that the
Wetland Map does not necessarily include all of the wetlands within the
Township that may be subject to the Wetlands Ordinance.
C. The Wetland Map shall not create any legally enforceable presumptions
regarding whether property that is or is not included on the inventory
map is or is not in fact a wetland.
§ 210-35 OAKLAND CODE § 210-37
1:152
ARTICLE VII
Continuance of Nonconforming Uses
§ 210-38. Continuing projects.
Any operation, use, obstruction or structure existing at the time of
enactment or affected by subsequent amendment of this chapter but not in
conformity with its provisions may be continued subject to the requirements
of Article III of this chapter. The burden of proof of establishing the
existence of said nonconforming use shall be upon the petitioner.
§ 210-39. Changes to a nonconforming activity.
Any operation, use obstruction, or structure which does not conform to the
provisions of this chapter or subsequent amendments may not be:
A. Changed to another nonconforming location and/or operation.
B. Reestablished after discontinuance for one year.
C. Rebuilt or repaired after damage exceeding 50% of the reconstruction
cost.
§ 210-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-39
1:153
Chapter 228
HISTORIC DISTRICTS AND PRESERVATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 68.
Construction standards — See Ch. 165.
Floodplain and wetlands protection — See Ch.
210.
Land divisions and subdivisions — See Ch.
250.
Mining operations — See Ch. 267.
Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 364.
Tree protection, preservation and
removal — See Ch. 389.
§ 210-39 OAKLAND CODE § 210-39
1:154
ARTICLE I
Generally
§ 228-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to:
§ 228-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ALTERATION — Work that changes the detail of a resource but does not
change its basic size or shape.
CENTER or HISTORICAL CENTER — The State Historical Center (formerly
known as the "Bureau of History").
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS — The written approval of a permit
application for work that is appropriate and that does not adversely affect a
resource.
COMMISSION — The Township Historic District Commission, as created by
the Township Board of Trustees pursuant to §§ 228-30 through 228-33.
COMMITTEE — An Historic District Study Committee appointed by the
Township Board of Trustees pursuant to Article II of this chapter.
DEMOLITION — The razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a
resource and includes, but is not limited to, demolition by neglect.
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT — Neglect in maintaining, repairing, or
securing a resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the
resource or the loss of structural integrity of the resource.
DENIAL — The written rejection of a permit application for work that is
inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area, or group of areas not necessarily having
contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources
that are related by history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or
A. Safeguard the heritage of the Township by preserving one or more
historic districts in the Township that reflect elements of the Township's
history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture.
B. Stabilize and improve property values in each district and the
surrounding areas.
C. Foster civic beauty.
D. Strengthen the local economy.
E. Promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure, and
welfare of the citizens of the Township and of the state.
§ 228-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-2
1:155
culture, created by the Township for the purposes of this chapter and
designated in § 228-7.
HISTORIC DISTRICT PERMIT — A permit issued by the Township Clerk's
office, following the Commission's issuance of a certificate of
appropriateness or a notice to proceed, which allows for construction and/
or alteration to be made upon a structure regulated by this chapter as
provided in Article III of this chapter.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION — The identification, evaluation, establishment,
and protection of resources significant in history, architecture, archaeology,
engineering, or culture.
HISTORIC RESOURCE — A publicly or privately owned building, structure,
site, object, feature, or open space that is significant in the history,
architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture of this state or a
community within this state, or of the United States.
NOTICE TO PROCEED — The written permission to issue a permit for work
that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource, pursuant to a
finding under § 228-23.
OPEN SPACE — Undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal
or man-made landscaped area that provides a connective link or a buffer
between other resources.
ORDINARY MAINTENANCE — Keeping a resource unimpaired and in good
condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to
time, in its exterior condition. Ordinary maintenance does not change the
external appearance of the resource except through the elimination of the
usual and expected effects of weathering. Ordinary maintenance does not
constitute work for purposes of this chapter.
PROPOSED HISTORIC DISTRICT — An area, or group of areas not
necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries
and that is under review by a committee or a standing committee for the
purpose of making a recommendation as to whether it should be established
as an historic district or added to an established historic district.
REPAIR — To restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound
condition by any process. A repair that changes the external appearance
of a resource constitutes work for purposes of this chapter. Ordinary
maintenance shall not constitute a "repair" as used in this chapter. Repair
does not constitute ordinary maintenance.
RESOURCE — One or more publicly or privately owned historic or
nonhistoric buildings, structures, sites, objects, features, or open spaces
located within an historic district.
STANDING COMMITTEE — A permanent body established by the Township
Board of Trustees pursuant to Article II of this chapter to conduct the
activities of an Historic District Study Committee on a continuing basis.
WORK — Construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, or
demolition.
§ 228-2 OAKLAND CODE § 228-3
1:156
§ 228-3. Ordinary maintenance.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance
or repair of a resource within an historic district.
§ 228-4. Inspection.
The Township Clerk or designated agent shall, subsequent to the issuance
of an historic district permit under this chapter, inspect the construction or
alteration approved therein, and shall take such action as is necessary to
effect compliance with the permit.
§ 228-5. Enforcement.
The Township Clerk shall be charged with enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter. Violations shall be processed through the Township Attorney
by municipal civil infraction complaint. The Commission may also request
that the Township Attorney proceed to have enjoined any violation of this
chapter or violation of any decision of the Commission.
§ 228-6. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction and may be fined not more
than $5,000.
B. A person that violates any of the provisions of this chapter may, in
addition to any fine assessed for a violation, be ordered by the court to
pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource unlawfully constructed,
added to, altered, repaired, moved, excavated, or demolished.
§ 228-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-6
1:157

ARTICLE II
Establishment of Historic Districts
§ 228-7. Creation of historic districts. [Amended 10-22-2002 by
Ord. No. 37-2002A; 5-22-2007 by Ord. No. 37-2007A]
A. There are hereby created historic districts, which includes historic
homesites and historic landmarks previously designated and now
referred to as "historic districts," which shall include the following:30
(1) The Cranberry Lake Farm Historic District, which shall include the
area described in Appendix 1.
(2) The Goodison Historic District, which shall include the area
described in Appendix 2.
(3) The Kading-Sauer Historic District, which shall include the area
described in Appendix 3.
(4) The Smith-Kulow-Glass Historic District, which shall include the
area described in Appendix 4.
(5) The Dernberger-Campbell Corners Historic District, which shall
include the area described in Appendix 5.
(6) The Woodbeck-Noble Historic District, which shall include the area
described in Appendix 6.
(7) The Kline-Middleton Historic District, which shall include the area
described in Appendix 7.
(8) The Bowlby-Matheys Historic District, which shall include the area
described in Appendix 8.
(9) The Braid Farm Historic District, which shall include the area
described in Appendix 9.
(10) The Lacy-Landon Historic District, which shall include the area
described in Appendix 10.
(11) The Hixson-Berean Historic District, which shall include the area
described in Appendix 11.
(12) The Anderson Farm Historic District, which shall include the area
described in Appendix 12.
(13) The Axford-Chamberlin Historic District, which shall include the
area described in Appendix 13.
(14) The Chamberlin Farm Historic District, which shall include the
area described in Appendix 14.
30.Editor's Note: The Appendixes listed in this section are included in the Legal Descriptions
of Historic Districts, attached to this chapter.
§ 228-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-7
1:159
(15) The Parks-Newberry Historic District, which shall include the area
described in Appendix 15.
(16) The Hadden Historic District, which shall include the area
described in Appendix 16.
(17) The Redfield-Davis-Harmon Historic District, which shall include
the area described in Appendix 17.
(18) The Axford-Thomas Historic District, which shall include the area
described in Appendix 18.
(19) The Taylor Historic District, which shall include the area described
in Appendix 19.
(20) The Cole-Major-Carpenter Historic District, which shall include the
area described in Appendix 20.
(21) The Fink Historic District, which shall include the area described in
Appendix 21.
(22) The Pike Historic District, which shall include the area described in
Appendix 22.
(23) The Wilber Historic District, which shall include the area described
in Appendix 23.
(24) The Fosdick-Pine Row Farm Historic District, which shall include
the area described in Appendix 24.
(25) The Bromley-Synder-Veen Historic District, which shall include the
area described in Appendix 25.
(26) The Chamberlin SW Historic District, which shall include the area
described in Appendix 26.
(27) The Kremer Historic District, which shall include the area
described in Appendix 28.
(28) (Reserved)
(29) The Kline Presbyterian Cemetery Historic District, which shall
include the area described in Appendix 30.
(30) The Dewey Historic District, which shall include the area described
in Appendix 31.
(31) The Paint Creek Cemetery Historic District, which shall include the
area described in Appendix 32.
(32) The Perry Historic District, which shall include the area described
in Appendix 33.
(33) The Bigler Cemetery Historic District, which shall include the area
described in Appendix 34.
§ 228-7 OAKLAND CODE § 228-7
1:160
§ 228-8. Administration of districts; Historic District Study
Committee. [Amended 2-8-2005 by Ord. No. 37A-2005]
The Township Board of Trustees may, by ordinance, establish one or more
historic districts. The historic districts shall be administered by the Historic
District Commission established pursuant to §§ 228-30 through 228-33. The
Township Board of Trustees shall also appoint a standing committee to be
known as the "Historic District Study Committee." The Historic District
Study Committee shall contain a majority of persons who have a clearly
demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation, and shall
contain representation from one or more duly organized local historic
preservation organizations. The Historic District Study Committee shall be
comprised of at least five individuals, including at least two individuals who
are owners of an historic resource and at least two, but not more than three,
who are members of the Historic District Commission. Members of the
Historic District Study Committee shall be appointed to three-year terms,
and such terms shall be staggered. The terms shall expire on December 31
of the year of expiration.
§ 228-9. Powers of Historic District Study Committee. [Amended
2-8-2005 by Ord. No. 37A-2005]
Upon the adoption of a resolution by the Township Board authorizing an
historic district study as set forth in § 228-12, the Historic District Study
Committee shall do all of the following:
(34) The Schuette Oak Tree Historic District, which shall include the
area described in Appendix 35.
(35) The George Farmstead Historic District, which shall include the
area described in Appendix 36. [Added 3-26-2013 by Ord. No.
37A-2013(A)]
A. Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each proposed
historic district following procedures established or approved by the
Historical Center.
B. Conduct basic research of each proposed historic district and the
historic resources located within that district.
C. Determine the total number of historic and nonhistoric resources within
a proposed historic district and the percentage of historic resources of
that total. In evaluating the significance of historic resources, the
Historic District Study Committee shall be guided by the selection
criteria for evaluation issued by the United States Secretary of the
Interior for inclusion of resources in the National Register of Historic
Places, as set forth in 36 CFR 60, and criteria established or approved
by the Historical Center, if any.
D. Prepare a preliminary Historic District Study Committee report that
addresses, at a minimum, all of the following:
§ 228-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-9
1:161
§ 228-10. Study of proposed historic areas. [Amended 2-8-2005 by
Ord. No. 37A-2005]
§ 228-11. Public hearing.
Not less than 60 calendar days after the transmittal of the preliminary
report, the Historic District Study Committee shall hold a public hearing
in compliance with Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCLA § 15.261 et seq.).
Public notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing shall be given in the
manner required by such act. Written notice shall be mailed by first class
mail not less than 14 calendar days before the hearing to the owners of
(1) The charge of the Historic District Study Committee.
(2) The composition of the Historic District Study Committee
membership.
(3) The historic district or districts studied.
(4) The boundaries for each proposed historic district in writing and on
maps.
(5) The history of each proposed historic district.
(6) The significance of each district as a whole, as well as a sufficient
number of its individual resources to fully represent the variety of
resources found within the district, relative to the evaluation
criteria.
E. Transmit copies of the preliminary report for review and
recommendations to the Township Planning Commission, to the
Historical Center, to the State Historical Commission, and to the State
Historic Preservation Review Board.
F. Make copies of the preliminary report available to the public pursuant
to § 228-13.
A. The Historic District Study Committee shall undertake a study under
§ 228-9 only after it is authorized to do so through a resolution of the
Township Board.
B. The Township Board may accept suggestions for a potential study
areas, or may initiate a study on its own motion.
C. The Township Board may, in its discretion, hold a public hearing for the
purposes of considering whether further study of a proposed area is
merited prior to referring the matter to the Historic District Study
Committee for study and recommendation back to the Township Board.
D. Following a public hearing, should the Board choose to hold one, the
Board shall authorize by resolution the further study of a proposed
historic area, and refer the matter to the Historic District Study
Committee.
§ 228-9 OAKLAND CODE § 228-11
1:162
properties within the proposed historic district, as listed on the tax rolls of
the Township.
§ 228-12. Authorized actions.
After the date of the public hearing, the Historic District Study Committee
and the Township Board of Trustees shall have not more than one year,
unless otherwise authorized by the Township Board of Trustees, to take the
following actions:
§ 228-13. Writings to be available to public.
A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the
Historic District Study Committee in the performance of an official function
shall be made available to the public in compliance with Public Act No. 442
of 1976 (MCLA § 15.231 et seq.).
§ 228-14. Establishment of additional historic districts.
The Board of Trustees may at any time establish by ordinance additional
historic districts, including proposed districts previously considered and
rejected, may modify boundaries of an existing historic district, or may
eliminate an existing historic district. Before establishing, modifying, or
eliminating an historic district, the Historic District Study Committee
appointed by the Township Board of Trustees shall, except as provided in
§ 228-15, comply with the procedures set forth in §§ 228-8 through 228-13
and shall consider any previously written committee reports pertinent to the
proposed action.
A. The Historic District Study Committee shall prepare and submit a final
report with its recommendations and the recommendations, if any, of
the Township Planning Commission, to the Township Board of Trustees.
If the recommendation is to establish an historic district, the final
report shall include a draft of a proposed ordinance.
B. After receiving a final report that recommends the establishment of an
historic district, the Township Board of Trustees, at its discretion, may
introduce and pass or reject an ordinance or ordinances. If the Board of
Trustees passes an ordinance or ordinances establishing one or more
historic districts, the Board of Trustees shall file a copy of that
ordinance or those ordinances, including a legal description of the
property located within the historic district or districts, with the
register of deeds. The Board of Trustees shall not pass an ordinance
establishing a contiguous historic district less than 60 days after a
simple majority of the property owners within the proposed historic
district, as listed on the tax rolls of the Township, have approved the
establishment of the historic district by a written petition.
§ 228-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-15
1:163
§ 228-15. Elimination of historic district.
If considering elimination of an historic district, a committee shall follow the
procedures set forth in §§ 228-8 through 228-13 for issuing a preliminary
report, holding a public hearing, and issuing a final report but with the
intent of showing one or more of the following:
§ 228-16. Review of building permit applications in proposed
historic districts.
Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic,
architectural, archaeological, engineering, or cultural significance of a
proposed historic district, the Township Board of Trustees may, at its
discretion, adopt a resolution requiring that all applications for building
permits within a proposed historic district be referred to the Commission
as prescribed in Article III of this chapter. The Commission shall review
building permit applications with the same powers that would apply if the
proposed historic district was an established historic district. The review
may continue in the proposed historic district for not more than one year,
or until such time as the Board of Trustees approves or rejects the
establishment of the historic district by ordinance, whichever occurs first.
§ 228-17. Emergency moratorium on work.
If the Township Board of Trustees determines that pending work will cause
irreparable harm to resources located within an established historic district
or a proposed historic district, the Board of Trustees may by resolution
declare an emergency moratorium of all such work for a period not to
exceed six months. The Board of Trustees may extend the emergency
moratorium for an additional period not to exceed six months upon finding
that the threat of irreparable harm to resources is still present. Any pending
building permit application concerning a resource subject to an emergency
moratorium may be summarily denied.
§ 228-18. Legal descriptions. [Amended 10-22-2002 by Ord. No.
37-2002A; 5-22-2007 by Ord. No. 37-2007A]
The legal descriptions of the historic districts shall be as follows:31
A. The historic district has lost those physical characteristics that enabled
establishment of the district.
B. The historic district was not significant in the way previously defined.
C. The historic district was established pursuant to defective procedures.
31.Editor's Note: The legal descriptions of the historic districts are attached to this chapter.
§ 228-15 OAKLAND CODE § 228-18
1:164
ARTICLE III
Regulation of Structures
§ 228-19. Historic district permit required.
No person shall construct, alter, repair, move or demolish any resource
within an historic district without first making application for and receiving
an historic district permit therefor from the Township Clerk as set forth
herein.
§ 228-20. Work without permit.
When work has been done upon a resource without an historic district
permit, and the Commission finds that the work does not qualify for a
certificate of appropriateness, the Commission may require an owner to
restore the resource to the condition of the resource prior to the
inappropriate work or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate
of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply with the restoration or
modification requirement within a reasonable time, the Commission may,
in addition to other penalties as provided in this chapter, seek an order
from the Circuit Court to require the owner to restore the resource to its
former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate
of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the
order of the Court, the Commission or its agents may enter the property
and conduct work necessary to restore the resource to its former condition
or modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness
in accordance with the Court's order. The cost of the work shall be charged
to the owner, and may be levied by the local unit as a special assessment
against the property. When acting pursuant to an order of the Circuit Court,
the Commission or its agents may enter a property for purposes of this
section.
§ 228-21. Application for historic district permit.
Applications for an historic district permit to construct, alter, repair, move
or demolish any resource within an historic district shall be delivered to the
Township Clerk or designated agent, to be forwarded to the Commission
for review and consideration. The Township Clerk shall upon receipt of a
complete application, notify the Commission within seven calendar days
and transmit such application and plans thereto for review. No fee shall be
collected by the Commission for any application required hereunder. Only
1/2 of such building permit fee, if a building permit should be required,
shall be collected by the Township, pursuant to its published and adopted
schedule of fees incidental to such construction activities. In the event
an application is denied by the Commission, the application fee will be
returned. The balance of the building permit fee shall be paid prior to the
issuance of the historic district permit.
§ 228-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-22
1:165
§ 228-22. Commission review.
The Commission, if it approves an application for an historic district permit,
shall file a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed with the
Township Clerk and the inspector of buildings or other delegated authority.
An historic district permit shall not be issued until the Commission has
issued a notice to proceed or a certificate of appropriateness as prescribed
by this chapter. If the Commission denies an historic district permit
application, the decision shall be binding on the Township Clerk and the
Building Inspector or other authority. A denial shall be accompanied with
a written explanation by the Commission of the reasons for denial and,
if appropriate, a notice that an application may be resubmitted for
Commission review when suggested changes have been made. The denial
shall also include notification of the applicant's rights of appeal to the State
Historic Preservation Review Board and to the Circuit Court.
§ 228-23. Standards for review.
In reviewing plans, the Commission shall follow the United States Secretary
of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and guidelines for
rehabilitating historic buildings, as set forth in 36 CFR 67. The Commission
shall also consider all of the following:
§ 228-24. Interior alterations.
The Commission shall review and act upon only exterior features of a
resource and shall not review and act upon interior arrangements unless
specifically authorized to do so by the Township Board of Trustees or unless
interior work will cause visible change to the exterior of the resource. The
Commission shall not disapprove an application due to considerations not
prescribed in § 228-23, except as set forth in § 228-26.
§ 228-25. Failure to act.
The failure of the Commission to act within 60 calendar days after the
date a complete application submitted in full compliance with Township
requirements is received and accepted by the Commission shall be
considered to constitute approval unless the applicant and the Commission
agree upon an extension in writing.
A. The historic or architectural value and significance of the resource and
its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area.
B. The relationship of any architectural features of the resource to the rest
of the resource and to the surrounding area.
C. The general compatibility of the design, arrangement, texture, and
materials proposed to be used.
D. Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the Commission finds
relevant.
§ 228-22 OAKLAND CODE § 228-26
1:166
§ 228-26. Preservation planning.
In case of an application for an historic district permit to alter, repair, move
or demolish a resource which the Commission deems so valuable to the
Township, state or nation that the loss thereof will adversely affect the
public purpose thereof, the Commission shall endeavor to work out with
the owner an economically feasible plan for preservation of the resource.
In reviewing an application for an historic district permit to determine
whether to approve a notice to proceed, the Commission shall, in addition to
the determinations set forth in § 228-23, determine whether the proposed
work can be demonstrated to be necessary to substantially improve or
correct any of the following conditions:
§ 228-27. Permit required for work to proceed.
Work within an historic district shall be permitted after the issuance of
an historic district permit from the Township Clerk and the issuance of all
necessary building permits from the Building Department.
§ 228-28. Appeal.
An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Commission concerning an
historic district permit application may file an appeal with the State Historic
Preservation Review Board. The appeal shall be filed within 60 days after
the decision is furnished to the applicant. The applicant may submit all
or part of the applicant's evidence in written form. The review board may
affirm, modify or set aside the Commission's decision and may order the
Commission to issue a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed.
A permit applicant aggrieved by the decision of the State Historic
Preservation Review Board may appeal the decision to the Circuit Court.
A. The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or to the
structure's occupants;
B. The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program that will
be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant proposing
the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals,
financing, and environmental clearances;
C. Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to the owner
when a governmental action, act of God, or other events beyond the
owner's control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to
eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the
resource for sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a
vacant site within the historic district, have been attempted and
exhausted by the owner;
D. Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority of the
community.
§ 228-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-29
1:167
§ 228-29. Design standards.
Design review standards and guidelines that address special design
characteristics of historic districts administered by the Commission may
be adopted by the Commission if they are equivalent in guidance to the
Secretary of Interior Standards and Guidelines and are established or
approved by the Historical Center.
§ 228-29 OAKLAND CODE § 228-29
1:168
ARTICLE IV
Historic District Commission
§ 228-30. Establishment.
There is hereby created the Township Historic District Commission. Each
member of the Commission shall reside within the Township, with a majority
of the members having a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge
of historic preservation. The membership of the Commission shall be
comprised of seven members, with at least one member from a list of
citizens submitted by the Township historical society. The Commission shall
also include as a member, if available, a graduate of an accredited school
of architecture who has two years of architectural experience or who is
an architect registered in this state. The Commission shall also include,
if available, at least two individuals chosen from among the owners of
property regulated by this chapter and listed in § 228-7.
§ 228-31. Appointment.
The Township Board of Trustees shall appoint all members of the
Commission. Members of the Commission shall be appointed for threeyear
terms with the initial appointments of some members to be for less
than three years so that the initial appointments are staggered and that
subsequent appointments do not recur at the same time. Members of the
Commission shall be eligible for reappointment. All members of the
Commission shall hold office until their successors are appointed.
§ 228-32. Compensation.
The members of the Commission shall be paid on a per meeting basis at a
rate set by resolution of the Township Board of Trustees.
§ 228-33. Vacancies; removal.
A vacancy occurring in the membership of the Commission shall be filled by
a person appointed by the Township Board of Trustees and shall be made
within 60 calendar days of the vacancy. Members of the Commission may be
removed by the Township Board of Trustees for cause upon written charges
and after a public hearing.
§ 228-34. Public meetings.
The business that the Commission may perform shall be conducted at
a public meeting of the Commission held in compliance with the Open
Meetings Act, Public Act No. 267 of 1976 (MCLA § 15.261 et seq.). Public
notice of the time, date, and place of the meeting shall be given in the
manner required by such Act. A meeting agenda shall be part of the notice
and shall include a listing of each permit application to be reviewed or
considered by the Commission.
§ 228-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-35
1:169
§ 228-35. Record.
The Commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings, and
actions. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained
by the Commission in the performance of an official function shall be made
available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act,
Public Act No. 442 of 1976 (MCLA § 15.231 et seq.).
§ 228-36. Rules.
The Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall adopt
design review standards and guidelines for resource treatment to carry out
its duties in accordance with Public Act No. 169 of 1970 (MCLA § 399.201
et seq.).
§ 228-37. Delegation of duties.
The Commission may delegate the issuance of certificates of
appropriateness and/or notices to proceed for specified minor classes of
work to its staff, to the inspector of buildings, or to another delegated
authority. The Commission shall provide to the delegated authority specific
written standards for issuing certificates of appropriateness and/or notices
to proceed under this subsection. On at least a quarterly basis, the
Commission shall review the certificates of appropriateness and/or notices
to proceed, if any, issued for work by its staff, the inspector, or another
authority to determine whether or not the delegated responsibilities should
be continued.
§ 228-38. Duties.
§ 228-39. Powers. [Amended 10-9-2012 by Ord. No. 37-A(2)-2012]
A. Recordkeeping. The Commission shall keep and maintain a copy of the
Historic District Study Committee report for each historic district listed
in § 228-7.
B. Regulatory. The Commission shall regulate the construction, alteration,
repair, moving and demolition of all resources contained in the historic
districts, and of all historic resources as listed in § 228-7.
C. Annual reporting. The Commission shall submit an annual report of its
activities to the Township Board of Trustees.
D. Maintenance. The Commission shall maintain all publicly owned
historic resources and landmarks in the Township, from its own funds
or funds otherwise made available for the purpose of maintaining
historic resources.
A. The Commission may recommend to the Township Board of Trustees
the adoption of incentive programs to encourage the preservation of
historic resources, or to encourage the inclusion of such resources in
§ 228-7.
§ 228-35 OAKLAND CODE § 228-39
1:170
B. The Commission may recommend to the Township Board of Trustees or
other appropriate Township boards or commissions the granting of
variances or other relief from building, use or other limitations
established by ordinance or other regulations to encourage or ensure
preservation of historic resources. It is the intent of this chapter to
encourage other boards and commissions to favorably consider such
variances and other relief.
C. The Commission may recommend to the Township Board of Trustees to
accept any grant, loan or aid of any nature from any federal, state or
private source for the purpose of historic preservation, including the
survey of historic resources, and for the acquisition, restoration or
maintenance of historic resources.
D. Upon a finding by the Commission that an historic resource within an
historic district or a proposed historic district subject to its review and
approval is threatened with demolition by neglect, the Commission may
do either of the following:
(1) Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions
contributing to demolition by neglect.
(2) If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time, the
Commission may, upon 14 days' notice, seek an order to enter the
property and make such repairs as are necessary to prevent
demolition by neglect. The costs of the work shall be charged to the
owner, and may be levied by the local unit as a special assessment
against the property. The Commission or its agents may enter the
property for purposes of this section upon obtaining an order from
the Circuit Court.
E. When work has been done upon a resource without an historic district
permit, and the Commission finds that the work does not qualify for a
certificate of appropriateness, the Commission may recommend
issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation and may require
restoration or modification of the work as set forth in § 228-20 of this
chapter.
F. The Commission may, within the limitations of its budget, call in experts
to assist in the carrying out of its duties.
G. The Commission may, within the limits of its budget, organize, manage,
advertise, and hold events and activities in the Township for the
purpose of promoting and educating the public regarding the existence
and preservation of historic resources located in the Township,
provided that the Commission obtains advance permission from the
person or entity having jurisdiction over or ownership of the property at
which the event or activity is to take place and complies with all
applicable laws, regulations, and Township ordinances, policies and
cash handling and audit requirements in connection with such events
and activities. Such events and activities shall not involve fund-raising.
For purposes of this subsection, the term "fund-raising" does not mean,
§ 228-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-39
1:171
§ 228-40. Appeals.
Any citizen or duly organized historic preservation organization in the
Township, as well as resource property owners, jointly or severally
aggrieved by a decision of the Commission, may appeal the decision to
the Circuit Court, except that a permit applicant aggrieved by a decision
rendered under Article III of this chapter may not appeal to the Court
without first exhausting the right to appeal to the State Historic
Preservation Review Board under § 228-28.
§ 228-41. Budget.
There shall be appropriated in the annual budget of the Township a sum
of money that may be expended by the Commission in furtherance of its
powers and duties under this chapter.
include, or preclude charges or fees to participants that are assessed
and applied for purposes of offsetting the costs of holding such events
and activities.
H. The Township Board of Trustees may prescribe powers and duties of the
Commission, in addition to those prescribed in this chapter, that foster
historic preservation activities, projects and programs in the Township.
§ 228-39 OAKLAND CODE § 228-41
1:172
Chapter 235
HUNTING; FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 274.
Offenses with weapons — See Ch. 285, Part 6,
Art. X.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 299.
§ 235-1. Hunting and firearm discharges prohibited; exceptions.32
Hunting with or the discharge of a firearm is prohibited in the Township,
except shotguns, flintlock or percussion cap muzzleloading rifles, 0.44
caliber or larger, may be used during those seasons open to the taking
of wild animals and wild birds. This rule shall not apply to the discharge
of firearms at target ranges under permit as may be authorized by the
local unit of government, and shall not apply to those areas described in
§ 235-2A, B and C.
§ 235-2. Areas prohibiting hunting and discharges; target ranges.
A. Hunting for a wild animal or wild bird with a firearm or bow and arrow
or the discharge of a firearm or bow and arrow is prohibited within the
following described area in the Township: beginning at the intersection
of the center lines of Romeo Road and Rochester Road, T4N, R11E;
thence southerly and southwesterly on Rochester Road to the
intersection with the center line of Predmore Road; thence westerly
1367.31 feet; thence North 0°59'40" east, 1324.73 feet; thence south
89°41'00" east 674.30 feet; thence north along west line of Section 2 to
a point 450 feet lakeward of the shoreline of Cranberry Lake; thence
easterly, northerly and westerly along a line 450 feet lakeward of the
shoreline of Cranberry Lake to the west line of Log Cabin Club
Subdivision as recorded in Liber 46 of Plats, Page 12, Oakland County
Records; thence north 5°08'00" west along that subdivision line as
extended to the center line of Romeo Road; thence easterly on the
center line of Romeo Road to the point of beginning. However, target
shooting is permitted in this area at ranges approved by the Township
legislative body.
B. Hunting with or the discharge of a firearm is unlawful in that portion of
the Township described as follows: beginning at a point where the Penn
Central Railroad enters Oakland Township in Section 33, T4N, R11E;
thence north on a line following the Penn Central Railroad tracks to the
center of Section 20, T4N, R11E; thence west on the 1/4 line of Section
20 and Section 19, T4N, R11E, to the center of Section 19, T4N, R11E;
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 228-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-2
1:173
thence north on the 1/4 line of Section 19 and Section 18, T4N, R11E,
to Orion Road; thence Northwest on Orion Road to the west line of
Oakland Township; thence north on the west line of Oakland Township
to Stoney Creek Road; thence east on Stoney Creek Road to Adams
Road; thence south on Adams Road to Orion Road; thence southeasterly
on Orion Road to where the Detroit Edison powerline crosses Orion
Road; thence east along the Detroit Edison powerline to Collins Road;
thence south on Collins Road to Orion Road; thence south on Orion
Road to Snell Road; thence east on Snell Road to Sheldon Road; thence
south on Sheldon Road to the south line of Oakland Township; thence
west on the south line of Oakland Township to the point of beginning.
C. Hunting with or the discharge of a firearm is unlawful in that portion of
the Township described as follows: beginning at a point where Gunn
Road intersects with Hadden Road; thence north on Hadden Road to
Buell Road; thence east on Buell Road to Hixon Road; thence south on
Hixon Road to Gunn Road; thence west on Gunn Road to the point of
beginning. Hunting with or the discharge of firearms is unlawful within
the following described portions of the Township:
(1) All of Section 4, T4N, R11E.
(2) That portion of Section 6, T4N, R11E, not located within the Bald
Mountain State Recreation area.
(3) All of the SW 1/4 of Section 13, T4N, R11E.
(4) All of Section 18, T4N, R11E, except that land owned by the State
Department of Environmental Quality.
(5) That portion of Section 20, T4N, R11E, located on the south side of
the Penn Central Railroad.
(6) All of the NE 1/4 of Section 23, T4N, R11E.
(7) All of the E 1/2 of the SE 1/4 of Section 23, T4N, R11E.
(8) All of the W 1/2 of the SW 1/4 of Section 24, T4N, R11E.
(9) All of the W 1/2 of the NE 1/4 of Section 24, T4N, R11E.
(10) That portion of Section 27, T4N, R11E, located north of Snell Road.
(11) All of Section 28.
(12) All of the SW 1/4 of Section 32, T4N, R11E.
(13) That portion of Section 33, T4N, R11E, lying west of the Penn
Central Railroad.
§ 235-2 OAKLAND CODE § 235-3
1:174
§ 235-3. Construal of words and phrases.
All words and phrases used in this chapter shall be construed and have the
same meanings as those words and phrases defined in Part 419, Public Act
No. 451 of 1994 (MCLA § 324.41901 et seq.).
Chapter 250
LAND DIVISIONS AND SUBDIVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 68.
Construction standards — See Ch. 165.
Floodplain and wetlands protection — See Ch.
210.
Historic districts and preservation — See Ch.
228.
Mining operations — See Ch. 267.
Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 364.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 370.
Tree protection, preservation and
removal — See Ch. 389.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 415.
§ 235-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 235-3
1:175

Part 1
[Adopted 4-12-1977 By OrLda.n Ndo D. i1v4is(iConh. 12, Art. III, Of The 2007
Code Of Ordinances)]
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 250-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Part 1 is to carry out the provisions of Public Act No.
288 of 1967 (MCLA § 560.101 et seq.) and to regulate and control the
subdivision of land within the Township, in order to promote the safety,
public health and general welfare of the community. These regulations are
specifically designed to:
§ 250-2. Legal basis.33
This Part 1 is enacted pursuant to Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCLA
§ 560.101 et seq.) and Public Act No. 33 of 2008 (MCLA § 125.3801 et seq.),
the Michigan Planning Enabling Act.
§ 250-3. Scope.
This Part 1 shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision
created and recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance from
which this Part 1 is derived, except for the further dividing of lots. Nor is it
intended by this Part 1 to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or
interfere with existing provisions of other laws, ordinances or regulations
or with private restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant, or
other private agreements, or with restrictive covenants running with the
land to which the Township is a party. Where this Part 1 imposes a greater
restriction upon land than is imposed or required by such existing provision
of any other ordinance of this Township, the provisions of this Part 1 shall
control.
A. Provide for regulated and harmonious development of the community,
consistent with orderly growth policies of the Township Master Plan.
B. Secure adequate traffic circulation through coordinated street systems
with proper relation to major thoroughfares, adjoining subdivisions,
and public facilities.
C. Achieve individual property lots of maximum utility and livability.
D. Ensure adequate provisions for water, drainage, sanitary facilities,
other health requirements, and improvements required herein.
33.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 250-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-4
1:177
§ 250-4. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Part 1, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
EASEMENT — A quantity of land set aside or over which a liberty, privilege
or advantage is granted by the owner to the public, a corporation, or some
particular person or part of the public for specific uses and purposes, and
shall be designated a "public" or "private" easement depending on the
nature of the user.
FLOODPLAIN — The relatively flat areas or low lands adjoining the channel
or watercourse or a body of water which has been or may be covered
by floodwater when high amounts of precipitation are experienced, as
established pursuant to Chapter 210, Floodplain and Wetlands Protection,
of the Code of the Charter Township of Oakland.
IMPROVEMENTS — Grading, street surfacing, curb and gutter, sidewalks,
crosswalks, water mains and lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts,
bridges, utilities, trees and landscaping, impoundments, and other additions
to the natural state of land which increases its value, utility or habitability.
LAND DIVISION ACT — Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCLA § 560.101 et
seq.).
LOT — A measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described
and fixed in a recorded plat.
MASTER PLAN — The comprehensive development regulation plan for the
Township including graphic and written proposals indicating the general
locations recommended for the streets, parks, schools, public buildings,
zoning districts, and all physical developments of the Township and includes
any unit or part of such plan separately adopted, and any amendments to
such plan or parts thereof duly adopted by the Planning Commission.
MASTER STREETS or THOROUGHFARE PLAN — The part of the Master
Plan which sets forth the location, alignment and dimensions of existing and
proposed streets and thoroughfares.
OUTLOT — When included within the boundary of a recorded plat, means a
lot set aside for purposes other than a development site, park or other land
dedicated to public use or reserved to private use.
PARCEL — A continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as
provided for in the Land Division Act.
PLAT — A map or chart of a subdivision of land.
LOT DEPTH — The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot
lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines.
A.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured at the setback line and at right angles to the lot depth.
B.
§ 250-4 OAKLAND CODE § 250-4
1:178
PROPRIETOR — A natural person, firm, association, partnership,
corporation or combination of any of them which may hold any recorded or
unrecorded ownership interest in the land. The proprietor is also commonly
referred to as the "owner."
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — Land dedicated or reserved for use by the general
public. Public open space includes parks, parkways, recreation areas, public
school sites, community or public building sites, streets and highways and
public parking spaces.
PUBLIC WALKWAY — A dedicated public right-of-way for the purpose of
pedestrian access.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved, used, or to be used for a street, walkway,
or other public purposes.
SCENIC EASEMENT — The legal right, dedicated to the Township
government, to control the use of certain lands to protect the scenic view.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway;
or, a street or way shown in a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law
or approved by official action; or a street or way on a plat duly filed and
recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds. A street includes
the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and
may comprise pavement, gutters, shoulders, sidewalks, parking areas, and
lawns.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — A map indicating the proposed layout of the
subdivision in sufficient detail to provide adequate basis for review and
to meet the requirements and procedures set forth in this Part 1.
A.
FINAL PLAT — A map on approved material of all or part of a
subdivision providing substantial conformance to the preliminary plat
of the subdivision prepared in conformance with the requirements of
the Land Division Act and this Part 1, and suitable for recording by the
County Register of Deeds.
B.
BOULEVARD STREET — A street developed to two two-lane one-way
pavements separated by a median.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street within a neighborhood used primarily
to carry traffic from minor streets to major thoroughfares, including
principal entrance streets to a residential development.
B.
CUL-DE-SAC STREET — A short minor street having one end
permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
C.
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE — An arterial street of great continuity
which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the
immediate municipality area and region beyond, and may be designated
in the Township's major thoroughfare plan as a major thoroughfare,
parkway, expressway, or equivalent terms to identify those streets
comprising the basic structure of the street plan.
D.
§ 250-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-4
1:179
SUBDIVIDE or SUBDIVISION — The partitioning or splitting of a parcel
or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors,
administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns for the purpose
of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development that
results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent,
and that is not exempted from the platting requirements of Sections 108
and 109 of the Land Division Act (MCLA §§ 560.108, 560.109). The term
"subdivide" or "subdivision" does not include a property transfer between
two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added
to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a
building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the Land
Division Act or the requirements of an applicable local ordinance.
TRACT — Two or more parcels that share a common property line and are
under the same ownership.
§ 250-5. Compliance standards.34
The approvals required under the provisions of this Part 1 shall be obtained
prior to the installation of any subdivision or project improvements within
the Township, in public alleys, public rights-of-way, and public easements,
and/or under the ultimate jurisdiction of the Township. All subdivision or
project improvements within the Township installed in public streets, public
alleys, public rights-of-way or public easements, or under the ultimate
jurisdiction of the Township, shall comply with all the provisions and
requirements of this or any related ordinance.
§ 250-6. Interpretation.
§ 250-7. Schedule of fees, charges, and expenses.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A minor street paralleling and
adjacent to a major thoroughfare which provides access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
E.
TURNAROUND — A short boulevard street, permanently terminated by
a vehicular turnaround.
F.
A. The provisions of these regulations shall be held to be the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion and preservation of public
health, safety, and general welfare of the Township.
B. These regulations are not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any
manner interfere with existing regulations or laws of the Township, nor
conflict with any statutes of the state or the county except that these
regulations shall prevail in cases where these regulations impose a
greater restriction than is provided by existing statutes, laws or
regulations.
34.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 250-4 OAKLAND CODE § 250-7
1:180
§ 250-8. Insurance and bonds.
§ 250-9. Variance for hardship.
The Township Board may authorize a variance from the regulations when,
in its opinion, undue hardship may result from strict compliance. In making
its findings, as required herein below, the Township Board shall take into
account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land
in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the proposed
subdivision, and the probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic
conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the Township
Board makes one or more of the following findings:
§ 250-10. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-8-1999 by Ord. No.
8135]
Any person, firm or corporation or anyone acting on behalf of said person,
firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this Part 1 shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and subject to a civil fine as set
forth in Chapter 1, Article I, Definitions; General Penalty, of the Code of the
Charter Township of Oakland. In addition to ordering a person determined
A. The Township Board shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees,
charges, and expenses for preliminary and final plat review, planning
review, engineering review, attorney, inspection, and other matters
pertaining to this Part 1. The schedule shall be available in the
Township office and may be amended only by the Township Board.
B. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full,
no action shall be taken on any application.
A. Prior to construction of subdivision and project improvements, the
contractor shall procure and maintain, during the life of any contract or
agreement for such construction, insurance as required under
Township engineering design and standards.
B. The contractor shall furnish a two-year maintenance bond in
accordance with the required agencies.
A. That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting said
property such that the strict application of this Part 1 would deprive the
applicant of the reasonable use of his land.
B. That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the petitioner.
C. That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property or territory in which said property
is situated.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 250-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-10
1:181
to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs,
damages and expenses, the judge or magistrate shall be authorized to issue
a judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or enjoin violation of the
ordinance. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ 250-10 OAKLAND CODE § 250-10
1:182
ARTICLE II
Platting Procedure
§ 250-11. Preliminary investigation. [Amended 11-14-1989 by Ord.
No. 57; 6-28-2005 by Ord. No. 14-2005]
§ 250-12. Tentative approval of preliminary plat. [Amended
11-14-1989 by Ord. No. 57; 6-28-2005 by Ord. No. 14-2005]
A. Preapplication conference. The proprietor shall contact the
Superintendent to request a preapplication conference, to provide
guidance for the preparation of a subdivision preliminary plat that will
be compatible with Township procedures and standards, and the impact
of the proposed development. Provided that if the preapplication
meeting pursuant to MCLA § 560.111(3) is requested in writing by the
proprietor, a separate meeting with the Township need not be held.
Such preapplication meeting shall be attended on behalf of the
Township by the Township Superintendent or his designee, and shall
take place within 30 days of receipt of the written request of the
proprietor.36
B. Responsibility of proprietor.
(1) The proprietor shall secure a copy of the Zoning Ordinance,
comprehensive development regulation plan, subdivision
regulations, engineering specifications, environmental impact
statement guide, the community infrastructure map, stormwater
management plan, and other similar ordinances or controls relative
to the subdivision improvements of land so as to make himself
aware of the requirements of the Township.
(2) The area for the proposed subdivision shall be properly zoned for
the intended use.
(3) An investigation of adequacy of existing schools and the adequacy
of public open spaces including parks and playgrounds to serve the
proposed subdivision shall be made by the proprietor.
(4) The relationship of the proposed subdivision with respect to major
thoroughfares and plans for widening of thoroughfares shall be
investigated by the proprietor.
(5) Standards for sewage disposal, water supply and drainage of the
Township shall be investigated by the proprietor.
(6) Review the Land Division Act, and the requirements of those state
and county agencies which are required by said public act to
review and approve the plat.
36.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 250-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-12
1:183
A. Filing.
(1) Ten copies of the completed subdivision plat review application
form, plus an electronic copy of same, shall be filled out and filed
with the Clerk.
(2) The proprietor shall pay all plat review fees and escrow deposits as
specified in § 250-7.
(3) Certified copy of deed or land contract evidencing recording
thereof and/or a title insurance policy reflecting ownership of
proprietor shall be filed with the Township Clerk. In the event the
proprietor is not the owner in fee simple absolute, then and in such
event he shall provide the written consent of such owner in such
form as may be properly recorded with the County Register of
Deeds.
(4) All names, addresses and phone numbers of those concerned with
ownership of the property shall be filed with the Clerk.
(5) One copy of the preliminary plat with all of the required
information shall be filed with the Clerk. Additional copies shall be
mailed by the proprietor to the mailing list provided by the Clerk
along with a copy of a Township cover letter.
B. Plat preparation and contents.
(1) The preliminary plat shall be designed and drawn by a registered
civil engineer or a registered land surveyor to a scale of a maximum
of 100 feet to an inch.
(2) Identification and description.
(a) Proposed name of subdivision.
(b) Full legal description to adequately describe parcel in
question.
(c) Names and addresses of the proprietor, owner proprietor, and
the planner, design engineer, or surveyor who designed the
subdivision layout. The proprietor shall also indicate his
interest in the land.
(d) Scale of plat.
(e) Date of preparation.
(f) North arrow.
(3) Existing conditions.
(a) An area map showing the relationship of the proposed
subdivision to the surrounding area within 1/2 mile at scale of
not more than 2,000 feet to an inch. The area map shall show
§ 250-12 OAKLAND CODE § 250-12
1:184
the topography drawn as contours with the interval available
on the USGS maps.
(b) Boundary lines of proposed subdivision, section or corporation
lines within or adjacent to the tract and overall property
dimensions.
(c) Property lines of adjacent tracts of subdivided and
unsubdivided land shown in relation to the tract being
proposed for subdivision including those of areas across
abutting roads.
(d) Location, widths, and names of existing or prior easements of
record, public and/or private.
(e) Location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains and
other underground facilities within or adjacent to the tract
being proposed for subdivision.
(f) Topography drawn at contours with an interval of not more
than two feet. Topography to be based on USGS datum.
(g) The location of significant natural features such as natural
watercourses, bodies of water, stands of trees, and individual
trees (apart from stands of trees) having a caliper of 12 inches
or greater, two feet above existing grade, within the area to be
platted.
(4) Proposed conditions.
(a) Layout of streets indicating proposed street names, right-ofway
widths, and connections and adjoining platted streets and
also the widths of and locations of alleys, easements and public
walkways.
(b) Layouts, numbers and dimensions of lots, including building
setback lines showing dimensions and finished grade,
elevations.
(c) Proposed topography, including contour lines at same interval
as shown for existing topography.
(d) Indication of parcels of land intended to be dedicated or set
aside for public use or for the common use of property owners
in the subdivision and for dedicated open space easements;
there shall be included a plan and description of the intended
use and/or development of said land reservations.
(e) An indication of the ownership and existing and proposed use
of any parcels identified as "excepted" on the preliminary plat.
If the proprietor has an interest, or owns any parcel so
identified as "excepted," the preliminary plat shall indicate
how this property could be developed in accordance with the
§ 250-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-12
1:185
requirements of the existing zoning district in which it is
located and with an acceptable relationship to the layout of the
proposed preliminary plat.
(f) Statement describing sewage system and method approved by
the County Health Division and this Part 1.
(g) Statement describing water supply system pursuant to the
Township engineering design standards and/or County Health
Division and this Part 1.
(h) Schematic indication and description of storm drainage
proposed pursuant to the Township engineering design
standards and acceptable to the County Water Resources
Commission if involving drains under its jurisdiction.
(i) In the case where the proprietor wishes to subdivide a given
area, but wishes to begin with only a portion of the total area,
the preliminary plat shall include the proposed general layout
for the entire area. The part which is proposed to be
subdivided shall first be clearly superimposed upon the overall
plan in order to illustrate clearly the method of development
which the proprietor intends to follow. Each subsequent plat
shall follow the same procedure until the entire area controlled
by the proprietor is subdivided. Each phase of the development
shall consist of land or uses planned in such a way so that the
average density of each separate phase shall not exceed, on a
cumulative basis, the average density allowed for the entire
development.
(j) An indication of the means by which and extent that significant
natural features such as watercourses, bodies of water, stands
of trees, and individual trees (apart from stands of trees)
having a caliper of 12 inches or greater, two feet above existing
grade, are to be preserved in conjunction with the
development of the proposed subdivision.
(k) If the subdivision is proposed to be developed under the
planned residential district option, said subdivision shall meet
the Zoning Ordinance requirements of same.
(l) Indication of approximate area for all site improvements
including roads, utilities, drains, and all building activity that
will have to be cleared and graded in order to develop the
proposed subdivision.
(5) The preliminary plat will also indicate the significant ecological
areas that are to be preserved in their natural state. The intent is
not to require a detailed grading plan at this time but to ensure that
the developer's engineer or surveyor has given sufficient thought to
the clearing and grading requirements in preparing the
preliminary plat.
§ 250-12 OAKLAND CODE § 250-12
1:186
(6) An environmental impact statement shall be prepared according to
the guide for the preparation of the environmental impact
statement provided by the Clerk. Such guide shall be in the form
approved by the Township Board by resolution. For tentative
preliminary plat review, the environmental impact statement shall
be utilized for the purpose of clarifying that the proposed lot and
road layout shall be feasible without unreasonably destroying and/
or encroaching upon natural resources, including wetlands. When
completed, the environmental impact statement shall be mailed by
the proprietor to those persons and entities contained in the
mailing list provided by the Clerk.
C. Preliminary plat review by Planning Commission; tentative approval.
(1) The Clerk shall receive the preliminary plat as required under this
section and the Land Division Act. The Clerk shall check the
preliminary plat for completeness and basic conformance with
applicable municipal requirements. If complete and in
conformance, the proposal shall be placed on the agenda of the
next Planning Commission meeting, not less than 20 days from the
day of receipt.
(2) The preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer
for his technical review and recommendation. The Township
Engineer shall notify the Planning Commission of his
recommendations for either approval or rejection of the
preliminary plat.
(3) The preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the Township Planner for
his technical review and recommendation. The Township Planner
shall notify the Planning Commission of his recommendations for
either approval or rejection of the preliminary plat.
(4) The preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the Township
environmental consultant for his technical review and
recommendation. The Township environmental consultant shall
notify the Planning Commission of his recommendations for either
approval or rejection of the preliminary plat, including, if
reasonably feasible, the undertakings necessary in order to achieve
approval. In the review of such consultant, consideration shall be
given to the following, among other things determined to be
relevant by the consultant: conformance with the Wetlands
Ordinance;37 relationship of improvements and topographical
modifications to the floodway and the floodplain; likely impact upon
on-site and off-site drainage and groundwater; and, generally,
achievement of minimum environmental degradation, taking into
consideration reasonable and prudent alternatives.
37.Editor's Note: See Ch. 210, Floodplain and Wetlands Protection.
§ 250-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-12
1:187
(5) The preliminary plat shall be reviewed by the Township Park
Commission for its recommendations. The Township Park
Commission shall notify the Planning Commission of its
recommendation.
(6) The Planning Commission shall review all details of the proposed
subdivision within the framework of the zoning provisions set out in
the Zoning Ordinance within the various elements of the Master
Plan, within the standards of this Part 1 and with regard to reports
and recommendations received.
(7) The Planning Commission shall recommend conditional approval,
rejection, or approval of the tentative preliminary plat.
(a) Should the recommendation be a conditional approval, any
conditions so imposed shall be noted on the plans, and
recorded in the minutes of the regular Planning Commission
meeting.
(b) Should the recommendation be rejection of the preliminary
plat, the reasons for rejection shall be recorded in the minutes
of the regular Planning Commission meeting. A copy of the
minutes shall be sent to the proprietor.
(c) Should the Planning Commission find that all conditions have
been satisfactorily met, it may recommend tentative approval
of the preliminary plat. The Chairperson shall make a notation
to that effect on a copy of the preliminary plat for permanent
record in the Planning Commission files.
D. Preliminary plat review by Township Board; tentative approval.
(1) The Township Board will not review a preliminary plat until it has
received the review and recommendations of the Planning
Commission and until all applicable fees for the tentative
preliminary review have been paid.
(a) Within 60 days of the date of submission to the Clerk if a
preapplication meeting was held pursuant to MCLA
§ 560.111(3).
(b) Within 90 days of the date of submission to the Clerk if a
preapplication meeting was not held pursuant to MCLA
§ 560.111(3).
(2) The Township Board shall take action on the tentative preliminary
plat.
(3) The Township Board shall:
(a) Tentatively approve the preliminary plat and note its approval
on a copy of the preliminary plat to be returned to the
proprietor; or
§ 250-12 OAKLAND CODE § 250-12
1:188
§ 250-13. Final approval of preliminary plat. [Amended 6-28-2005
by Ord. No. 14-2005]
(b) Reject the preliminary plat and instruct the Clerk to advise the
proprietor of the reasons for rejection in writing.
(4) Tentative approval by the Township Board shall be effective for a
period of 12 months. Should the final preliminary plat in whole or in
part not be submitted within this time limit, a preliminary plat must
again be submitted to the Planning Commission and Township
Board for their recommendations. A one-year extension of tentative
preliminary approval may be requested in writing by the proprietor,
and granted by the Township Board in writing.
(5) Tentative approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute
approval of the final preliminary plat.
(6) No installation or construction of any improvements shall be made
at this time.
(7) After tentative approval by the Township Board, the proprietor
shall submit copies of a preliminary plat to each officer or agency
entitled to receive those copies under MCLA §§ 560.113 to 560.118
for their simultaneous review and action within the thirty-day time
period prescribed in those sections.
A. Filing title.
(1) The proprietor shall file a valid final preliminary plat with the Clerk,
together with a certified list of all authorities required for approval
in Sections 113 through 119 of the Land Division Act (MCLA
§§ 560.113 through 560.119), along with all written approvals.
(2) The proprietor shall provide approved copies of tentative
preliminary plats from each of the required authorities.
(3) The proprietor shall pay all plat review fees and escrow deposits as
specified in § 250-7.
B. Preliminary plat review by Township Board; final approval.
(1) The Township Board shall approve or reject the preliminary plat at
the next regularly scheduled meeting not less than 20 days after
the submission of all copies of necessary approved tentative
preliminary plats and any additional required information.
(2) If the preliminary plat conforms substantially to the plat tentatively
approved by the Township Board and meets all conditions laid
down for tentative approval, the Township Board shall give final
approval to the preliminary plat and note its approval on a copy of
the preliminary plat to be returned to the proprietor.
§ 250-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-13
1:189
§ 250-14. Final plat approval. [Amended 11-14-1989 by Ord. No. 57;
6-28-2005 by Ord. No. 14-2005]
(3) The Clerk shall notify the applicant of approval or rejection in
writing; if rejected, reasons shall be given.
(4) Final approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective for a period
of two years from the date of final approval of the preliminary plat.
The two-year period may be extended if applied for by the applicant
and granted by the Township Board in writing. If an extension is
granted by the Township Board, written notice of such extension
shall be sent to the other approving authorities.
(5) No installation or construction of any improvements shall be made
before the preliminary plat has received final approval of the
Township Board, engineering plans have been approved by the
Township Engineer, and any deposits and fees required under
§ 250-7 have been received by the Township.
(6) The owner and contractors shall have preconstruction conferences
regarding land balancing, improvements and amenities with the
Township engineering and/or Township planning representatives
prior to the start of construction.
A. Filing.
(1) The final plat shall comply with the provisions of the Land Division
Act.
(2) The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat as approved and
it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat
which the proprietor proposes to record and develop at that time;
provided, however, that such portion conforms to this Part 1.
(3) The proprietor shall submit as evidence of title an abstract of title
certified to date with the written opinion of an attorney at law
thereon, or, at the option of the proprietor, a policy of title
insurance currently in force for examination in order to ascertain
as to whether or not the proper parties have signed the plat.
(4) One true copy along with an electronic copy and nine prints of the
final plat which shall comply with all provisions of the Land Division
Act shall be filed by the proprietor with the Clerk.
(5) The proprietor shall provide copies of the deed restrictions to the
Clerk.
(6) Easements shall be executed by the Township and the proprietor,
setting forth the use and/or development of any land reserved for
the use of the public and/or property owners.
(7) The proprietor shall pay all fees and escrow deposits as specified in
§ 250-7 and the Township engineering design standards.
§ 250-13 OAKLAND CODE § 250-14
1:190
B. Final plat review by Township Board.
(1) The final plat shall be reviewed by the Township Engineer as to
compliance with the approved preliminary plat and plans for
utilities and other improvements.
(2) The Township Engineer shall notify the Township Board of his
recommendation for either approval or rejection of the final plat.
(3) Not less than 20 days from the receipt of all previously required
information, the Township Board shall review all recommendations
and:
(a) Approve the plat and instruct the Clerk to notify the proprietor
of the Township Board's approval and certify on the plat the
Township Board approval and date thereof; the approval of the
County Health Division, when required, the date thereof as
shown on the approved preliminary plat; and that surety has
been deposited with the Clerk for the placing of monuments
and lot markers within a reasonable length of time, not to
exceed one year from the date of signing; or
(b) Reject the plat and instruct the Clerk to advise the proprietor
in writing of the reasons for rejection and return the plat to the
proprietor.
(4) Instruct the Clerk to record all proceedings in the minutes of the
meeting which shall be open for inspection, and instruct the Clerk
to send a copy of the minutes to the County Plat Board.
(5) Upon approval of the final plat by the Township Board, the
subsequent approvals shall follow the procedure set forth in the
Land Division Act.
§ 250-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-14
1:191

ARTICLE III
Design Layout Standards
§ 250-15. General requirements.
The subdivision design layout standards set forth under this article are
development guides for the assistance of the proprietor. All final plans must
be reviewed and approved by the Township Board.
§ 250-16. County Road Commission standards for streets.
§ 250-17. Location and arrangement of streets. [Amended
11-14-1989 by Ord. No. 57]
A. The design layout standards herein are intended to be in harmony with
the standards of the County Road Commission.
B. The County Road Commission's option for subdivisions with lot sizes
averaging at least 1 1/2 acres and Class "B" roads without curbs and
gutters shall be acceptable.
A. The creative layout of developments will be encouraged with homes
grouped to save land for dedicated open space.
B. Street alignment shall be planned to fit the terrain and avoid destroying
natural and cultural features.
C. The proposed subdivision shall conform to the master thoroughfare
plan and shall effectively relate to the existing and planned major
thoroughfares and collector streets.
D. The street layout shall provide for continuation of collector streets in
the adjoining subdivisions or provide for the continuation of streets to
adjoining unsubdivided property.
E. The street layout shall include minor streets so laid out that their use by
through traffic shall be discouraged.
F. Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain an existing or
proposed major thoroughfare, scenic easements shall be provided as
required by the Planning Commission, but not to exceed 1/2 the road
right-of-way width. In addition, the Planning Commission may require
greenbelt plantings, marginal access streets, reverse frontage, or such
other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of
residential properties and to afford separation and reduction of traffic
hazards.
G. Should a proposed subdivision border on or contain a railroad, freeway
or other limited access highway right-of-way, the Planning Commission
may require the location of a street approximately parallel to and on
each side of such right-of-way at a distance suitable for the
development of an appropriate use of the intervening land such as for
§ 250-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-17
1:193
§ 250-18. Street right-of-way widths. [Amended 11-14-1989 by Ord.
No. 57]
§ 250-19. Street grades.
For adequate drainage, the minimum street grade shall not be less than
0.4% grade. The maximum street grade shall be 6% except that the
parks in residential districts. Such distances shall be determined with
due consideration of the minimum distance required for approach
grades to future grade separation.
H. Half streets shall be prohibited, except where absolutely essential to
the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with other
requirements of these regulations and where the Planning Commission
finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half
when the adjoining property is developed. Whenever there exists
adjacent to the tract to be subdivided a dedicated or platted and
recorded half street, the other half shall be platted.
I. All lots shall front on subdivision streets and not on the major
thoroughfare.
A. The right-of-way widths for streets shall be as follows:
Street Type Right-of-Way Width
Major thoroughfare In conformance with the master
thoroughfare plan of the Township
(generally 120 feet)
Collector street 86 feet
Industrial service street 70 feet
Multiple-family residential street
where platted
60 feet
Minor (single-family residential)
street
60 feet
Marginal access street 34 feet
Turnaround (loop) street 120 feet
Alley 20 feet
Cul-de-sac street turnaround 60-foot street
Industrial 75-foot radius
Residential and others 60-foot radius
Residential boulevard 86 feet
B. Maximum length for residential cul-de-sac streets shall be 500 feet.
C. Maximum length for industrial and other cul-de-sac streets may exceed
500 feet subject to the approval of the Planning Commission.
§ 250-17 OAKLAND CODE § 250-19
1:194
Planning Commission may make an exception to this standard on the
recommendation of the Township Engineer.
§ 250-20. Street geometries.
Standards for maximum and minimum street grades, vertical and horizontal
street curves, and sight distances shall be in harmony with the standards
of the County Road Commission. In special circumstances, the Planning
Commission may determine that a variance to these standards may be
necessary.
§ 250-21. Street intersections.
Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at 90°.
Curved streets, intersecting with major thoroughfares and collector
thoroughfares shall do so with a tangent section of center line 50 feet
in length, measured from the right-of-way line of the major collector
thoroughfare.
§ 250-22. Street grading and center-line gradients.
Street grading and center-line gradients shall be per the plan and profiles
approved by the Township Engineer.
§ 250-23. Street jogs.
Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided.
§ 250-24. Street access.
Access to streets across ditches shall be provided by the proprietor in a
standard method approved by the County Road Commission.
§ 250-25. Lot sizes and shapes.
A. The lot size, width, depth and shape in any subdivision shall be
appropriate for the location and type of development contemplated.
B. Lot areas, width, and building setback lines shall conform to at least the
minimum requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for the district in
which the subdivision is proposed.
C. When the subdivision is to be a planned residential development (PRD),
lot sizes and shapes shall be regulated as set forth in the Zoning
Ordinance.38
D. When the subdivision is planned with lots averaging 1 1/2 acres or
more, County Road Commission Class "B" roads without curbs and
gutters shall be acceptable.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 250-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-26
1:195
§ 250-26. Lot arrangements. [Amended 11-14-1989 by Ord. No. 57]
§ 250-27. Natural features.
A. Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the street lines, or as
nearly as possible thereto.
B. Residential lots shall be separated from existing or proposed regional,
major or secondary thoroughfares by scenic easements, generally 1/2
the road right-of-way width. A landscaping plan of the scenic easement
area shall be submitted for approval as part of the preliminary plat,
final approval step. This plan shall provide for the following:
(1) A berm to be approved by the Planning Commission, which shall
achieve the objective of screening the view between the
thoroughfare and the residential development.
(2) The berm may be a combination of elevations and plantings. The
plantings shall include three trees per each lot in the development,
with the specific number of trees per lot being determined by the
Planning Commission, along with the precise dimensions of the
easement, taking into consideration the screening objective, the
length of the easement area, and the number of lots in the
development.
(3) Plant types shall conform with the Zoning Ordinance.39
(4) The means of irrigation, and responsibility and assurance for
ongoing maintenance of the plantings.
C. Lots shall have a front-to-front relationship across all streets where
possible.
D. Residential lots abutting collector streets shall be platted with extra
depth to permit generous distances between buildings and such
trafficway.
A. Any area of land within the proposed subdivision which lies either
wholly or partly within the floodplain of a river, stream, creek or lake, or
any other areas which are subject to flooding or inundation by
stormwater shall be subject to specific compliance with Chapter 210,
Floodplain and Wetlands Protection, the Land Division Act, and its
review by the State Department of Environmental Quality.
B. The development of wetlands shall be subject to Chapter 210,
Floodplain and Wetlands Protection.
C. Buffer zones along streams and tributary swales shall be established to
inhibit erosion and sedimentation and preserve their natural character.
39.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 250-26 OAKLAND CODE § 250-27
1:196
D. Existing grades and topography are to be retained; mass grading or
extensive filling and land balancing shall be restricted to the minimum
extent necessary for reasonable use of the land. To this end, the
Township shall require grading plans for specific lots as designated by
the Township Engineer, which shall indicate existing and proposed
grade levels. The plans shall be prepared by a registered engineer and
shall be reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer prior to
issuance of a building permit.
E. Slopes over 20% or unique wildlife habitats shall be preserved to the
maximum extent compatible with reasonable use of the land.
F. The proposed subdivision shall be planned to avoid, to the maximum
extent feasible, the cutting, trimming, or clearing of trees and other
natural vegetation, within 100 feet of any free-flowing stream or lake.
G. Site plan review pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance shall be required for
all proposed uses on lands indicated as natural preservation areas in
the Oakland Township Ecological Survey (Paul Thompson, 1974). Such
proposed land uses shall be planned so as to enhance the natural
features of the area and so as to result in minimal damage to those
features.40
H. The preliminary plans for a proposed development shall be reviewed
with the County Road Commission so that allowance can be made for
maximum possible preservation of existing vegetation on the road rightof-
way.
I. Within a proposed development, the developer shall take the necessary
action to preserve and replace trees. The following information must be
supplied to and approved by the Planning Commission:
(1) Location of existing stands of trees and existing individual trees
(apart from stands of trees) having a caliper of 12 inches or greater
at two feet above the ground.
(2) Location of trees to be retained.
(3) Specifications for protection during development.
(4) Specifications for grading and drainage to assure the preservation
of those trees to be retained.
(5) Plans for reforestation and afforestation in accordance with
Township guidelines.
J. Tree removal on steep slopes shall be regulated as provided under Part
91 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCLA § 324.9101 et seq.), Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control.
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 250-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-28
1:197
§ 250-28. Public reservations and open space.
§ 250-29. Utility and surface drainage easements.
A. Dedication of lands and facilities for passive and active outdoor
recreational activities shall be encouraged in all private residential
developments; these shall be related to the Township open space
network; such lands shall provide for the recreational needs of the
residents and/or preserve significant natural features.
B. Dedication or reservation of school sites shall be encouraged in
developments of appropriate size. Elementary schools should be
located generally central to neighborhoods and serviced by collector
roads.
C. When the public reservation is that of an open space area of a planned
residential development (PRD), said area shall be designed as set forth
in the Zoning Ordinance.41
D. When consideration is given by the proprietor to the allocation of areas
suitably located and of adequate size for playgrounds, school sites,
parks, and recreation facilities, as indicated in the Master Plan and
Zoning Ordinance, said areas shall be provided by one of the following
methods:
(1) Dedication to the Township.
(2) Reservation of land for the use of the public and/or property
owners by deed or covenants.
(3) Reservation for acquisition by the Township or School Board within
a period of two years. Said reservation shall be made in such
manner as to provide for a release of the land to the proprietor in
the event that the Township or the School Board does not proceed
with the purchase.
A. Stormwater drainage systems shall be designed to discharge into
existing watercourses where possible after the water runoff has been
retained and filtered, with minimal change in normal downstream flow
rate. The preferred method of managing stormwater is to provide a
means of absorbing as much as possible on the site.
B. Exact sewer line locations and configurations require Township
approval and can be determined only after a complete environmental
and cost-benefit analysis. It is not to be assumed that there are
predetermined locations, such as streambeds.
C. Location of utility and surface drainage easements shall be provided
along the front, rear and/or side lot lines as may be necessary for utility
service and drainage. Easements shall give access to every lot, park or
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 250-28 OAKLAND CODE § 250-29
1:198
§ 250-30. Easements for nonvehicular travel. [Amended 11-14-1989
by Ord. No. 57]
public grounds; such easements shall be a total of not less than 12 feet
wide, six feet from each parcel.
D. Recommendations on the proposed layout of telephone, television,
public lighting, electric, and gas service should be sought from all
utility companies servicing the area and coordinated so as not to create
a conflict of use of such easements.
E. Recommendations on the proposed layout of water and sewer service
should be sought from the Township Engineer.
F. Prior to the approval of the final plat for a proposed subdivision, a
statement shall be obtained from the appropriate utility indicating that
easements have been provided along specific lots or corridors, and a
notation shall be made on the final plat indicating such areas involved
and what portions have been reserved to each of the respective utilities
involved by depth in the ground and location within such easements.
Such easements so described which shall traverse privately owned
property shall be protected by easements granted by the proprietor.
The use of the dedicated public ways shall be protected by the utility
license and agreement between the Township and the utility involved.
A. Location of public walkways, crosswalks, or footpaths may be required
by the Planning Commission to obtain satisfactory pedestrian linkage to
neighborhood centers and schools or as part of the Township footpath
system.
B. Right-of-way of public walkways shall be at least 15 feet and shall be
dedicated for this purpose.
C. Installation of eight-foot-wide bikeways shall be required by the
Planning Commission to provide satisfactory linkage to neighborhood
centers and schools adjacent to all regional, major and secondary
thoroughfares as designated in the Township Road Right-of-Way
Ordinance, set out in Chapter 370, Streets and Sidewalks, Article I,
Right-of-Way Widths. The bikeways shall be coordinated with and made
an integral part of the required landscaped berm.
D. Location of bridle paths may be required by the Planning Commission
as part of the Township bridle path system.
§ 250-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-30
1:199

ARTICLE IV
Improvements
§ 250-31. Minimum standards.
The improvements set forth under this article are to be considered as the
minimum acceptable standards.
§ 250-32. Financial guarantees.
§ 250-33. Streets.
All street pavement and appurtenances thereto shall be constructed to
the design requirements of the County Road Commission and any adopted
Township standards. The County Road Commission option for subdivisions
with lot sizes averaging at least 1 1/2 acres, utilizing Class "B" roads
without curbs and gutters shall be acceptable.
§ 250-34. Utilities. [Amended 11-14-1989 by Ord. No. 57]
A. Prior to approval of the final plat by the Township Board and the
undertaking of any improvements, the proprietor shall deposit with the
Township Treasurer, by cash, certified check, or irrevocable bank letter
of credit, or furnish to the satisfaction of the Township Board a surety
bond for the faithful performance of such improvements in an amount
to be established by the Township Board to adequately ensure the
faithful performance of such improvements.
B. In the event that a full money deposit should be required herein, such
funds shall be released by the Township Board by resolution directing
the Township Treasurer to pay over such funds to either the proprietor
or such persons as may be entitled to receive same. In no event shall
the Township Board authorize either the release of all funds or
cancellation of bond until such improvements have been completed. In
this regard, the Township Treasurer is authorized to retain a tenpercent
retainage of the total deposit until the improvements have been
completed and he may be specifically authorized to release up to 90% in
partial payments.
C. Improvements shall be provided by the proprietor in accordance with
standards and requirements established herein and/or any other such
standards and requirements which may from time to time be
established by ordinance or published resolution of the Township
Board.
A. Requirements for underground wiring. The proprietor shall make
arrangements for all lines for telephone, electric and television and
other similar services distributed by wire or cable to be placed
underground entirely throughout a subdivision area and such conduits
or cables shall be placed within such underground private easements
provided to such utility company by the developer or utility, as may be
§ 250-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-34
1:201
§ 250-35. Public walkways.
prescribed by law or rules and regulations of the State Public Service
Commission, or underground within dedicated public ways, provided
that overhead lines may be permitted where such use is consistent
with preexisting use in the area. Application for a variance of this
requirement for underground wiring shall first be submitted to and
receive approval of the Planning Commission determining that
overhead lines will not constitute a detriment to the health, safety
and general character of the area prior to submission of such request
pursuant to § 250-9. All such facilities placed in dedicated public ways
shall be planned so as not to conflict with other underground utilities.
All such facilities shall be constructed in accordance with standards of
construction approved by the State Public Service Commission.42
B. Sewage disposal. All sanitary systems shall meet minimum County
Health Division requirements or better. Unless sewered, all lots must be
capable of accommodating county-approved on-site septic systems.
C. Water supply. All water supply systems shall meet minimum County
Health Division requirements or better. A plat may be required to
provide a central water system for domestic use and fire protection.43
D. Storm drainage system.
(1) Storm drainage systems shall be installed based upon plans
approved by the Township Engineer, designed to achieve a system
of long-term drainage control and/or disposition in order to achieve
standards of applicable Township ordinances and to insure against
erosion and unreasonable on-site and off-site negative impacts of
drainage pattern modification, taking into consideration both
qualitative and quantitative impacts. All storm drainage systems
shall be dedicated to the County Water Resources Commission, and
shall be designed so as to conform to all requirements for such
dedication and acceptance by the Water Resources Commissioner.
(2) Adequate and safe disposal of all rear yard storm drainage shall be
provided in accordance with details and specifications prescribed
by the Township Engineer.
(3) The subdivision shall be graded in such a manner as to control soil
erosion and sedimentation, pursuant to the standards prescribed
by the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act, Part 91 of
Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCLA § 324.9101 et seq.).
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 250-34 OAKLAND CODE § 250-35
1:202
§ 250-36. Trees and plantings.
§ 250-37. Grading.
The developer's engineer shall submit a detailed grading plan along with
the construction plans for the other improvements in the proposed
subdivision. The grading plan shall consist of a good copy of the topographic
map of the site and shall contain the following information:
A. Public walkways or footpaths shall be installed when deemed necessary
by the Planning Commission to serve as linkage to neighborhood
centers and schools or as part of the Township footpath system.
B. Public walkways or footpaths shall be developed in a permanent and
durable surface, such as concrete or asphalt. Planting pockets shall be
provided in public walkways for tree and shrub planting. The planting
plan and surface treatment shall meet the approval of the Planning
Commission.
C. Fences and/or other improvements may also be required if the Planning
Commission and/or Township Board determines they may be necessary
to protect the adjacent property owners.
A. The proprietor shall provide a plan for the development of trees and
ornamental plantings in and about the development along public rightsof-
way or as otherwise specified by ordinance. Where a greenbelt is
required by ordinance, or by the Planning Commission, it shall be
planted within six months after the date of recording of the final plat or
as otherwise may be required by the Township Board and shall
thereafter be reasonably maintained with permanent plant materials to
provide a screen to abutting properties.
B. In a residential subdivision, the proprietor shall provide for the planting
of trees and ornamental shrubs in an area between the roadway and the
lot line pursuant to the guidelines available from the Township office in
such a fashion so that such plantings will not interfere with natural
development of the residential area. A list of recommended plant
materials and spacing is available in the Township office.
A. Existing contour lines at a maximum of two-foot intervals.
B. All existing wooded areas and individual significant trees within the
limits of construction showing the size and species.
C. All wetlands.
D. Any other important ecological features of the site.
E. A clear indication of the areas to be cleared or disturbed during the
grading and installation of subdivision improvements. This area shall be
shaded or cross-hatched and dimensioned in a manner that can be laid
§ 250-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-37
1:203
out in the field by the developer's engineer and verified by the Township
Engineer.
F. Proposed contours at two-foot intervals in any areas that are to be
graded.
G. After the grading plan is approved by the Township, the developer's
engineer shall set sufficient stakes in the field to clearly indicate the
areas of the site that are not to be disturbed.
H. After the site has been staked as described in Subsection G of this
section, the developer shall provide the Township with a copy of the
executed contract between the developer and the clearing and/or
grading contractor and request a preconstruction meeting. The
contract shall include insurance policies and certificates and/or bonds
as required by the Township.
I. The preconstruction meeting shall be attended by the contractor, the
Township Engineer, the developer's representative, and the developer's
engineer. The purpose of this meeting is to determine the contractor's
work schedule and the methods and materials he intends to use in
performing the work included in the contract for clearing and grading
and to make sure that all parties are in agreement on the areas of the
site that are to be preserved in their natural state.
J. Prior to the start of any clearing and grading, the developer shall place
on deposit with the Township sufficient funds to cover the cost of fulltime
inspection of the work by the Township Engineer. The amount to
be deposited will be determined by the Township. The contractor shall
not perform any clearing or grading without notifying the Township at
least two working days prior to commencing work. This time is required
to schedule inspection. The amount of inspection required for each job
shall be determined by the Township Engineer.
K. Prior to the start of any clearing or grading, the developer shall deposit
a cash bond or other bond assurances of performance, in the amount to
be determined by the Township, to guarantee that the clearing and
grading will conform with the approved plans.
L. Minor changes to the plan may be permitted by the Township Engineer
during construction if, in his opinion, conditions so indicate. However,
any major changes must be approved by the Township Board.
§ 250-37 OAKLAND CODE § 250-37
1:204
ARTICLE V
Parcel Splitting
§ 250-38. Authorization.
A lot, outlot, or other parcel of land in a recorded plat may be further
partitioned or divided into not more than four parts in accordance with the
provisions of Land Division Act and/or Part 2 of this chapter on division of
platted lots and the procedures therefor established hereinafter subject to
the following minimum lot standard, to wit:
The minimum lot size of any lot, outlot, or other parcel of land in a recorded
plat shall be in accordance with the applicable requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance of the Township, as amended, and/or such successive Zoning
Ordinance as may be hereafter established, except when the partitioning
or dividing of such land is for the immediate development and use of such
divided or partitioned land in conjunction with the adjoining lot, outlot,
or parcel which does not meet the minimum requirements of said Zoning
Ordinance after division or partition shall not be developed or used except
in conjunction with the lot, outlot, or parcel immediately adjoining same.
§ 250-39. Procedure.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or
copartnership to divide or partition any lot, outlot, or other parcel of land in
a recorded plat except in accordance with the following procedures:
A. Partition or division in two or more but not more than four parts. The
applicant shall deliver a written instrument fully executed in form
legally sufficient for recording with the County Register of Deeds to the
Township Board for its approval. Such instrument shall contain the
legal description of the partition or division of the parcel described
therein. Accompanying such instrument shall be a policy of title
insurance issued by a company doing title work in the county, which
policy of title insurance shall disclose that the person or persons
executing the instrument are the owners in fee title or an abstract of
title and tax history evidencing title to the property described.
B. If the division or partition of the parcel will result in a minimum lot size
less than the requirements of the applicable provisions of the Township
Zoning Ordinance, as amended, or its successive ordinance, if any, then
the applicant shall deliver, in addition, a fully executed affidavit in form
legally sufficient for recording with the County Register of Deeds and
signed by all persons who have a legal or equitable interest in the
parcel acknowledging that they understand and agree the partitioned
or divided parcel or parcels may not thereafter be developed or used
separately but only in conjunction with the adjoining parcels of land,
such to be a covenant running with the land and such land to be and
remain in common ownership.
§ 250-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-39
1:205
C. Township Board review and approval. The review by the Township
Board shall be such that the public health, safety, and welfare of the
people will not be subserved by such partition or division.
D. The applicant shall pay the cost of recording such instrument or
instruments as the case may be.
E. The applicant shall also submit a plan or drawing drawn to scale by a
registered civil engineer or surveyor, pursuant to Public Act No. 132 of
1970 (MCLA § 54.211 et seq.), showing the subject property, including
dimensions, and also adjoining property for at least 300 feet in all
directions from subject property so as to adequately portray
relationship of subject and adjoining property. All existing buildings and
structures shall be located on said plan or drawing. The Township
Board may also require the applicant to furnish it with such additional
data as will enable the Township Board to decide the matter.
§ 250-39 OAKLAND CODE § 250-39
1:206
Part 2
[Adopted 10-14-1986PaBrytiOtirodn. NOfo .P 5la3tt(eCdh .L 1o2ts, Art. IV, Of The 2007
Code Of Ordinances)]
ARTICLE VI
General Provisions
§ 250-40. Legislative determination.
It is hereby determined necessary to maintain orderly development of the
community and provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents
and property owners of the Township to regulate the division and
partitioning of land in the Township which is not otherwise subject to the
Land Division Act platting procedures and requirements of this chapter.
§ 250-41. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Part 2, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
APPLICANT — A person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or
combination of any of them which may hold any divisible interest in land,
whether recorded or not, who is seeking approval for a division or partition
pursuant to this Part 2.
DIVIDE or PARTITION — Splitting or separating a parcel or tract of land
into parts by, or for purposes of selling or leasing for more than one year, or
for building development, where the resulting parts are not, or will not be
owned by the same person, and the splitting and separating is not pursuant
to land division or platting procedures under the Land Division Act.
LAND — The surface area known as "real estate."
LAND DIVISION ACT — Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCLA § 560.101 et
seq.).
LOT, PARCEL or TRACT — Contiguous areas of land under the ownership of
the same person. Lot may also refer to land which is described and fixed in
a recorded plat.
PANHANDLE — That portion of a lot used for ingress and egress to and
from an abutting road which does not meet the minimum lot width required
for the zoning district.
PLAT — A map or chart approved for the division of land pursuant to the
laws of the state.
PRIVATE ROAD — An area of land used for ingress and egress to and from
land which does not abut a public road, and said area is not owned or
maintained by the public.
PUBLIC ROAD — An open way for passage or travel under public ownership
and/or maintenance.
§ 250-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-42
1:207
§ 250-42. Division and partitioning of land prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to divide or partition any lot, outlot
or other parcel of land in a recorded plat, except in accordance with the
provisions of this Part 2, unless the division or partition is approved and a
part of a recorded plat pursuant to the Land Division Act.
§ 250-43. Authorization to partition or divide parcels of land.
A lot, outlot, or other parcel of land in a recorded plat, may be divided or
partitioned into not more than four parts, if it is not in violation of the Land
Division Act, if there is compliance with the following:
A. An approval pursuant to this Part 2 shall be obtained.
B. The minimum lot size in area, and the minimum front lot line width of
any lot, outlot or other parcel of land shall be in compliance with the
applicable requirements of the Township Zoning Ordinance, as
amended. The minimum lot size in area shall be exclusive of all
dedicated road rights-of-way. (See Chapter 370, Article I, Right-of-Way
Widths.) Lot depth shall not be in excess of four times the lot width.44
C. Any due or unpaid taxes or special assessments upon the property shall
be paid or secured.
D. Every resultant parcel shall abut a public road right-of-way, or a private
road approved pursuant to Article VIII of this Part 2.
E. Every resultant parcel shall be serviced by underground electrical and
communication service lines pursuant to standards and quality of
workmanship prescribed and/or approved by the State Public Service
Commission.
F. Every resultant parcel which is not served by sewer shall be approved
by the County Health Department for the development of a septic
system.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 250-42 OAKLAND CODE § 250-43
1:208
ARTICLE VII
Procedure for Land Partition
§ 250-44. Application.
§ 250-45. Plan drawing.
The applicant shall submit a sketch of the proposed property division, which
includes the following:
§ 250-46. Review and approval by Supervisor.
§ 250-47. Survey requirements.
A. An applicant for a division or partition regulated by this Part 2 shall
submit to the office of the Supervisor an application on the forms
provided by said office setting forth the information required by this
Part 2 including proof of ownership and such other information which is
determined to be necessary.
B. An application for a land division/private road shall be valid for one year
from date of application. The application shall be valid for an additional
year if construction of a private road has been started and is proceeding
to completion as approved.
A. Dimensions of existing parcel and proposed division.
B. Location of existing buildings and structures including setbacks.
C. Location of existing easements, public and private.
D. Location of proposed homesite, including setbacks.
E. Location of lakes, ponds, streams, stands of trees and wetlands.
F. Proposed electrical layout for underground service.
G. Location map drawn at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet.
A. The office of the Supervisor may refer the application to the various
departments of the Township for review and approval.
B. Approval is conditioned upon the following: the applicant will make the
required improvements within one year and will submit a recorded copy
of the approved survey to the Township.
A. Easements of underground electrical and communication service lines
and dedication of the public road right-of-way shall be shown on the
survey. Upon review and approval of the legal survey by the Supervisor,
the applicant shall record that survey with the County Register of
Deeds.
§ 250-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-47
1:209
§ 250-48. Referral to Planning Commission.
The Supervisor may refer applications with any of the following
characteristics on the property to the Planning Commission:
§ 250-49. Referral to Township Board.
§ 250-50. Appeal.
Any applicant who is aggrieved by the determination of the office of the
Supervisor may appeal to the Township Board. The Board shall thereafter
review the decision or action and may reverse, modify or affirm such
decision in whole or in part, based upon the Board's interpretation and
application of this Part 2.
B. The office of the Supervisor shall submit a copy of the recorded survey
to the County Equalization Department to acquire Sidwell numbers for
the new parcels.
A. Lake or free-flowing stream;
B. Wetlands as defined in Chapter 210, Floodplain and Wetlands
Protection;
C. Unique vegetation, as cited in the Oakland Township Ecological Survey,
prepared by Paul Thompson in 1974;
D. Slopes over 20%, as noted on the topographical map of the
comprehensive development plan.
A. If the parcel to be divided is a platted subdivision lot, the matter shall
be referred to the Township Board for approval.
B. The Township Board shall have the final decision as to any division or
partition which is referred to it. The Township Board may refer the
matter to the Township Planning Commission for review and
recommendation before final decision. The Township Board shall find in
each case, before giving its approval:
(1) The division or partition will result in lots or parcels of land
consistent with the Township Zoning Ordinance, and the Township
comprehensive development regulation plan.
(2) There has been compliance with the requirements of this Part 2 and
the other applicable Township ordinances, standards, rules and
regulations.
C. This approval expires in one calendar year if the applicant fails to make
the required improvements, record the approved survey, and submit a
copy of same to the Township.
§ 250-47 OAKLAND CODE § 250-50
1:210
ARTICLE VIII
Procedure for Private Road Land Partition
§ 250-51. General requirement.
Any lot or parcel of land resulting from a division or partition of lands
pursuant to this Part 2 which does not abut a public road shall abut a private
road which has been approved by the Township. Divisions with more than
two panhandle parcels sharing a common driveway shall be reviewed as a
private road.
§ 250-52. Preapplication conference.
§ 250-53. Application.
§ 250-54. Design standards for private road land division.45
A. The applicant shall contact the Township Supervisor or designated
agent to request a preapplication conference.
B. Prior to the preapplication conference, the applicant shall submit a
sketch of the proposed property division for review by the Township
Supervisor. The sketch, in a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 feet
should include the following information:
(1) Parcel identification number of the property.
(2) Proposed lines of division and dimensions.
(3) Existing buildings and structures.
(4) Notation of significant natural features such as natural
watercourses and wetlands, steep slopes, stands of trees, and
unique vegetation.
A. The applicant must file an application for a private road land division
with the Township Clerk, pay the required filing fee and establish an
escrow account to cover the cost of reviews by Township consultants.
B. The applicant shall provide proof of ownership and/or written consent
of such owner and the names and addresses of those concerned with
the application.
A. Private road standards (specification drawing).
B. The maximum length of a private road shall be 2,000 feet.
C. The maximum length of a "panhandle" on a cul-de-sac shall be 200 feet.
D. The private road shall have a maximum grade of 8%.
45.Editor's Note: See also the Private Road Specifications, located at the end of this chapter.
§ 250-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-54
1:211
§ 250-55. Documents required for private road land divisions.
Road maintenance agreement, easement agreement, and deed restrictions
shall provide for the perpetual private (nonpublic) maintenance of such
roads and/or easements to a necessary and reasonable standard to serve
the several interests involved. These documents shall contain the following
provisions:
§ 250-56. Preliminary concept approval by Planning Commission.
E. The private road approach shall be a minimum of 30 feet in width at the
intersection of a public road, as required by the County Road
Commission.
F. Private roads shall not interconnect with public streets.
G. Where existing private roads are to be extended within the original
property, but not to adjacent parcels, the existing road may be extended
at its present right-of-way width, providing that the entire private road
is improved to the specifications of this Part 2, except for width.
H. The ultimate divisions of a private road land division shall not create a
density in excess of 50% of the density permitted by the zoning district.
This limit on the ultimate number of parcels shall be made a part of the
recorded deed restrictions.
I. The maximum number of parcels on a single access cul-de-sac shall be
no more than 30.
A. A method of initiating and financing of such road and/or easements in
order to keep the road in a reasonably good and usable condition.
B. A workable method of apportioning the costs of maintenance and
improvements.
C. A notice that if repairs and maintenance are not made, the Township
Board may bring the road up to the design standards specified in
§ 250-54 of this article and assess owners of parcels on the private road
for the improvements, plus an administrative fee in the amount of 25%
of out-of-pocket costs.
D. A notice that no public funds of the Township are to be used to build,
repair, or maintain the private road.
E. Easements to the public for purposes of emergency and other public
vehicles for whatever public services are necessary.
F. A provision that the owners of any and all of the property using the road
shall refrain from prohibiting, restricting, limiting or in any manner
interfering with normal ingress and egress and use by any of the other
owners. Normal ingress and egress and use shall include use by family,
guests, invitees, tradesmen, and others bound to or returning from any
of the properties having a right to use the road.
§ 250-54 OAKLAND CODE § 250-56
1:212
A. Required information. Ten copies of the plan prepared by a registered
land surveyor, civil engineer, or landscape architect in a scale of at least
one inch equal 100 feet shall be submitted to the Township Clerk or
designated agent. The plans shall include the following information:
(1) Identification and description.
(2) Proposed name of development.
(3) Parcel identification number and/or legal description.
(4) Names and addresses of proprietor, owner proprietor, and planner,
design engineer, landscape architect or surveyor.
(5) Scale of drawing.
(6) Date of preparation.
(7) North arrow.
B. Existing conditions.
(1) A location map showing the general relationship of the proposed
property division to the surrounding area within 1/2 mile, in a scale
not less than one inch equals 2,000 feet.
(2) Proposed lines of division and dimensions.
(3) Zoning classification.
(4) Location of existing buildings and structures.
(5) Locations, widths, and names of existing or prior easements of
record, public and/or private.
(6) Location of existing sanitary sewers, water mains, storm drains,
and other underground facilities.
(7) Topography drawn at contour intervals of four feet.
(8) Location of significant natural features such as lakes, streams,
wetlands, slopes over 20%, stands of trees, scenic views, and
geologic features. Location of individual trees having a caliper of
12 inches or greater shall be indicated within the area of road
construction.
C. Proposed conditions.
(1) Proposed easements for open space, pathways, utilities and other
activities as may be reflected by the Township community
infrastructure map.
(2) Layout of the private road, indicating easement width and
connections to adjoining rights-of-way.
§ 250-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-56
1:213
§ 250-57. Final concept approval by Planning Commission.
Additional information to be submitted prior to final concept approval by
the Planning Commission:
(3) Indication of possible future divisions. This is for information
purposes only; approval of the plan does not give approval of future
divisions.
(4) Locations of proposed homesites, including elevations and
setbacks.
(5) Delineation of proposed road right-of-way of existing public road.
D. Grant of approval. Finding that all conditions of this Part 2 and other
applicable ordinances have been met, the Planning Commission may
grant preliminary concept approval.
A. A copy of the drawing as prepared and approved by public utilities to be
serviced. Easements shall be shown on both the plan and the survey.
B. Two copies each of the road maintenance agreement, easement
agreement and deed restrictions.
C. Ten copies of the construction plans for the private road prepared by a
civil engineer, shall be submitted to the Township for review and
recommendations of the Township Engineer, Township planning
consultant and Planning Commission.
(1) The plans shall include the following information:
(a) Cover sheet (approved overall development plan).
(b) Typical cross section and quantities.
(c) Paving and drainage plan (showing drainage for each
structure) (one-inch-equals-one-hundred-feet scale).
(d) Sanitary sewer and water main plan (one-inch-equals-onehundred-
feet scale).
(e) Underground utilities plan (gas, electric and telephone) (oneinch-
equals-one-hundred-feet scale).
(f) Street paving, drainage, sanitary sewer, water main, gas,
telephone and electric layout plans in detail (plan one-inchequals-
fifty-feet scale) (profile one-inch-equals-five-feet scale).
(2) General information.
(a) Drawing on sheet size (24 inches by 36 inches plan and
profile).
(b) North arrow.
§ 250-56 OAKLAND CODE § 250-57
1:214
(c) Seal of civil engineer.
(d) Title block.
(e) Contours (two-foot intervals).
(f) Topography (trees, etc.).
(g) Permanent B.M. elevations (USGS datum).
(h) Street names (approved by the County Road Commission).
(i) Lot layout (informational purposes).
(3) Roads.
(a) Proposed sixty-foot road right-of-way.
(b) Road alignment (survey data).
(c) Intersection alignment including sight distance for intersection
of private and public roads.
(d) Method of constructing dead-end streets.
(e) Plan and profile elevations and grades.
(f) Vertical curves: length, elevations.
(g) Soil borings (500 feet maximum spacing and 10 feet minimum
depth below proposed grade or existing ground whichever is
deeper) to be shown on plan and profile sheets.
(h) Area to be cleared or disturbed during grading and installation
of improvements. This area shall be shaded or cross hatched
and divisioned in a manner that can be laid out in the field by
the Township Engineer.
(i) Disposition of unsuitable materials removed for road
construction.
(j) An approach permit from the County Road Commission shall
be obtained.
(k) Location of the County Road Commission approved street
name sign and stop sign.
(l) Other items as determined by the Planning Commission.
D. Should the Planning Commission find that all conditions have been
satisfactorily met, it may recommend final concept approval to the
Township Board. All information and recommendations from the
Planning Commission will be forwarded to the Township Clerk for
Township Board consideration.
§ 250-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-58
1:215
§ 250-58. Final concept approval by Township Board.
§ 250-59. Road construction.
A. After having received the Planning Commission's approval, the
applicant may contact the Township Clerk to request Township Board
concept review, which shall be scheduled no sooner than 20 days after
the Planning Commission approval.
B. The applicant shall submit six sets of plans including construction plans
to the Township Clerk at least 14 days prior to the meeting. These plans
shall include all recommendations of the Planning Commission.
C. Final concept approval by the Township Board authorizes the applicant
to commence road construction. Final concept approval expires in one
calendar year if the applicant fails to obtain final approval. The one-year
period may be extended if applied for by the applicant and granted by
the Township Board in writing.
D. The Township Board shall have the final decision regarding application
for private road land divisions. The Board may waive or revise any
requirement of this Part 2 which in its judgment would cause
unnecessary hardship to the applicant.
A. All necessary approvals and permits of the County Road Commission
shall be obtained including approval of a street name.
B. The developer's design engineer will be required to furnish all
necessary line and grade stakes and as-built plans of the completed
work. The developer shall be responsible for obtaining, at his own
expense, any material testing by an independent testing laboratory as
required by the Township Engineer.
C. After the site has been staked, the developer shall provide the Township
with a copy of the executed contract between the developer and the
clearing and/or grading contractor and request a preconstruction
meeting. The contract shall include insurance policies and certifications
and/or bonds as required by the Township.
D. The preconstruction meeting shall be attended by the contractor, the
Township Engineer, the developer's representative and the developer's
engineer. The purpose of this meeting is to determine the contractor's
work schedule and the methods and materials he intends to use in
performing the work included in the contract for clearing and grading
and to make sure that all parties are in agreement on the areas of the
site that are to be preserved in their natural state.
E. Prior to the start of any clearing or grading, the developer shall deposit
a cash bond or other bond assurances of performance, in the amount to
be determined by the Township, to guarantee that the clearing and
grading will conform with the approved plans.
§ 250-58 OAKLAND CODE § 250-59
1:216
§ 250-60. Inspection procedure for private roads.
F. All private roads shall be inspected by the Township Engineer during
the construction of the road. A two-working-day notification shall be
given to the Township Engineer's office before commencing
construction of the road. The owner and/or contractor shall hold
liability insurance for the road construction. Prior to granting final
approval, the developer's engineer shall first certify that the road has
been constructed in accordance with the as-built plans which shall be
submitted at the completion of the job. (He should also submit test
results for materials, compaction, etc.)
G. Any significant changes from the approved plans shall be noted in the
cover letter, along with the reasons for the changes.
H. Upon receipt of acceptable as-built plans and verification of proper
certification of construction, the Township Engineer may submit his
recommendation to the Township to accept the road as completed.
I. If there is any deviation from the plans, the Township Engineer shall
report the deviation and reason for same to the Township Clerk. The
Township Engineer has the right to reject the work and issue stop-work
orders if the contractor or contractor's equipment creates any
unnecessary disturbance beyond the limits of the contract as shown on
the approved plans and staked by the developer's engineer.
J. Signed contracts for all improvements shall be submitted to the
Township Engineer, at least seven days prior to the start of
construction.
K. The proprietor shall cause its contractor to furnish to the Township
evidence of public liability and property damage insurance coverage
with a responsible insurance company which meets the approval of the
Township in such amounts as will be adequate to protect the public, the
Township, individual members of the Township Board, Township
employees and agents for the Township, and all parties of interest; and
shall not be less than the limits set forth by resolution of the Township
Board from time to time.
L. The proprietor shall obtain, or cause his contractor to obtain all
permits, post all required bonds and pay all required fees for each and
all departments having jurisdiction over the lands and rights-of-way
involved in his project. Proper notification shall be given each
governmental agency and utility company prior to beginning of
construction. The Township shall require a minimum forty-eight-hour
notice prior to commencement of any construction.
A. Plans will be reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer and two
sets of plans stamped "For Construction" submitted for inspection
purposes.
§ 250-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-60
1:217
§ 250-61. Utilities. [Amended 2-25-1997 by Ord. No. 53A]
B. The contractor shall notify the Township Engineer two days prior to
start of construction. Roads are to be staked and graded, including
ditches, and cut sheets given to the inspector.
C. The construction will be spot checked each day. The contractor shall
notify the Township Engineer's office at the start of the working day if
no work is to be completed that day. If notification is not given, the
Township inspector will check the site and time will be charged.
D. Spot inspection will consist of verifying cut and fill, ditch cross sections,
soil erosion, seed and mulch, and other items related to the road
construction.
E. Gravel placement can begin after subgrade has been proof rolled and is
approved by the inspector.
F. Full-time inspection will be performed on continuous gravel operations.
If placing of gravel is intermittent from day to day, spot inspection may
be done and test holes dug every 100 feet to check depth of gravel.
G. Load tickets will be collected by the inspector and/or contractor for all
loads of gravel placed. The gravel supplier shall submit a letter
certifying the material conforms with the plan specifications. The
material will also be sampled in the field and submitted to a testing
laboratory for gradation analysis.
H. For final acceptance, a letter of certification shall be submitted by a
registered professional engineer stating that the improvements have
been completed in substantial conformance with the approved plans.
Two sets of record drawings shall be submitted with the engineer's
certification.
I. Full-time inspection will be performed on storm sewer construction.
A. Requirements for underground wiring. The applicant shall make
arrangements for all lines for telephone, electric, television and other
similar services distributed by wire or cable to be placed underground
entirely throughout a private road land division area.
B. Sewage disposal. All sanitary systems shall meet minimum County
Health Division requirements or better. Unless sewered, all parcels
must be approved by the County Health Department for on-site septic
systems.
C. Water supply. All water supply systems shall meet minimum County
Health Division requirements or better. All divided parcels shall be
served by a central water system for domestic use and fire protection. If
it is demonstrated to the Township Board by detailed estimates and
calculations prepared by a registered engineer that compliance with
this provision would not be economically feasible, and would result in a
§ 250-60 OAKLAND CODE § 250-61
1:218
§ 250-62. Final approval by Township Board.
taking of all use of the property proposed to be divided, and further
demonstrated that there is no feasible alternative use of the property
which would be economically feasible, the Township Board may fashion
appropriate relief found to be the minimum required in order to allow
use of the property which is economically feasible.
D. Storm drainage system.
(1) Storm drainage systems shall be installed based upon plans
approved by the Township Engineer, designed to achieve a system
of long-term drainage control and/or disposition in order to achieve
standards of applicable Township ordinances and to insure against
erosion and unreasonable on-site and off-site negative impacts of
drainage pattern modification, taking into consideration both
qualitative and quantitative impacts.
(2) Adequate and safe disposal of all rear yard storm drainage shall be
provided in accordance with details and specifications prescribed
by the Township Engineer.
(3) The private road land division shall be graded in such a manner as
to control soil erosion and sedimentation, pursuant to the
standards prescribed for soil erosion and sedimentation control,
Part 91 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCLA § 324.9101 et seq.).
A. In order to request placement on the Township Board agenda for final
approval, the applicant shall obtain and/or complete the following:
(1) Final inspection and approval of private road by the Township
Engineer.
(2) Installation of street sign and traffic control devices.
(3) Installation of underground utilities.
B. The following information shall be submitted to the Township Clerk at
least 14 days prior to the Board meeting.
(1) Eight copies of recorded land survey and legal descriptions
showing easements for underground electrical and communication
service lines, drainage, sanitary sewer, open space, pathways,
scenic areas, private road and dedication of public road right-ofway.
(2) Two copies of recorded road maintenance agreement.
(3) Two copies of recorded deed restrictions and easements.
C. If there is compliance with this and other applicable Township
ordinances, the Township Board may give final approval to the private
road land division. Upon approval, the Township Clerk shall submit a
§ 250-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-62
1:219
§ 250-63. Permits not to be issued.
No building or occupancy permits shall be issued by the Building
Department for the use of any parcel of land which has resulted from a
division or partition without the approvals required by this Part 2.
§ 250-64. Fees.
Fees to be charged pursuant to this Part 2 shall be as set, or from time to
time amended, by a resolution of the Township Board.
§ 250-65. Variances.
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the power to authorize upon
application in specific cases, a variance from the terms of this Part 2
contained in § 250-54, regarding design standards for private road land
division. The consideration by the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be based
upon the standards for consideration of a variance set forth in the Township
Zoning Ordinance.
§ 250-66. Violations and penalties.46
Any person, firm or corporation or anyone acting on behalf of said persons,
person, firm or corporation, violating any of the provisions of this Part 2
shall, upon a determination of responsibility thereof, be subject to a civil
fine as set forth in Chapter 1, Article I, Definitions; General Penalty, of
the Code of the Charter Township of Oakland. In addition to ordering a
person determined to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction to pay
a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, a Judge or Magistrate shall be
authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or
enjoin violation of this Part 2. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist
shall constitute a separate violation.
copy of the recorded survey to the County Equalization Department to
acquire Sidwell numbers for the new parcels. A copy of the plan shall
also be submitted to the County Road Commission and appropriate Fire
Departments.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 250-62 OAKLAND CODE § 250-66
1:220
Part 3
[Adopted 12-12-199L7aBndy ODrivdi.s Nioon. R78eg(uClha.t i1o2n,s Art. II, Of The 2007
Code Of Ordinances)]
ARTICLE IX
General Provisions
§ 250-67. Purpose; intent; findings.
A. It is the purpose of this Part 3 to carry out the provisions of the Land
Division Act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCLA § 560.101 et seq.), by
providing regulations governing the division of land, and by providing
regulations governing the use of parcels and tracts created by land
division.
B. It is the further purpose of this Part 3 to provide regulations designed to
minimize confusion among purchasers and potential purchasers of
parcels and tracts of land created by the process of division, and to
promote the orderly development of the Township.
C. It is the intent of this Part 3 to recognize that the Land Division Act, as
effective upon adoption of this Part 3:
(1) Authorizes the creation of parcels and tracts of record that may not
be used as building sites or independent sites for residential use
and/or other uses.
(2) Authorizes the creation of parcels and tracts of record that are
landlocked, and the creation of parcels and tracts which do not
have adequate vehicular access as the Township has, as a matter of
policy, consistently required in order to ensure access by police,
fire and other emergency vehicles.
(3) Provides incentive for the creation of new parcels intended to be
building sites having driveways entering directly upon heavily
traveled thoroughfares, rather than promoting new building sites
which do not create new driveways onto thoroughfares, as
implicitly found to be preferable under MCLA § 560.108(3)(a).
(4) Requires a municipality to review and approve divisions based
upon applications which do not require more than approximate
dimensions of parcels, and thus precludes meaningful
determinations on the compliance of proposed parcels with
applicable law and ordinance.
(5) Does not permit a municipality to specify conditions applicable to a
division of land which may be needed in order to protect the longand
short-term interest of the public health, safety and general
welfare, including, without limitation, conditions designed for the
preservation of important natural resources; the avoidance of
drainage, erosion, and other problems resulting therefrom;
assurance that the establishment of divisions does not create other
§ 250-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-67
1:221
§ 250-68. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the meanings ascribed in this section, and
terms not expressly mentioned shall have meanings as provided by
dictionary and common usage, taking into consideration the context in
which they appear and the rules applicable to the interpretation of
legislation:
ACCESSIBLE — In reference to a parcel, that the parcel meets one or both
of the following requirements:
dangers or health and safety hazards due to steeply sloping
topography; avoidance of parcels without adequate water and
sanitary sewage disposal, and the like; assurance that there will
be adequate distances between improvements on parcels and
adjoining rights-of-way, adjoining buildings and other adjoining
uses; and, the assurance that consumers in the market place are
not financially harmed in connection with the purchase of parcels
which may not be usable.
(6) Appears to promote the preservation of open space and farmland,
however, such appearance is illusory in actual practice, thus
creating confusion and unfounded expectations.
D. Thus, it is found that there are provisions and authorizations in the
Land Division Act with regard to the creation of divisions that may
result in confusion and otherwise permit actions or results the
Township Board believes should be minimized in the interest of the
public health, safety and general welfare. Some of the potentially
adverse actions and results have been identified in correspondence of
Governor John Engler to the Michigan Legislature.
E. It is the further intent of this Part 3 to recognize the relative
advantageous procedures contained in laws and ordinances applicable
to plats and condominiums, which contemplate more thorough review,
the creation of more reliable and usable end-products for use by
consumers, and which do not have such potential for the creation of
confusion and dispute. Specifically, it is the intent of this Part 3 to
promote the creation of new parcels of land by way of the creation of
subdivisions and condominiums, which the Township Board finds and
determines to be in the best interest of the present and future citizens
and property owners in the Township, and in the best interest of clear,
understandable and orderly development and use of land.
F. It is found by the Township Board that minimizing the creation of new
parcels of property prior to the employment of subdivision and
condominium regulations, while concurrently recognizing that there
are circumstances in which properties simply are not well adapted to
subdivision or condominium application, will serve to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare.
§ 250-67 OAKLAND CODE § 250-68
1:222
APPLICANT — The person having the fee interest in the property which is
the subject matter of the application under this Part 3, or the authorized
representative of such person.
BUILDING SITE — A parcel with existing structures proposed for use, and/
or a parcel on which the improvement of new structures is proposed.
CHARACTER — The combination of traits which, when considered together,
distinguish specified land and/or development from other specified land
and/or development. In assessing character, the following may be
considered, along with any other expressly identified factors:
Has an area where a driveway provides vehicular access to an existing
road or street and meets all applicable location standards of the State
Transportation Department or County Road Commission under Public
Act No. 200 of 1969 (MCLA § 247.321 et seq.) and of the Township,
or has an area where a driveway can provide vehicular access to an
existing road or street and meet all such applicable location standards.
A.
Is served by an existing easement that provides vehicular access to an
existing road or street and that meets all applicable location standards
of the State Transportation Department or County Road Commission
under Public Act No. 200 of 1969 (MCLA § 247.321 et seq.) and of the
Township, or can be served by a proposed easement that will provide
vehicular access to an existing road or street and that will meet all such
applicable location standards.
B.
A. Current zoning and land usage.
B. Size of parcel.
Percentage of a lot covered by structures and other impervious
improvements.
C.
D. Type of structure.
E. Type, extent, location and use of natural landscape.
F. Topography and soil.
Traffic flow and the relationship of traffic to pedestrian and vehicular
thoroughfares.
G.
H. Density of land uses.
I. Intensity of uses.
J. Type and location of utilities and other infrastructure improvement.
K. Police/fire protection.
L. Natural areas.
M. Natural features.
§ 250-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-68
1:223
DIVIDE or DIVISION — The partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract
of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors,
administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose
of sale or lease of more than one year, or of building development that
results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent,
and that satisfies the requirements of this Part 3 and Sections 108 and
109 of the Act (MCLA §§ 560.108, 560.109). Division does not include a
property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property
taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting
parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to
the requirements of this Act or the requirements of this Part 3.
EXEMPT SPLIT — The partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land
by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators,
legal representatives, successors or assigns that does not result in one or
more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent. For a property transfer
between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel
is added to an adjacent parcel, any resulting parcel shall not be considered
a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the Act
and the requirements of this Part 3.
FORTY ACRES — Includes either 40 acres, a quarter-quarter section
containing not less than 30 acres, or a government lot containing not less
than 30 acres.
LAND DIVISION ACT or ACT — Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCLA
§ 560.101 et seq.).
LOT — A measured portion of a parcel or tract of land, which is described
and fixed in a recorded plat.
NATURAL FEATURE SETBACK — A distance from a natural feature
designed to achieve independent benefits, and concurrently, benefits
relating to the adjacent natural feature, all as defined and required under
the Zoning Ordinance.
NEIGHBORHOOD — Those parcels or subdivision plats located in whole or
in part within 1,320 feet of the parcel in question, found by the Township
official or body conducting the review to relate to the creation, development
or use of the parcel in question.
PARCEL — A continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as
provided in the Land Division Act.
PARCEL USE CERTIFICATE — A permit issued under Article XI of this
Part 3, following submission of an application and review by the Township,
determining that a parcel conforms with applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations for the purpose to which the parcel is proposed to be used,
subject to the issuance of building permits and other permits or certificates
required by governmental entities having jurisdiction.
PARENT PARCEL or PARENT TRACT — A parcel or tract, respectively,
lawfully in existence on March 31, 1997.
§ 250-68 OAKLAND CODE § 250-68
1:224
PLAT or SUBDIVISION — A map or chart, and accompanying provisions and
restrictions, created and recorded as provided in the Land Division Act, or
predecessor statutes.
PRIVATE ROAD — An area of land approved by the Township for vehicular
ingress and egress to and from land which does not abut a street, road
or highway over which a governmental entity has taken jurisdiction for
maintenance. "Private road" shall also mean an area of land established as
a means of vehicular ingress and egress by documentation recorded at the
Register of Deeds office on or before the effective date of the ordinance
from which this Part 3 is derived, and lawful for use for such purposes under
applicable law and ordinances.
TRACT — Two or more parcels that share a common property line and are
under the same ownership.
WATERCOURSE — Any waterway or other body of water having well
defined banks, including rivers, streams, creeks, and brooks, whether
continuously or intermittently flowing, and lakes and ponds.
WETLAND — An area defined as a "wetland" in MCLA § 324.30301.
WIDTH (PARCEL OR TRACT WIDTH) — The distance along a line between
the side boundaries of a parcel or tract, where such line is parallel to the
front boundary of the parcel or tract, and is measured in the location at
which such distance is the shortest.
§ 250-69. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-8-1999 by Ord. No.
81]
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part 3 shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and upon a determination of
responsibility shall be subject to a civil fine as set forth in Chapter 1,
Article I, Definitions; General Penalty, of the Code of the Charter
Township of Oakland. In addition to ordering a person determined to be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs,
damages and expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to
issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or enjoin
violation of this Part 3.47
B. Each day a violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
C. In addition, a civil action in the Circuit Court may be initiated seeking
relief deemed appropriate to the Township, including, without
limitation, a declaration that a division or use of land should not be
lawfully recognized or permitted to continue.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 250-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-69
1:225

ARTICLE X
Review Procedure
§ 250-70. Requirement for approval.
There shall be no division of land in the Township unless and until an
application for a division has been submitted, reviewed and approved in
accordance with this Part 3.
§ 250-71. Applications; fees.
Six copies of an application for a land division shall be submitted on the
form provided by the Township, and shall include all of the following:
A. Evidence that the application is submitted by or on behalf of the fee
owner of the property to be divided.
B. Adequate and accurate legal description of each resulting parcel to be
created by the division. For purposes of this Part 3, a legal description
shall be deemed adequate if it is sufficient for purposes of all
decisionmaking required under this section.
C. Each resulting parcel to be created by the division shall be included in a
tentative parcel map, which shall be a scale drawing of the entire
parent parcel of which the proposed resulting parcels are a part,
showing:
(1) The area of the parent parcel to be divided.
(2) The area of each resulting parcel.
(3) All parcel lines, with dimensions with regard to the parent parcel
and all resulting parcels, with separate designations for existing
resulting parcels and proposed resulting parcels.
(4) Public utility easements.
(5) Accessibility, as defined in this Part 3.
(6) A record of the history and specifications of any previous divisions
on the parent parcel.
(7) All other information and detail needed to ascertain compliance
with the standards specified in Subsection C(1) through (6) of this
section, and any other requirements of Section 109 of the Act
(MCLA § 560.109).
D. Copies of all recorded documents showing the lawful existence and date
of creation of the parent parcel and all existing divisions of the parent
parcel, and any other documentation required for decisionmaking
§ 250-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-71
1:227
§ 250-72. Standards applicable to review.
An application for a land division shall be reviewed by the Township based
upon the following standards:
under Section 108 of the Act,48 including, without limitation,
documentation regarding the area and dimensions of all parcels.
E. Written approval from the applicable road agency with regard to
conformance with location standards for all means of accessibility.
F. The application shall be accompanied by the application fee in the
amount required by resolution adopted by the Township Board.
A. Generally. The number of proposed divisions, together with any
previous divisions of the same parent parcel or parent tract, shall result
in a number of parcels not more than the sum permitted in Section 108
of the Act (MCLA § 560.108).
B. Area requirement. Each resulting parcel shall contain not less than the
following area, exclusive of road rights-of-way, 1/2 of all wetlands on the
parcel regulated by state law and/or Township ordinance (not including
areas permitted to be used by the issuance of all required permits),
areas designated as floodplain, areas below the high-water mark of
watercourses, and 1/2 of any other areas required for actual
construction purposes that, due to soils, would not support a foundation
for conventional construction for uses permitted within the zoning
district in which the property is situated. (Note that, in light of the fortyfive-
day time period for decisionmaking, and the restriction upon the
information that may be required in the application, action by the
Township in approving an application may not be relied upon with
regard to the presence or absence of site features.)
(1) On parent parcels 10 acres or less in area, the minimum resulting
parcel area shall be the larger of the following:
(a) One hundred fifty percent of the minimum parcel area required
in the schedule of regulations in the Zoning Ordinance;49
(b) The minimum parcel area required in order to achieve a parcel
area which is compatible with the parcel areas in the
surrounding area. For purposes of this provision, the term
"compatible with the parcel areas in the surrounding area"
shall mean an area which is as large or larger than 80% of the
area of the largest parcel which has any part thereof situated
within a distance of 1,320 feet of, and on the same right-of-way
(either side) as, the parent parcel proposed to be divided; or
48.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.108.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 250-71 OAKLAND CODE § 250-72
1:228
(c) In all events, the minimum resulting parcel area shall be not
less than one acre and not more than five acres.
(2) On parent parcels more than 10 acres in area, regulations shall
apply to provide the applicant with the option for determining
minimum resulting parcel area by applying a conventional squarefootage
rule or by utilizing a cluster development formula, in either
case taking into consideration the policy objective of promoting the
preservation of open space on large parcels of property while
concurrently recognizing the legitimate right of owners to make
reasonable use of their land. The applicant shall elect treatment
under Subsection B(2)(a) or (b) of this section.
(a) Conventional square-footage rule. The minimum area of each
resulting parcel shall be 2 1/2 times the area of resulting
parcels determined by applying the regulations of Subsection
B(2)(a) of this section, as if the parent parcel were 10 acres or
less, provided the minimum resulting parcel area shall not be
larger than five acres; or
(b) Cluster Formula. The minimum area of resulting parcels shall
be determined based upon the Cluster Formula set forth,
below, but only if 1/2 of the gross area of the parent parcel
shall be permanently reserved for open space purposes by an
appropriate means approved by the Township Attorney as
being lawfully binding. An area permanently reserved for open
space shall not be deemed to be a parcel for purposes of
determining the number of parcels that may be created from
the parent parcel. If the Cluster Formula is proposed for use by
the applicant; no part of any resulting parcel shall be situated
closer than 100 feet from an existing public road classified on
the Township or county right-of-way map as a major
thoroughfare, i.e., all resulting parcels shall be set back 100
feet from major thoroughfares; no new individual driveway
shall enter upon an existing public road from a resulting
parcel; and, all drawings and calculations needed for
determining resulting parcel area shall be included with the
application. The formula for determining minimum parcel area
under the cluster option is as follows: First, the parent parcel
shall be drawn with the required open space set aside; then the
regulations of Subsection B(2)(a) of this section shall be
applied to the area not set aside for open space as if the parent
parcel were 10 acres or less; the minimum parcel area so
determined shall be the minimum area for resultant parcels for
the division of the parent parcel.
C. Width requirement. Each resulting parcel shall have a width not less
than that corresponding to the larger of the following:
(1) The minimum parcel/lot width required under the Zoning
Ordinance for the district in which the property is situated;
§ 250-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-72
1:229
§ 250-73. Decision on application.
§ 250-74. Notice of decision.
(2) Three hundred fifty lineal feet if the resulting parcel is situated
with any part on an existing public road; or
(3) The minimum width required in order to achieve the required
depth-to-width ratio for resulting parcels.
D. Parcel depth. Each resulting parcel shall have a depth of not more than
four times the width of the resulting parcel.
E. Accessibility. Each resulting parcel shall be accessible, as such term is
defined in this Part 3, as confirmed by written approval of the road
agency having jurisdiction.
F. Easements. Each resulting parcel that is a development site shall have
adequate easements for public utilities from the resulting parcel to
existing public utility facilities. For purposes of this provision, an
easement shall be deemed to be adequate if it is in a location
reasonably adapted and lawful for underground installation, and the
instrument creating the easement is recorded as a condition to
finalization of the division.
A. A decision on the application shall be made by the Township Supervisor,
approving or disapproving the proposed division, within 45 days after
the filing of a complete application for the proposed division with the
Township Supervisor.
B. Upon receipt of an application, the Township Supervisor shall refer
copies to the Township Planner, the Township Engineer, the Township
Assessor and the Township Attorney for review and comment with
respect to the preparation of a notice of decision.
A. A decision approving an application shall include the following:
(1) Taking into consideration the forty-five-day time limitation for
decision, and further considering the limitation on the amount and
type of information the Township may require for the review of a
proposal for a division, the Township may not be able to make a full
and meaningful decision on whether the proposal conforms with all
laws, ordinances and regulations applicable for use of the property
for building and other purposes. Accordingly, with a decision
approving an application, the Township shall include, to the extent
ascertained, a statement of the aspects of the resulting parcels
which do not conform with applicable requirements for building
and use of the such parcels, and a further statement that the
approval does not represent that the Township has determined that
any of the resulting parcels meet the requirements of law,
ordinance or regulation for building or other use purposes, and that
further application and approval shall be required as a condition to
§ 250-72 OAKLAND CODE § 250-74
1:230
§ 250-75. Appeal of decision to Township Board.
An aggrieved party may appeal a disapproval of a land division application,
and may appeal an approval of a land division application if such approval
fails to permit an economically feasible use of the parent parcel. An appeal
shall be taken by filing an application within 21 calendar days from the date
of the notice of decision.
the issuance of a building permit and/or other required permits,
certificates, and the like.
(2) A statement that the Township and its officers, employees and
contractors shall not be liable if any or all of the resulting parcels
may not be used for building and other purposes. This statement
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the clarification that the
Township and its officers, employees and contractors shall not be
liable if a building permit is not issued for the resulting parcels if
needed facilities to serve the parcels, such as public or on-site
water or sanitary sewage disposal facilities are not available and/or
are not approved on the parcel.
(3) A statement that all outstanding and due special assessment
installments and taxes, including delinquent taxes, must be paid,
and all other processing requirements of MCLA § 211.25a shall be
met, as a condition to the issuance of new parcel identification
numbers.
B. A decision disapproving an application shall include a statement of all
the reasons for disapproval.
C. If the notice of decision approving an application specifies any
particular aspects of the resulting parcels which do not conform with
applicable requirements for building and use of the such parcels, or a
statement that the approval does not represent that the Township has
determined that any of the resulting parcels meet the requirements of
law, ordinance or regulation for building or other use purposes, the
notice of decision shall be recorded with the office of the Register of
Deeds relative to the parcels identified in the notice.
A. Application.
(1) An application for appeal shall include the name, address, and
phone number of the owner of the property, as well as the
applicant, a description of the property, a plan drawn to scale
detailing the specific use and improvements proposed by the
applicant, and a summary of the facts which support each of the
following conclusions:
(a) It is not economically feasible to use the parent parcel under
the ordinance and decision of the Township.
§ 250-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-75
1:231
(b) The applicant's suggested use would not alter the essential
character of the area.
(c) The applicant's problem has not been self-created.
(2) At the end of each statement [Subsection A(1)(a) through (c) of this
section], the applicant shall identify all persons who will appear at
the appeal hearing with respect to each of the facts, and,
separately, identify all persons who will appear at the hearing
relative to each respective conclusion (and if any person is to be
offered as an expert witness, include with the application a resume
which shows the education and experience of such person within
the particular area of expertise).
B. Pre-hearing conference.
(1) Prior to the scheduling of a hearing, the applicant shall contact the
Township Supervisor for the purpose of scheduling a pre-hearing
conference.
(2) The purposes of the pre-hearing conference shall be to:
(a) Review the procedure for the hearing and identify all persons
who will appear (directly or through affidavit) and the evidence
to be offered on behalf of the applicant.
(b) Attempt to secure a statement of agreed-upon facts to be used
to narrow the matters of dispute and shorten the hearing.
(c) Discuss the need, desirability, and the terms of providing a
verbatim record of the hearing.
(3) The Township Supervisor shall determine who should be present at
the pre-hearing conference based upon the application submitted,
and taking into consideration the discussion with the applicant or
the applicant's representative.
(4) The pre-hearing conference shall be scheduled and conducted on
an expeditious basis so as to avoid unreasonable delay to the
applicant. Sufficient time shall be taken, however, to achieve the
purposes of the pre-hearing conference, stated above.
C. Hearing procedure.
(1) The applicant shall have the burden of proof. In order to be entitled
to relief, the applicant must demonstrate each of the four factors
set forth in Subsection A(1)(a) through (c) of this section.
(2) Manner of presentation at the Township Board:
(a) The Township Board shall conduct a public hearing, utilizing
the procedures below.
§ 250-75 OAKLAND CODE § 250-75
1:232
(b) Township representatives shall present an overview of the
regulations involved. This may include an indication of the
objectives sought to be achieved in the ordinance, and any
planning, engineering, financial, environmental or other
considerations which are generally relevant on the property at
issue. The applicant may present witnesses, including the
applicant, or may submit affidavits, for the purpose of
attempting to prove facts or conclusions. The applicant shall be
provided with the opportunity to present all testimony and
evidence proposed to be presented at the pre-hearing
conference, either through witnesses or affidavits; however,
the Chairperson of the Township Board may restrict testimony
and evidence which would result in unreasonable duplication.
In addition, by motion made on its own or at the request of a
person at the hearing, the Township Board may require the
presence of any witness who has offered either testimony by
affidavit on a material question of fact or testimony of an
expert nature, with the view of permitting members of the
Township Board to ask questions of such witnesses.
(c) At the conclusion of the applicant's presentation, interested
persons attending the hearing shall be provided with the
opportunity to present testimony and evidence in the same
manner and subject to requiring the presence and questioning
of witnesses, as provided above for the applicant.
(d) When interested persons have completed their presentations,
at the same meeting and/or at an adjourned meeting date,
testimony and evidence may be presented on behalf of the
Township in the same manner, and subject to requiring the
presence and questioning of witnesses, as provided above for
the applicant. The purpose of such presentation shall be to
ensure that a full picture, including all relevant information, is
before the Township Board for consideration as it relates to the
specific application presented.
(e) If testimony or evidence has been offered by or on behalf of
interested persons and/or the Township, the applicant shall
have the opportunity to make a responsive presentation,
restricted to answering the points raised by interested persons
and Township representatives. The manner of presenting
witnesses, and requirement of their presence and questioning,
shall be the same as provided above for the applicant's
principal presentation.
(f) At the hearing, the Township Board may determine to establish
other rules of procedure, such as meeting hours on any given
day, procedure for presentations by interested persons and/or
on behalf of the Township, or other rules found to be necessary
or appropriate by the Township Board. When questions of
procedure arise during the hearing, the Chairperson of the
§ 250-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-75
1:233
Board may solicit the recommendation of the representatives
of both the applicant and the Township.
(g) If a hearing is not completed at a given meeting within the time
period allowed by the Township Board, the Township Board
shall adjourn the hearing to a date certain for continuation.
D. Decision of the Township Board.
(1) The Township Board may deem it appropriate in any given case to
provide an opportunity for anyone presenting testimony or
evidence to submit proposed findings of fact and conclusions.
(2) At the conclusion of the hearing, the Township Board may make its
decision at that meeting, or it may adjourn the hearing to a new
date for the purpose of reviewing the testimony and evidence, and
reviewing proposed findings and conclusions submitted by hearing
participants, in preparation for making its decision.
(3) If the Township Board determines to grant appellate relief under
this provision, it shall be the minimum relief required to allow
reasonable use of the property, while maintaining the essential
character of the area.
(4) If the Township Board adopts a motion to grant appellate relief
under this provision, such motion may be made as a tentative grant
of relief, subject to review and recommendation by the Planning
Commission, planning director/consultant, engineer or other
person or official with expertise, with a view of obtaining
recommendations that may be relevant and authorized by law, and
for the further purpose of ensuring that the grant of relief would
not violate applicable law. If a motion authorizing such a tentative
grant of relief is made, the Township Board, in the same motion,
should request the completion of all reviews by other boards or
persons by a specific date, so that relief may be expeditiously
finalized.
(5) If the Township Board adopts a motion to grant appellate relief
under this Part 3, the relief granted shall be in the form of a sitespecific
land division plan, subject to all specifications, terms and
conditions included on the plan and in the decision.
E. Effect of approval.
(1) Approval of appellate relief under this provision shall apply only to
the specific land division plan granted, and shall be subject to all
specifications, terms and conditions included on the plan and in the
decision granting the approval. A land division approval under this
section shall not be final until such time as the applicant records an
affidavit at the office of the Register of Deeds in connection with
the property, providing notice of the land division plan approved.
§ 250-75 OAKLAND CODE § 250-75
1:234
§ 250-76. Conditions governing grant of variance. [Amended
5-11-1999 by Ord. No. 78A]
Upon petition filed by or on behalf of the owner of property, the Township
Board shall be authorized, in its discretion, to grant a variance to the area
and width requirements specified in § 250-72, subject to and in accordance
with the following:
Such affidavit shall be in a form approved by the Township
Attorney.
(2) An approval of appellate relief under this provision shall be
effective for a period of one year, and shall thereafter be void unless
actual structural improvements have been commenced on the
property pursuant to building permit.
A. A variance may allow a resulting parcel with an area not less than 2.3
acres, and/or a width not less than 200 feet. The extent of the variance
shall be based upon conformity with the character of the neighborhood
in which the property is situated.
B. The land division shall result in not more than two resulting parcels,
i.e., shall not result in the creation of more than one new parcel.
C. A new curb cut on an existing public road shall not be created. If access
is to be provided to the newly created parcel by shared driveway, the
division shall not be finalized until:
(1) An easement has been created for the driveway;
(2) An agreement for shared responsibility and expense of
maintenance of the driveway has been established in a form, and
with contents approved by the Township Attorney, applicable to
present and future owners;
(3) These documents have been recorded with the County Register of
Deeds.
D. A deed restriction in the form approved by the Township Attorney shall
be established prohibiting any further divisions of either of the two
parcels resulting from the land division, and prohibiting the
establishment of a new curb cut onto the adjoining public road, with the
Township as a beneficiary of such restriction. Such restriction shall be
recorded with the County Register of Deeds.
E. A permit for an on-site septic tank and tile field shall be issued by the
County Health Department, or the parcels shall have public sanitary
sewer service available, for each of the two resulting parcels.
F. Underground electrical service shall be available and shall be utilized
for each of the two resulting parcels.
§ 250-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-76
1:235

ARTICLE XI
Determination of Use for Buildings and Other Purposes
§ 250-77. Parcel use certificate required for parcels created by
division.
It is recognized in the Land Division Act that approval of a division is not
a determination that the resulting parcels comply with other ordinances
or regulations [MCLA § 560.109(6), and also see MCLA §§ 560.109a and
560.109b]. Accordingly, no building permit or certificate of occupancy shall
be issued for, and no building or other use may be made of, any parcel
in the Township created by division unless and until an application has
been submitted and reviewed, and a parcel use certificate approved in
accordance with this Part 3, determining that such parcel conforms with all
applicable laws, ordinances and regulations for the purpose to which the
parcel is proposed to be used (subject to the issuance of building permits
and other permits or certificates required by governmental entities having
jurisdiction).
§ 250-78. Applications; fees.
An application for a parcel use certificate shall include all of the following,
and shall be submitted on the form provided by the Township:
A. Evidence that the application is submitted by or on behalf of the owner
of the property to be divided.
B. Adequate and accurate legal description of each parcel proposed for
use, meeting the requirements of Public Act No. 132 of 1970 (MCLA
§ 54.211 et seq.).
C. Each resulting parcel proposed for use shall be included on a scale
drawing, prepared by and with the seal of a licensed surveyor or
engineer, showing:
(1) Area of the parcel.
(2) Dimensions of the parcel.
(3) Location of existing buildings and structures.
(4) Location of all existing and proposed easements, including public
utility easements, drainage easements, sidewalk easements and all
other public and private easements.
(5) All setback lines required for building or other use, including yard
setbacks and natural feature setbacks.
(6) Location of all existing and proposed buildings.
(7) Location of all watercourses, wetlands and other natural features,
and all existing and proposed drainagecourses.
§ 250-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-78
1:237
§ 250-79. Standards applicable to review.
An application for a parcel use certificate shall be reviewed by the Township
Supervisor based upon the following standards:
(8) Evidence of the payment of all due and payable taxes and special
assessment installments on the parcel.
(9) Statement of the division rights on the parcel under the Land
Division Act, including whether there is a right to further divide the
parcel.
(10) Clarification of the adequacy of road frontage, and location of all
existing and proposed means of vehicular ingress and egress.
(11) Statement of the proposed use of the parcel.
(12) All other information and detail needed to ascertain compliance
with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations relevant to the
parcel use certificate.
(13) A stormwater management plan.
D. The application shall be accompanied by the application fee in the
amount required by resolution adopted by the Township Board.
A. Accuracy of the legal description and of the scale drawing submitted as
part of the application, and confirmation of parcel ownership.
B. Conformance with minimum parcel area, width, and depth-to-width
ratio, as established in this Part 3 and all other applicable ordinances.
C. Adequacy of easements for public utilities from the parcel to existing
public utility facilities. For purposes of this provision, an easement shall
be deemed to be adequate if it is in a location reasonably adapted and
lawful for underground installation, and the instrument creating the
easement is recorded with the office of the County Register of Deeds.
D. Adequacy of road frontage, as established in the Zoning Ordinance. A
parcel use certificate shall not be issued unless the parcel has frontage
on a public road, or on a private road on which parcels of record existed
on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this Part 3 is
derived. All newly established roads shall conform with all
requirements of the County Road Commission and all Township
ordinance regulations applicable to subdivision roads, including,
without limitation, maximum cul-de-sac length.
E. Conformance with all yard and other setback requirements.
F. Confirmation of the payment of all due and payable taxes and special
assessment installments on the parcel.
G. Confirmation that the parcel has adequate water supply and sanitary
sewage disposal available to service the parcel for its intended use, as
§ 250-78 OAKLAND CODE § 250-79
1:238
evidenced in approvals granted by governmental entities having
jurisdiction.
H. Conformance with all other laws, ordinances and regulations applicable
to the property and the proposed use of the property, including, without
limitation, all laws and ordinances for the preservation of natural
resources and natural features, and, generally, all regulations which
would impact upon whether the parcel is buildable, e.g., whether any
fact, land characteristic or feature would prohibit development and use
of the parcel without the necessity of discretionary approvals under,
and/or variances or deviations from applicable governmental
regulations, and without the necessity of private legal transactions or
proceedings.
I. The parcel area and width, and the proposed use and improvement of
the parcel, shall not result in a change in the character of the
neighborhood in which the parcel is situated. A determination on this
standard shall require an examination of the impact of the creation,
improvement and use of the proposed site in relation to the character
and circumstances of lots and parcels in the neighborhood.
J. Confirmation that there is an adequate stormwater management plan
consistent with standards applicable to subdivision development.
K. Confirmation that there are no culs-de-sac with a greater length than
permitted for subdivision development.
L. If the parcel use certificate is sought for a parcel with vehicular access
provided by an existing private road, the number of building sites shall
not exceed 1/2 the density that would be permitted for subdivision
development in the zoning district in which the property is situated (or
the density permitted by applying the other provisions of this Part 3,
whichever density is lower), and, moreover, the certificate shall not be
granted until a review is conducted for the purpose of determining
whether the additional vehicular and/or any other burden of the one or
more new building sites was intended and otherwise permitted on the
private road. Any determination made under this subsection shall be for
Township administration purposes, and shall not constitute a legal
determination binding upon other parties. For purposes of this
subsection, the following procedure shall apply:
(1) The recorded documentation pursuant to which the private road
was established shall be provided by the applicant and reviewed by
the Township. If the documentation discloses an express statement
of intent on whether the burden of the proposed new building site
is permissible on the private road, such statement of intent shall
govern, and no further review shall be required.
(2) If recorded documentation fails to disclose an express intent on
whether the burden of the proposed new building site is
permissible on the private road, the applicant shall be permitted to
present additional facts and circumstances to demonstrate that
§ 250-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-79
1:239
§ 250-80. Decision on the application.
there is no reasonable doubt that the burden of the proposed new
building site was intended to be permitted.
(3) If a decision to approve the division has not been made under
Subsection L(1) and (2) of this section, and the applicant desires to
further pursue the division, the applicant may elect to proceed
under Subsection L(4) and (5) of this section.
(4) The applicant may obtain the written consent of each and every
owner of property abutting the private road for use of the private
road by the newly created building site. Such consent shall be
given in writing in recordable form.
(5) Alternatively, the applicant may request the Township Board to
notice and conduct a public hearing on whether there is consent for
the use of the private road by the newly created building site. If the
applicant elects this alternative, then, at the applicant's sole
expense, the name and address of each owner of property abutting
the private road shall be determined; a notice specifying the nature
of the hearing and the date, time and place of the public hearing
shall be mailed to each of the owners abutting the private road; and
the public hearing shall be conducted. If objection is made at the
hearing, or before the hearing in the form of a signed writing
addressed to the Township, to the effect that the burden of the
proposed new building site was not intended, the Board shall find
that a court determination shall be required in order to resolve the
issue. If no objection is presented at the hearing, and all other
requirements are met, it shall be determined that the additional
use of the road may be made.
(6) If a decision to approve the additional use of the road has not been
made under Subsection L(1) through (5) of this section, the parcel
use certificate shall not be granted unless and until a court of
competent jurisdiction enters judgment ordering and adjudging
that the burden of the proposed new building site, is permissible on
the private road.
(7) All costs and expenses to be incurred by the Township in
connection with any aspect or review under this section shall be
paid by the applicant, in advance, including, without limitation, the
costs and expenses of legal review and research, title search, if
necessary, ascertaining names and addresses, sending notices and
conducting public hearings. For this purpose, an estimate of such
costs and expenses shall be made by the Township, and such
estimated amount shall be escrowed by the applicant. If needed,
additional sums shall be escrowed, as required. Any and all monies
not expended shall be returned to the applicant at the conclusion of
the decisionmaking process.
§ 250-79 OAKLAND CODE § 250-80
1:240
§ 250-81. Effect of decision.
A notice of the issuance of a parcel use certificate may be recorded with the
office of the Register of Deeds in order to clarify any earlier recorded notice
of decision with regard to a parcel division.
§ 250-82. Appeal.
A. Following receipt of a full and complete application, the Township
Supervisor shall conduct a review, and, within a reasonable time, shall
approve, approve with conditions or deny an application for a parcel
use certificate. If the application is denied, the reasons for denial shall
be stated.
B. As part of the review process, an application may be referred to the
various departments and consultants of the Township.
C. In addition, if there is one or more watercourses, wetlands, natural
features or slopes having a grade in excess of 20% on the parcel, the
Township Supervisor may refer the application to the Planning
Commission for recommendation.
A. Any person or entity aggrieved by a determination on a parcel use
certificate under this article may appeal to the Township Board, on the
condition that a written and signed request for appeal is filed with the
Township Clerk within 21 days of the decision on the application. A
request for appeal shall contain a statement of the basis on which the
person or entity feels aggrieved, and all grounds for appeal.
B. The Township Board shall review the decision on the application, and
may reverse, affirm or modify the decision in whole or in part based
upon the Board's interpretation of this Part 3 and/or the facts and
circumstances presented.
C. If a timely appeal is not filed, the action on the application shall be
deemed to be acceptable, and shall be final.
§ 250-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-82
1:241
Chapter 267
MINING OPERATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 68.
Floodplain and wetlands protection — See Ch.
210.
Land divisions and subdivisions — See Ch.
250.
Noise — See Ch. 274.
Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 364.
Tree protection, preservation and
removal — See Ch. 389.
§ 250-82 OAKLAND CODE § 250-82
1:242
ARTICLE I
Generally
§ 267-1. Intent.
In preparation and development of this chapter on the basis of the advice
of experts and upon independent investigation, it has been recognized that
there are activities and impacts which require regulation in view of the
noise, dirt, dust and temporary and permanent changes to the topography
and environment which are inherent in mineral mining operations. It is the
intent of the Township to regulate, inspect and monitor mining operations
in order to minimize the existence of dangerously steep slopes, shifting
earth, impairments or pollution of groundwater, water table, surface water,
and the watershed, and to protect the air, water and natural resources
and the public trust therein, and the health, safety and general welfare
of the residents of the Township. To meet these objectives, such mineral
mining operations shall be licensed and the fees required for licensure
shall be utilized to offset costs and expenses of monitoring, inspection, and
administration.
§ 267-2. Interpretation; conflict with other provisions.
§ 267-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning. Terms not specifically defined
in this section shall have the meanings customarily assigned to them.
MINING — A pit or excavation in the earth from which mineral substances
are taken by digging or by some other method of extraction together with
the land, buildings, and machinery belonging to it.
NEW OPERATION AREA — The area which has been or is in the process
of being stripped of overburden, the area being mined, the area used for
structures, improvements, of stockpiles and storage, and worked-out areas
which have not been reclaimed.
RECLAMATION — The establishment, recovery and reconstruction of the
land contained in a mining site, or part thereof, to a condition approved
A. All operations regulated by this chapter shall be conducted in a manner
so as to meet all standards and requirements hereunder, and, in
addition, all other applicable law, ordinances and regulations effective
in the Township, and the more restrictive provisions of this chapter and
such other law, ordinances and regulations shall govern in the event of
a conflict.
B. It is not the intention of this chapter to retroactively relieve compliance
with any formerly effective provisions of law, or ordinance, or consent
judgment relating to such operations.
§ 267-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-3
1:243
by the Township Board as part of a plan incorporated into a permit issued
hereunder.
VIBRATION PERCEPTION THRESHOLD — The minimum ground- or
structure-borne vibrational motion necessary to cause a reasonable and
normal person to be aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not
limited to, sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects.
§ 267-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-8-1999 by Ord. No.
81]
A. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be responsible
for a municipal civil infraction, and upon a determination of
responsibility shall be subject to a civil fine as set forth in Chapter 1,
Article I, Definitions; General Penalty, of the Code of the Charter
Township of Oakland. In addition to ordering a person determined to be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs,
damages and expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to
issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or enjoin
violation of the chapter.50
B. Each act of violation, and on each day any such violation shall occur,
shall constitute a separate offense.
C. The rights and remedies provided in this chapter are cumulative and in
addition to such other remedies provided in this chapter, and/or by law
and/or in equity. The Township shall not be prohibited from pursuing
any other lawful remedy it may have in order to bring about compliance
with this chapter.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 267-3 OAKLAND CODE § 267-4
1:244
ARTICLE II
Permits
§ 267-5. Permit required.
No person shall commence and/or continue to operate any mineral mining
operation in the Township except in accordance with a permit issued by the
Township Board pursuant to this chapter.
§ 267-6. Permit application procedure.
A. Application shall be made to the Township for a permit. The application
shall be submitted to the Township Clerk who shall apprise the
Township Board of the filing of the application, and shall refer the
application to the Planning Commission of the Township for
recommendation. Following action of the Planning Commission, the
matter shall be placed upon the agenda of the Township Board for final
action. In its deliberations on the application, the Township Board shall
be entitled to continue this further, shall consult with any and all
experts deemed appropriate within the discretion of the Township
Board. Upon completion of deliberations, the Township Board shall
either grant the permit, or deny the same and state the reasons for
denial.
B. The application submitted for a permit shall contain the following:
(1) Identifications:
(a) Names and addresses of all owners or parties of interest in the
proposed mining site, together with their legal or equitable
interest in the property.
(b) Name and address of applicant.
(c) Name and address of person, firm or corporation that will be
conducting the actual removal operation, and the name,
address and telephone number of the specific person
designated by the applicant for the purpose of receiving all
notice, correspondence and communications.
(d) Location, size and legal description of the proposed mining
operation area, as well as the total site and any and all
adjoining land owned by the applicant and/or any persons or
entities affiliated with applicant.
(e) Location and type of proposed processing plant.
(f) Amount of each and every kind of material or resource to be
removed.
(g) Proposed method of removal and extraction, processing, and/
or other procedures undertaken prior to transport of minerals
from the site.
§ 267-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-6
1:245
(h) Proposed vehicular access to and from the operation and the
generally anticipated haul route within the Township.
(i) Types and amounts of explosives proposed to be used, and the
area to be blasted, if specifically approved in the license.
(j) Estimated period of time to complete operations with number,
duration and description of each phase where appropriate.
(k) Amount and source of water to be utilized in processing, and
the anticipated means and location of treatment and disposal
of such water following use.
(l) Name and address of the banking or savings and loan entity
which is to issue the irrevocable letter of credit to be posted by
the applicant.
(m) Sworn statement that the applicant has never defaulted on any
bond posted to insure performance by the applicant in
connection with any gravel or mineral mining or any related
mining and/or construction activity, or if the applicant has
defaulted on any such bond, a brief description of the
circumstances surrounding the default, including the name of
the surety, date of default and any remedial action which was
taken.
(n) The name of the operator's carrier for public liability and
property damage insurance.
(o) The contemplated period of time following reclamation
required prior to the date upon which the property will be
usable for construction and improvement in accordance with
the terms of the Township Zoning Ordinance in the district in
which the property is situated. If the response hereto varies
with respect to two or more locations on the property, provide
the appropriate answer in relation to each varying portion of
the property. Plans for any phasing of reclamation shall be
indicated if such phasing is proposed.
(2) Vertical aerial photography.
(a) Vertical aerial photograph, enlarged to a scale of one inch
equals 200 feet, from original photograph flown at a negative
scale no smaller than one inch equals 660 feet, and certified as
having been flown not earlier than two months prior to the date
of application. The vertical photograph shall cover:
[1] All land anticipated to be mined in the application,
together with adjoining land owned by the applicant.
[2] All contiguous land which is or has been used by the owner
or leasehold applicant for mineral extraction and/or
§ 267-6 OAKLAND CODE § 267-6
1:246
processing and/or storage, and all contiguous in which the
applicant or any affiliate has a current interest.
[3] All lands within 1/2 mile of the proposed mining area.
[4] All private and public roads from which access to the
property may be immediately gained.
[5] Boundary of the entire planned mining area of courses and
distance.
[6] Site topography and natural features including location of
watercourses within the planned mining area.
[7] Means of vehicular access to the proposed operation.
(3) Sectional map. Sectional map at an appropriate scale to cover the
areas within one mile of the boundaries of the land included in the
permit application showing the existing classification of all land
appearing on the map as shown on the official Township Zoning
Map, roads, streets and all uses of land within the area of the
sectional map, and the names of these roads and streets.
(4) Topographic survey. Topographic survey taken from aerial
photographs of field surveys of the existing parcel drawn to a scale
of one inch equals 200 feet prepared by a registered civil engineer
or registered land surveyor licensed by the state within the
minimum four-foot contour intervals based upon USGS data. The
drawing shall also clearly show each and every area to be mined,
and each and every area to be utilized for stockpiling, processing,
plant location, and maintenance and storage areas.
(5) Geological and engineering survey. Geological and engineering
survey and data prepared by a geologist or civil engineer licensed
by the state, indicating:
(a) Quality and quantity of each type of mineral to be excavated.
(b) Level of water table throughout the planned mining area for
which a permit is sought.
(c) Opinion as to each and every effect on the water table and
private wells of property owners within the reasonable
anticipated area of impact during and subsequent to the
operation.
(d) Quality of surface water, groundwater and watershed
anticipated to be impacted during and subsequent to the
operation to the geographical extent reasonably expected to be
affected.
(e) Opinion whether the exposure of subterranean waters and/or
the impoundment of surface waters, where proposed, will
§ 267-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-6
1:247
establish a stable water level at the level or levels proposed as
part of the operation, and that the same will not interfere with
existing subterranean water or cause any harm or impairment
to the general public.
(f) Detailed plan for the disposition by controlled flow or
controlled drainage of any excess water into existing drains or
watercourses or drains or watercourses to be established, in
accordance with Chapter 210, Floodplain and Wetlands
Protection, and the stormwater management plan of the
Township.
(g) Detailed engineering and drainage plan prepared in
accordance with the County Water Resources Commission
specifications and application for a soil erosion permit.
(6) Plan of operation (overlay).
(a) A plan of operation shall be presented on a transparent overlay
at the same scale as the vertical aerial photograph [Subsection
B(2) of this section], and, when so applied, shall delineate the
following:
[1] Area to be actively excavated, and, if the same shall be in
phases, a designation of such phases.
[2] Area for settling ponds, crushing facilities, driers and
washing plan facilities.
[3] Area for treatment facilities and mineral storage and
stockpile.
[4] Area for overburdened storage.
[5] Area for production facilities for resource-related industry.
[6] Area for location of buildings and/or other improvements
be they permanent or temporary.
(b) To supplement the plan of operation overlay required in this
subsection, the following shall be submitted: description of
operation including all mobile and stationary machinery and
equipment utilized or to be utilized; method or methods of
treatment of water utilized in the operation prior to discharge
into the ground or into the surface water system; and
provisions for sanitary sewage facilities on the site.
(7) Reclamation plan.
(a) A plan for the reclamation for the site shall be submitted in
three parts: a reclamation plan as an overlay for the vertical
aerial photograph; a reclamation contour map; and a
description of reclamation methods and materials proposed for
§ 267-6 OAKLAND CODE § 267-6
1:248
renewal of topsoil and replanting, including a reclamation
schedule indicating the time sequence within which each area
mined will be reclaimed as mining operations progress.
Wherein any on-site development proposed, a specific site plan
shall be submitted as a part of the reclamation phasing plan.
The plan for reclamation shall be prepared on transparent
overlay at the same scale as the vertical aerial photograph,
illustrating, with the acreage for each item shown on the
overlay:
[1] Each phase of reclamation, reflecting the sequence of each
phase in relation to all others.
[2] Location and boundaries of all permanent water areas.
[3] Distance of all reclamation areas and water areas from
property boundary.
(b) A restoration contour map shall be prepared to the same base
as heretofore required, to indicate the grade and slopes to
which excavated areas shall be reclaimed, and the distance of
such reclaimed areas from the property boundaries. Such
grade and slope designations shall also include areas proposed
to be beneath the surface of permanent water areas.
(c) A description of the methods and materials proposed for
reclamation shall include topsoiling and the amount and type
of plantings.
(d) In no event shall the area being mined, and which is
unreclaimed, exceed the lesser of 75 acres and 40% of the
property being subject of the application.
(e) Notwithstanding Subsection B(10) of this section, the plan for
reclamation shall contain a date by which all reclamation shall
be completed.
(8) Environmental impact report. An environmental impact report,
detailing the effects of the proposed operation on all aspects of the
environment as outlined in the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, Public Act No. 451 of 1994, (MCLA
§ 324.101 et seq.), shall be prepared and submitted with the
application. All pollution control measures shall be detailed within
the environmental impact report.
(9) Application fee. The application shall be accompanied by an
administrative and processing fee, to be paid by the applicant in
the amount as currently established or hereafter adopted by
resolution of the Township Board from time to time.
(10) Review procedure. Review of the application shall proceed as
follows:
§ 267-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-6
1:249
§ 267-7. Permit content and conditions; fees.
(a) Upon receipt of an application under this chapter, the Clerk
shall forward copies of the same to the Township Planning
Commission, Township Planner, and Township Engineer.
(b) The Planning Commission shall review and study the
application, together with such supplemental information
deemed necessary and report its recommendation of approval
or denial to the Township Board including recommended
conditions or statement to be included in the permit if granted.
(c) The Township Planner and the Township Engineer shall review
the application and report their recommendations to the
Planning Commission. Such report shall include a
recommendation concerning whether or not an environmental
report, assessment or statement beyond those required herein
should be made.
(d) After considering the reports of the Planning Commission,
Township Planner, and Township Engineer, and such other
facts, opinions and reports as may be requested and available
by the Township Board, and after conducting a public hearing
on the application, the Township Board may issue a mining
permit, or, in the alternative, it may deny the permit and state
the reasons for denial.
A. The annual permit shall contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the holder of the permit, as well as the
name and address of the land, if different from that of the permit
holder. In addition, the permit shall also include the name, address
and phone number of the person designated as agent for all notice,
correspondence and communication.
(2) The legal description of the property to which the permit shall
apply.
(3) The one-year period for which the permit shall be valid, including
its expiration date.
(4) The allowable hours of operation.
(5) The number of feet from all the property lines and rights-of-way
within which no cuts or excavations have been made.
(6) The steepest horizontal to vertical grade on finished slopes where
excavations have been made.
(7) A statement essentially corresponding to the following: "This
permit may be suspended or revoked upon a hearing of the
Township Board, with notice by regular mail of said hearing to the
applicant, based upon failure to comply with one or more of the
§ 267-6 OAKLAND CODE § 267-7
1:250
requirements of the Oakland Township Ordinance to License and
Regulate Gravel and Other Mineral Mining, as amended, or other
applicable law, ordinance or regulation, and/or the terms and
conditions of this license or upon the ground that the use
constitutes a nuisance or danger to the public health, safety, and/or
welfare."
(8) A statement to be countersigned by the applicant corresponding
substantially to the following: "The undersigned has read this
permit and understands and agrees that, incorporated by reference
as a part of the terms and conditions hereof, are all the statements
and contents of the application for the permit as approved by the
Oakland Township Board, the terms and conditions of Code of
Ordinances, Charter Township of Oakland, Michigan, Chapter 267,
as amended, and of any other applicable law, ordinances or
regulations, and further that Oakland Township employees and
agents are permitted to come upon the premises at any reasonable
time for the purpose of inspection, monitoring and/or administering
this ordinance."
(9) Any additional reasonable condition deemed appropriate by the
Township Board.
(10) A statement of the condition that in no event shall the area being
mined and unreclaimed exceed the lesser of 75 acres or 40% of the
land constituting the subject of the permit.
(11) A statement and description of the machinery, equipment and
methods used in the operation.
B. The applicant shall provide the Township Board with a recordable
affidavit to be recorded with the county register of deeds, binding
applicant and all heirs, successors, assigns and transferees of the
applicant to the terms and conditions of the annual permit.
C. For the purpose of reimbursing the Township for inspections,
monitoring, administration and enforcement of this chapter with
respect to the licensee, and in view of the relative impossibility of
calculating and precisely anticipating amounts to be required for such
purpose, the licensee shall make monthly payments to the Township in
an amount as currently established or hereafter adopted by resolution
of the Township Board from time to time. At the end of each calendar
year, and as the date of termination in the final year of operations, an
entity performing audits in the regular course of its business shall
certify the amount of materials sold by the licensee during the previous
year or during such portion of the year until the date of termination, as
applicable. In the event the permittee objects to the above-described
method of fee determination, the following shall govern:
(1) Upon issuance of each annual permit, and prior to commencing
operation, the permittee shall make an initial deposit in an amount
as currently established or hereafter adopted by resolution of the
§ 267-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-7
1:251
Township Board from time to time. The Township Treasurer shall
hold such amount in an account for the permittee for each annual
permit issued.
(2) The fee requirement shall be determined on a monthly basis and
paid out of said account, and shall be equal to the aggregate of the
statements and invoices to the Township for all costs and expenses
incurred which are reasonably related to inspections, monitoring,
administration and enforcement of this chapter, including
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred, if any, plus an amount equal to
25% of the total of such invoices and statements (payable to offset
the fixed costs of the Township for employee salaries, equipment
and the like).
(3) The fee requirement shall be invoiced to the permittee on a
monthly basis, and shall be paid to the Township within 30 days.
Upon receipt, the payment shall be disbursed as follows: the
amount equal to the statements and invoices shall be credited to
the permittee's account, to reimburse the amounts paid out, as
aforementioned; the balance shall be credited to the general fund.
(4) The amount on account with the Township in connection with the
permittee shall be maintained at a minimum in the amount as
currently established or hereafter adopted by resolution of the
Township Board from time to time, the permittee shall be invoiced
immediately for the deficiency and such amount shall be paid
within 30 days.
D. A permittee may apply for renewal of the annual permit. In order to
promote uninterrupted operations, application shall be made to the
Township Clerk no less than 30 days and no more than 60 days prior to
the expiration of a then effective permit. The application for annual
renewal shall be made on the form provided by the Clerk. Upon receipt
of an application, the Clerk shall refer copies of same to the Township
Board, the Director of the Township Building Department, and to the
Township Engineer. The Director of the Building Department and the
Township Engineer shall forthwith report in writing to the Township
Board with respect to compliance by the applicant with all aspects of
this chapter during the period of the permit which is about to expire. If
there has been compliance in all respects with this chapter, a renewal of
the permit may be granted. In the event there has not been compliance,
the Township Board may, in its discretion either deny the renewal or
grant the renewal for a period determined to be appropriate by the
Township Board upon stated conditions. In all events, if it appears that
protection of the public health, safety and general welfare and/or
protection of the air, water and natural resources, and the public trust
therein, require denial of the permit renewal, the Township Board may
either deny renewal outright, or consider renewal upon conditions
which overcome the underlying cause for denial.
§ 267-7 OAKLAND CODE § 267-7
1:252
ARTICLE III
Performance Bond; Insurance
§ 267-8. General bond requirements.
§ 267-9. Cash deposit into interest-bearing account.
In the event that the applicant chooses to post cash in lieu of an irrevocable
letter of credit, as provided in § 267-8, such cash may be deposited in an
interest-bearing account in control of the Township at a bank or savings
and loan institution satisfactory to the Township, provided that all sums of
deposit shall be readily accessible to the Township in the event of need.
A. The mining operation shall not commence until such time as the
licensee has posted with the Township Clerk a performance bond in an
amount determined by the Township Board, following recommendation
of its experts, to be reasonably necessary to ensure reclamation. No
less than 25% of the total bond shall be in the form of cash or an
irrevocable letter of credit issued by a banking or savings and loan
institution licensed to do business in the state, making the Township the
beneficiary thereof. All of the rest and balance of the bond shall be a
corporate surety bond issued by a company licensed for such purposes
in the state. The conditions of such bonds shall be that, if the licensee
has satisfactorily reclaimed the property being the subject of the permit
in accordance with the approved reclamation plan, the performance
bond shall be returned to the licensee; otherwise, the Township shall
have a right to use the cash or proceeds of the irrevocable letter of
credit to the extent necessary to reclaim the property and to cover the
costs of enforcing and bringing about compliance with this chapter,
including reasonable attorney's fees, and the corporate surety bond
shall serve to guarantee payment for all such reclamation and
enforcement and compliance requirements, as aforementioned.
B. The cash or irrevocable letter of credit shall remain with the Township
until the parcel or parcels have been reclaimed, and all equipment,
machinery, materials, buildings and other operation related
improvements removed as required by this chapter and/or by the terms
of the permit.
C. In the establishment of the amount of the performance bond, the
Township Board shall take into account the size and scope of the
proposed operation, the current and projected costs of reclamation in
the event of default by the operator at such time as it is likely to be most
costly, and other such conditions and factors as might be relevant in
determining a sum reasonable in light of all the facts and
circumstances. The Township Board, in considering any application to
renew the permit, may in its discretion, increase or decrease the
amount of the performance bond, based upon increased costs, new
information, or partial reclamation.
§ 267-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-9
1:253
Such interest shall accrue for the benefit of the applicant, or be paid over to
the applicant.
§ 267-10. Insurance requirement.
Insurance shall be a precondition to commencement of operations, and
maintenance in full force and effect of insurance shall be a precondition
to the right to continue operations. The applicant shall provide binders
for personal injury and property damage insurance for the project to be
carried by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state
during all times which any reclamation is left to be done, and during
all times any machinery and/or equipment remains on the site, or any
structures, equipment or improvements to be removed remain on the site,
said insurance to contain a hold-harmless clause regarding liability of the
Township during any reclamation phase. This insurance shall be carried
in amounts as currently established or hereafter adopted by resolution of
the Township Board from time to time. This insurance shall cover injury or
damage occurring upon the site of the operations, as well as upon injuries
occurring upon adjoining property as the result of conditions or activities
conducted upon the subject property.
§ 267-9 OAKLAND CODE § 267-10
1:254
ARTICLE IV
Standards and Required Improvements
§ 267-11. Fencing.
All mining sites shall be fenced prior to the commencement of extractive
operations and prior to the placement on the site of machinery or buildings.
The fence shall completely surround the borders of the subject property,
provided, however, for good cause shown in relation to the protection of
public safety in view of the operations conducted, the Township Board
may, in its discretion, modify the precise location of fencing. The minimum
specifications for the fencing shall be as follows: a six-foot-high farm-type
fence of number-nine-gauge wire, number-twelve-gauge bottom wire,
number-fourteen-gauge stays and intermediate wires with spacing of six
inches vertically by 12 inches horizontally; all stays shall be of fourteengauge
wire; and support posts shall be spaced on sixteen-foot centers or
less.
§ 267-12. Signage.
The perimeter of any mining site shall be conspicuously and adequately
posted with signs sufficient to indicate the danger of trespassing in the area.
In no event shall such signs be more than 200 feet apart, and the same shall
be constructed of a rigid and sturdy material and shall be maintained and
replaced as needed.
§ 267-13. Visual screening.
All active excavations and mining operations shall be visually screened from
view from all adjacent public highways and residentially used parcels. Any
of the following methods shall be used for such screening, as determined
by the Township Board, following recommendation of the Planning
Commission:
A. Construction of a raised-earth berm along the boundary lines of the
premises where such lines abut a public highway, abut privately owned
property which is improved and occupied for residential purposes, and
at such places as are necessary to screen processing equipment from
the view of a person standing at ground level on any parcel of land
improved and occupied for residential purposes located adjacent to or
which fronts on any of the roads forming the boundaries of the mining
site. When constructed along public highways, the berm shall be of
sufficient height to screen processing equipment from view of the
general public using the highway. Where the berm is constructed
adjacent to residential property, or to screen nonadjacent residential
property, it shall be sufficient in length and height to screen that portion
of the property actually improved and occupied for residential
purposes. All berms constructed adjacent to residential property shall
be designed to prevent soil erosion, encroachment and excessive water
runoff. During the next planting season following the replacement of
§ 267-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-13
1:255
§ 267-14. Hours of operation.
The hours of operation by the permittee under this chapter shall be as
follows:
the berm, and as often as may be necessary thereafter to ensure the
existence of a vegetative ground cover, the licensee shall seed or plant
the berm in a manner suitable for the area, and for soil conditions, so as
to provide a visible ground cover substantially similar to the vegetative
cover previously on the property and/or on adjacent property. Where
the topography of the area acts as a natural screen, the Township Board
may waive the berm requirement. The berm shall have slopes not in
excess of one-foot vertical to three-feet horizontal; or
B. Planting of coniferous trees along the boundaries of the property with
sufficient rows and depth to permit effective screening, as determined
by the Township Board and following recommendation of the Planning
Commission.
A. Activities involving the sale of mineral and/or any other removal of
material and/or any other activity involving ingress and egress by large
vehicles and/or equipment, shall be carried on exclusively between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m.
B. Activities involving the mining and extracting of materials, processing
and stockpiling of minerals and/or other operation of motor-driven
vehicles and/or equipment shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m.
through 7:00 p.m.
C. Equipment maintenance and repair may be carried on at any time
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.; provided, however, that
emergency repairs may be made during other hours with the condition
that the Director of the Building Department be given notice of such
activities.
D. No activities on the property shall occur on Sunday with the exception
of emergency repair activity required to permit the commencement of
operations on the following Monday morning, however, this exception
shall not apply in the event that such activities shall involve the
operation of vehicles and equipment earlier that 7:00 a.m. and later
than 7:00 p.m.
E. The use of explosives of any kind shall only be permitted if authorized in
the permit issued under this chapter, and in addition shall only be
authorized upon 14 days' advance written notice to the Director of the
Building Department.
F. The limitation of operations on legal holidays shall be the same as the
limitations applicable to Sundays.
§ 267-13 OAKLAND CODE § 267-15
1:256
§ 267-15. Thoroughfare access; highway maintenance.
All parcels being mined under the provisions of this chapter shall have
direct access to a major thoroughfare as designated on the intercounty
right-of-way plan having a minimum right-of-way width of 120 feet, which
roadway shall be improved in accordance with the county road commission
requirements. In the event the operation of a mined area shall cause any
mined material, overburden and/or similar materials to be deposited upon
the public highway in the Township, it shall be the responsibility of the
operator to remove such materials within 12 hours of receipt of notice
from the Director of the Building Department. This requirement shall not
waive any other higher or more restrictive requirements by any other
governmental entity or agency.
§ 267-16. Maintenance of roads.
All roads within the mineral mining site shall be maintained by the operator
at all times in a dust-controlled condition by the use of hard-surface paving
material, or the application of other dust retardants. Moreover, the location
and maintenance of roads shall be such as to avoid harm and/or impairment
to any bodies of water, as well as to surface water and/or groundwater.
§ 267-17. Maintenance of equipment and facilities.
All equipment and facilities used in the production, processing or
transportation of minerals such as sand, gravel, or stone shall be
constructed, maintained and operated in such a manner as to eliminate,
insofar as practical, sounds, vibrations, or dust which interfere with the
reasonable use and enjoyment of surrounding property. As a minimum,
the operations shall conform to all performance standards set forth in
the Township Zoning Ordinance, as amended, or any succeeding Zoning
Ordinance, except as specifically modified herein. Where feasible, the
processing plant and accessory equipment shall be situated below the
average grade of the surrounding parcels so as to effectuate screening from
sight, sound, dust and vibration.
§ 267-18. Sound levels.
The intensity level of sounds shall not exceed the following decibel levels, as
measured from the nearest property line of the following types of adjacent
uses, where applicable: 55 decibels from residentially used property; 60
decibels from commercially used property; and 70 decibels from industrially
used property. Measurements shall be made under this section on an "A"
weighing scale.
§ 267-19. Lighting.
All lighting used to illuminate the property and operation and each and
every portion thereof, shall be directed away from surrounding property.
Shielding shall be required where lighting would otherwise be directed
toward a residential use and/or county road.
§ 267-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-20
1:257
§ 267-20. Protection of groundwater and watershed; drainage plans.
No aspect of the operation, including, without limitation, mining, storage
and/or transportation of minerals, shall result in a danger to the public
health or safety, and/or impairment and/or pollution of the groundwater,
surface water and/or watershed. Surface water shall at all times be directed
in such a manner so as not to interfere with the adjoining property owners;
provided, however, that maintenance of the direction and volume of the
natural flow of surface water shall not be deemed an interference. Proper
drainage shall be provided at all times to prevent the collection and
stagnation of water except in conformance with the reclamation plan as
approved as part of the permit. All stormwater and drainage plans shall be
prepared in accordance with the Township stormwater management plan
and subsequently reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer prior
to issuance of any permit.
§ 267-21. Ground vibration.
All machinery and other operations conducted on or at the mining site
which cause vibration shall be conducted so as to prevent transmission
of ground vibration. The ground vibration shall be measured from any
lot adjoining the site, and the vibrations shall not exceed the vibration
perception threshold of an individual standing on said lot line.
§ 267-22. Creation of slopes, pits or depressions.
Activities in connection with the mining operations shall not create slopes
and/or pit or depression in the earth closer than 160 feet from the center
of the nearest street, highway, alley or road, or 100 feet from the nearest
property line, provided, however, the Township Board may, as part of the
permit, prescribe greater distance requirements in order to ensure
sublateral support to surrounding property as reasonably required, or
where the Township Board reasonably finds the same to be necessary for
the protection of the public health, safety or welfare from a particular
danger.
§ 267-23. Limitation of machinery, equipment and methods.
Machinery, equipment and methods of operation on the mining site shall
be limited to those specified in the permit application, unless approval for
same is subsequently granted by the Township Board, in which case such
approval shall be made part of the permit.
§ 267-24. Floodplain and wetlands protection.
Any and all activities of the mining operation and incidental uses where
applicable shall be subject to the floodplain and wetlands protection
regulations set out in Chapter 210, Floodplain and Wetlands Protection,
in addition to all of the standards required in any other applicable law,
ordinance or regulation, including this chapter. Where applicable, the
permittee shall obtain a concurrent permit from the Township Board, as
§ 267-20 OAKLAND CODE § 267-24
1:258
required by the floodplain and wetlands protection regulations in Chapter
210, Floodplain and Wetlands Protection, prior to commencement of any
operations and shall also follow the standards and specifications of the
Township stormwater management plan.
§ 267-25. Distance requirements.
All machinery, equipment, processing plant, and related uses shall not be
closer than 160 feet from the center of the nearest street, highway, alley, or
road or 100 feet from the nearest property line regardless of the minimum
setbacks as prescribed in the Zoning Ordinance.
§ 267-26. Stockpiles of mineral and processed material.
All stockpiles of mineral and processed material shall not be located within
the setback area required in § 267-25. The height of said stockpiles shall
not exceed the applicable height standards for the zoning district in which
the stockpiles are located. Screening as required in § 267-13 may be located
within said setback area if so approved as a part of the permit by the
Township Board.
§ 267-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-26
1:259

ARTICLE V
Standards For Reclamation of Mined Areas
§ 267-27. Water quality.
In such cases as the reclamation plan provides for a permanent water area,
excavations shall be made to a water depth of at least 10 feet below the lowwater
mark, for at least 80% of the entire water area. Upon completion of
any phase of reclamation wherein a permanent water area is provided said
water area shall be tested for water quality for body contact by the County
Health Department prior to continuation of reclamation.
§ 267-28. Grading and backfilling.
The surface area of all land not to be permanently submerged under water
shall be graded and backfilled as necessary so as to reduce peaks and
depressions, and so as to produce a gently rolling surface that will minimize
erosion due to rainfall, and which will produce a natural appearance in
relation to the property as it existed prior to the commencement of mining
operations and in relation to the property in the area of the subject property.
§ 267-29. Grading of slopes to permanent water areas.
Slopes shall be graded to permanent water areas, if any and to the pit floor
in connection with an operation without permanent water areas, and shall
not be graded to the exterior areas of the property so as to create the
potential of flooding on adjoining properties and roads. In no event shall
a reclaimed slope have a grade in excess of a minimum ratio of one foot
vertical to four feet horizontal. Moreover, for permanent water areas, for
a distance of not less than 10 feet nor more than 50 feet, the submerged
slopes shall be graded from the water's edge at a grade not in excess of a
minimum ratio of one-foot vertical to seven-feet horizontal.
§ 267-30. Reclamation of soil and vegetation.
Vegetation shall be reclaimed by the use of sufficient soil and overburden,
and by appropriate seeding of perennial grasses and ground cover or
planting of shrubs or trees in all parts of the reclaimed mining area not
to be submerged under the water, or within 25 feet of the shoreline of a
permanent water area. Reclamation with appropriate turf, vegetation, soil,
overburden, shrubs and trees shall be implemented in a manner so as to
prevent washout and erosion. In the event of a disagreement between the
permittee and the Director of the Building Department, with respect to the
meaning and interpretation of this section, the Township Board shall make
a final determination.
§ 267-31. Prohibited fill materials.
In the event filling of the mined area is necessary in the course of
reclamation, the fill material shall not consist of and/or contain any organic
waste, hazardous waste, industrial waste, or sludges and sewage residues,
§ 267-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-31
1:261
whether or not compounded, mixed, combined, bound or contained within
any other material through any chemical or physical process or a
combination thereof, or in any other fashion, and, moreover, such fill
material shall not contain any other material which will, or is likely to,
impair or harm the air, water and natural resources, and public trust
therein, and/or the public health and safety. Any solid waste regulated by
Part 115 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCLA § 324.11501 et seq.) and any
hazardous waste regulated by Part 111 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCLA
§ 324.11101 et seq.) shall not be used for fill and/or reclamation material of
a mined area.
§ 267-32. Completion of reclamation.
Upon cessation of mining operations as provided for in the permit, or as
a result of any earlier termination, voluntary or involuntary, the permittee,
within the dates stated in the permit, or within 150 days after the
termination of the operation (not including days in the months of December
through March, inclusive) shall complete reclamation of the property.
Moreover, within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed the time stated
in the permit, or within seven months after termination, whichever period
is shorter, the permittee shall remove all buildings, structures, machinery,
equipment, vehicles and stockpiles, provided it shall not be necessary to
remove buildings, structures which may lawfully be used in the zoning
district in which the property may be situated. The Township Board may
permit materials which have been mined, processed and stockpiled during
the mining period to be sold during the reclamation period if and to the
extent that such activity does not interfere with reclamation, and not
thereafter, and such stockpiles shall in all events be removed within the
time provided for reclamation hereunder. In the event the Township is
required to complete reclamation, any remaining mined materials
overburden, topsoil, stockpiles or similar materials may be used in the
reclamation of the mining area.
§ 267-33. Minimum standards.
The standards set forth in this article shall be considered minimum
standards and stricter standards may be required by the Township Board, if
and to the extent such stricter standards are demonstrated to be necessary
to protect the environment and/or the public health, safety and/or welfare.
§ 267-31 OAKLAND CODE § 267-33
1:262
ARTICLE VI
Inspections
§ 267-34. Inspections; reports.
The Director of the Building Department or his designate or agent, shall be
responsible for inspections under this chapter, and shall at all reasonable
times have the right to peaceably enter upon the property for the purpose
of conducting inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and with
all other applicable law, ordinances and/or regulations the Township is
authorized to enforce. Any refusal to allow such inspections shall be cause
for summary proceedings to suspend and/or revoke the permit issued
pursuant hereto pending such inspection. In addition to discretionary
inspections, the Director shall make regular inspections during operations
and reclamation with such frequency as shall be necessary to ensure and
monitor compliance under all of the circumstances, and further, shall utilize
the services of such experts as the Township Board shall authorize for such
purpose. The Director shall make quarterly reports to the Township Board
concerning compliance with this chapter.
§ 267-35. Notice of noncompliance; corrections.
A. Should the Director or his designate and/or agent, discover any
noncompliance with terms and conditions of this chapter and/or the
permit issued hereunder and/or with any other applicable law,
ordinance or regulation, the Director shall prepare a notice of this fact
detailing the violations and shall send copies of same to the permittee
and to the Township Board. Within 15 days following such notice, the
permittee shall advise the Township in writing, whether or not it
concurs that a violation does exist, the permittee shall take steps to
remedy the violation. If the permittee does not agree, it shall, within the
same period of time, state the reasons for such lack of agreement.
B. The permittee shall correct any and all violations forthwith, and in all
events in a period not to exceed 60 days from the date of the violation
notice unless, due to circumstances beyond the permittee's control,
completion of the corrective measures are not possible within such
period, in which event the permittee shall have a reasonable additional
time within which to make the correction.
C. In the event of a dispute with respect to the existence of a violation, the
Township Board shall set a reasonable time for a hearing. After a review
of the reasons stated by the permittee for its position that no violation
exists, the Township may, in its discretion, include in the notice of
hearing, responsive allegations with respect to the claimed violation.
D. In the event the permittee has concurred that a violation exists, but has
not remedied the same in a timely manner as provided for herein, a
notice of violation shall be sent and a hearing thereon established
utilizing the same form and procedure as set forth in this section with
respect to the notice and hearing on a violation.
§ 267-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-35
1:263
E. At the Township Board meeting, the matter of the disputed violation, or
the failure to timely cure a violation shall be considered, which
consideration may be adjourned from time to time. Such consideration
shall include a hearing conducted at the meeting or meetings and shall
further include the opportunity of the permittee to appear in person or
by a duly authorized representative to present argument, witnesses and
other evidence on behalf and in the defense of the permittee, or in
addition to or in lieu thereof, to file a written presentation prior to the
initiation of the meeting. The permittee shall also be afforded the
opportunity to examine individuals who have made statements or
submitted other evidence supporting the existence of a violation or the
failure to timely cure a violation, provided such examination shall be
limited in scope to matters relating directly to the statements made and
evidence submitted. The Township Board shall make an effort to
ascertain whether the permittee made a reasonable effort to prevent
the occurrence of the violation, or to cure the same in a timely manner.
F. In the event the Township Board shall determine that a violation of this
chapter exists or that the permittee has failed to cure a violation in a
timely manner, the Township Board is authorized to take the following
action, taking into consideration whether the permittee made a
reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of a violation and/or cure
the same in a timely manner:
(1) If the violation constitutes the first uncured violation and/or the
first failure to cure a violation in a timely manner and the same has
not resulted in damage to person or property, the Board is
authorized to suspend the permit for a period of up to two weeks.
(2) If the violation constitutes the second uncured violation and/or the
second failure to cure a violation in a timely manner, or a
combination of these, and the same has not resulted in a damage to
person or property, the Township Board is authorized to suspend
the permit for up to one month.
(3) If the permittee has previously had two uncured violations and/or
two failures to cure a violation in a timely manner, or a combination
of these, and there is an additional uncured violation and/or failure
to cure a violation in a timely manner, and/or if any violation or
failure to cure a violation results in property damage, the Township
Board is authorized to suspend the license for a period of up to
three months.
(4) If the permittee is found to be in violation of this chapter on a sixth
occasion and/or if the permittee is found to have failed to cure a
violation in a timely manner for the sixth time, or any combination
of these, and/or if there are violations and/or failures to cure in
excess of six and/or if a violation has resulted in personal injury on
one or more individuals, the Township Board may suspend the
permit for a period of up to one year, or revoke the permit
permanently.
§ 267-35 OAKLAND CODE § 267-35
1:264
§ 267-36. Entry of determination.
Following the entry of a determination by the Township Board to suspend
or revoke the permit, the institution of a lawsuit in the Circuit Court, or
other court, shall not constitute a stay of the suspension or revocation, as
the case may be. Once such revocation occurs, the Director of the Building
Department shall take such steps necessary to cause reclamation of the site
in accordance with permittee reclamation plan.
§ 267-37. Effect of procedures and actions.
The procedures and remedial action authorized under this article shall be
in addition to, and not in lieu of, additional actions the Township may seek
pursuant to § 267-4.
G. In the event the Township Board shall determine, in its discretion, that
serious and irreparable harm and damage is likely to occur to person or
property, or that an impairment or pollution of the environment is likely
to occur, the Township Board may order an emergency summary
suspension of the permit which shall become effective upon service of
same upon the permittee. The Township Board shall thereafter, as soon
as is practical, conduct a hearing with the same notice and procedural
standards as set forth in this section for violations hearing, to
determine whether to revoke the suspension order; to continue the
suspension order for a fixed period of time; or to revoke the permit
permanently. The Township Board shall state reasons for its
determination. If the permittee wishes to expedite the hearing
procedure, the permittee may waive the advanced notice requirements
and proceed immediately to a hearing.
§ 267-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 267-37
1:265
Chapter 274
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
False alarms — See Ch. 109.
Outdoor assemblies — See Ch. 122.
Mining operations — See Ch. 267.
Offenses — See Ch. 285.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 299.
§ 274-1. Noises prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the Township to make, continue
or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise
which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose,
convenience, health, peace or safety of others, within the Township.
§ 274-2. Loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises enumerated.
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary
noises in violation of this chapter:
A. Vehicle horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street or
public place of the Township, except as a danger warning; the creation
by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or
harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time; the use of any horn, whistle, or other
device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling
device when traffic is for any reason held up. Authorized emergency
vehicles may use warning sounds.
B. Engine exhausts. The discharge into the open air within the Township of
the exhaust of any steam engine, gasoline engine, stationary internal
combustion engine, or other kind or type of engine, motor boat, or
motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will
effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
C. Defect in vehicle or load. The use within the Township of any wagon,
cart, automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle, so out of repair or
loaded in such manner or with material of such nature as to create loud
and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noises.
D. Loading, unloading; opening boxes. The creation within the Township of
loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading of any
vehicle, or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates,
containers, or the like, without exercising reasonable care to limit such
noise and to confine the same.
§ 267-37 OAKLAND CODE § 274-2
1:266
E. Construction, repairing of buildings. The creation (including
excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building within the
Township, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on
weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public
health and safety, and then only with a permit from the Township
Supervisor.
F. Drums. The use within the Township of any drum or other instrument or
device for the purpose of attracting attention, by the creation of noise,
to any place of business or entertainment or place of public assembly.
G. Piledrivers, hammers. The operation within the Township between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any piledriver, power shovel,
pneumatic hammer, derrick or hoist, or other appliance, the use of
which is attended by loud or unusual noises.
H. Blowers. The operation within the Township of any noise-creating
blower or power fan, the operation of which causes loud disturbing
noise, unless such blower or fan is muffled to deaden such noise.
I. Vehicle sound systems. A motor vehicle containing a radio, stereo, disc
player, speakers or other similar equipment that is emitting noise on a
public street, highway, road, publicly patrolled parking lot, driveway, or
other public place at or with a level, volume, intensity, frequency or
other attribute so that it is perceptible at a distance of 50 feet or more
either by hearing the noise by the human ear or by feeling the noise in
the form of vibrations associated therewith. This provision shall be
applicable to noise or sound transmitted by persons with such
equipment in or on a vehicle while operated or while parked. The
operator of the vehicle shall be presumed to be in control of the noise or
sound. This provision shall not be applicable to noise or sound
emanating from emergency vehicles, publicly owned vehicles, and
publicly sponsored or publicly permitted concerts, sporting events,
activities, events or gatherings.
J. Radios, phonographs, etc. The playing, using, operating or permitting
to be played, used or operated any radio, stereo, musical instrument,
phonograph, tape player, disc player, television, speaker, loudspeaker,
sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
from Sunday evening through Friday morning, and between 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. from Friday evening through Sunday morning and on
those evenings preceding holidays as established by ordinance, loud
enough to be clearly heard 50 feet from the boundary of the property on
which the sound is produced or reproduced. This provision shall not be
applicable to noise or sound emanating from publicly sponsored or
publicly permitted concerts, sporting events, activities, events or
gatherings.
K. Schools, courts, churches and hospitals. The creation within the
Township of any excessive noise in the vicinity of any school, institution
§ 274-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-2
1:267
§ 274-3. Violations and penalties.51
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and subject to a civil fine as set
forth in Chapter 1, Article I, Definitions; General Penalty, of the Code of the
Charter Township of Oakland. In addition to ordering a person determined
to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs,
damages and expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue
any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or enjoin violation of this
chapter. Each act of violation, and on each day which any such violation
shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 285
OFFENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcohol beverages — See Ch. 115.
Drug paraphernalia — See Ch. 177.
Hunting; firearms — See Ch. 235.
Noise — See Ch. 274.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 299.
of learning, church, court or hospital, while the same is in use, which
unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which
disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided
conspicuous signs are displayed at or near such buildings indicating
that the same is a school, hospital, court or church.
L. Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying within the Township of
peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of
the neighborhood.
M. Yelling, shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the
public streets of the Township, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the peace,
quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling,
hotel or other type of residence or of persons in the vicinity, within the
limits of this Township.
N. Animals, birds. The keeping of any animal or bird enclosed or tied up in
any yard, enclosure, stable, or other place within the Township which,
by frequently repeated barking, howling, crying, singing or other sound
causes frequent or long continued noise so as to annoy or disturb the
peace, quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any
dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of persons in the vicinity,
within the limits of the Township.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 274-2 OAKLAND CODE § 274-3
1:268
Part 1
Offenses Affecting Government Functions
ARTICLE I
Interference With Police
[Adopted 1-28-1997 by Ord. No. 76 (Ch. 16, Art. II, of the 2007 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 285-1. Interference with police authority.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any police officer, any
member of the Police Department, or any person duly empowered with
police authority or any other Township officer or employee while in the
discharge or apparent discharge of his duty, or in any way interfere with or
hinder him in the discharge of official duty.
§ 285-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-1
1:269

Part 2
Offenses Against Persons
ARTICLE II
Assault; Harassment
[Adopted 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 87 (Ch. 16, Art. III, of the 2007
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 285-2. Assault and battery.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault, or an assault and
battery on any person.
§ 285-3. Assault and battery within household; arrest without
warrant.
A peace officer may arrest an individual for violating § 285-2, regardless
of whether the peace officer has a warrant or whether the violation was
committed in his presence, if the peace officer has reasonable cause to
believe both of the following:
§ 285-4. Harassment.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
§ 285-5. Malicious use of telecommunications services.
A. That the violation occurred or is occurring.
B. The individual has had a child in common with the victim, resides or has
resided in the same household as the victim, has or has had a dating
relationship with the victim, or is a spouse or former spouse of the
victim. As used in this subsection, the term "dating relationship" means
frequent, intimate associations primarily characterized by the
expectation of affectional involvement. This term does not include a
casual relationship or an ordinary fraternization between two
individuals in a business or social context.
A. Follow another person in or about a public place; or
B. Engage in a course of conduct or repeatedly commit acts that alarm or
annoy another person and that serve no legitimate purpose.
A. A person is guilty of a misdemeanor who maliciously uses any service
provided by a telecommunications service provider with intent to
terrorize, frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, molest, or annoy
another person, or to disturb the peace and quiet of another person by
any of the following:
§ 285-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-5
1:271
§ 285-6. Window peeping.
It shall be unlawful for any person to look, or peer into, or be found loitering
around or within view of, any window not on his own property, with the
intent of looking through such window in such a manner as would be likely
to interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy without
the occupant's express or implied consent.
(1) Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property in
the course of a conversation or message through the use of a
telecommunications service or device.
(2) Falsely and deliberately reporting by message through the use of a
telecommunications service or device that a person has been
injured, has suddenly taken ill, has suffered death, or has been the
victim of a crime or an accident.
(3) Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between
a telecommunications device and another telecommunications
device or between a telecommunications device and other
equipment provided for the transmission of messages through the
use of a telecommunications service or device.
(4) Using vulgar, indecent, obscene, or offensive language or
suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a
conversation or message through the use of a telecommunications
service or device.
(5) Repeatedly initiating a telephone call and, without speaking,
deliberately hanging up or breaking the telephone connection as or
after the telephone call is answered.
(6) Making an unsolicited commercial telephone call that is received
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. For the purpose of
this subsection, the term "an unsolicited commercial telephone
call" means a call made by a person or recording device, on behalf
of a person, corporation, or other entity, soliciting business or
contributions.
(7) Deliberately engaging or causing to engage the use of a
telecommunications service or device of another person in a
repetitive manner that causes interruption in telecommunications
service or prevents the person from utilizing his
telecommunications service or device.
B. As used in this section, the terms "telecommunications,"
"telecommunications service," and "telecommunications device" mean
those terms as defined in MCLA § 750.540c.
§ 285-5 OAKLAND CODE § 285-6
1:272
Part 3
Offenses Against Property
ARTICLE III
Theft
[Adopted 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 87 (Ch. 16, Art. IV, Div. 2, of the
2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 285-7. Larceny of goods.
It shall be unlawful for any person to steal, or unlawfully take any money,
goods, chattels, or property of any other person.
§ 285-8. Larceny from vacant buildings.
It shall be unlawful for any person to steal or unlawfully remove or in
any manner damage any fixture, attachment, or other property belonging
to, connected with, or used in the construction of any vacant structure or
building, whether built or in the process of construction, or to break into
any vacant structure or building with the intention of unlawfully removing,
taking therefrom, or in any manner damaging any fixture, attachment, or
other property belonging to, connected with, or used in the construction
of such vacant structure or building, whether built or in the process of
construction.
§ 285-9. Breaking and entering coin box.52
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously and willfully, by and with
the aid and use of any key, instrument, device, or explosive, blow or attempt
to blow, or force or attempt to force an entrance into any coin box, or
other receptacle established and maintained for the convenience of the
public or any person, or for the person to extract or obtain or attempt to
extract or obtain therefrom any such money or thing of value so deposited
or contained therein.
§ 285-10. Fraudulent acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any fraudulent scheme,
device, or trick to obtain money or other valuables, or to aid or abet, in any
manner in a fraudulent scheme, device or trick, or to convert to one's own
use money or property in one's possession without lawful authority of the
owner.
§ 285-11. Bad checks.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who, with intent to defraud, shall
make or draw or utter or deliver within the Township any check, draft,
or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise,
52.Editor's Note: This section was originally adopted 1-28-1997 by Ord. No. 76.
§ 285-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-11
1:273
§ 285-12. Revoked or canceled financial transaction device.
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and with intent to defraud
use, for the purpose of obtaining goods, property, or services or anything
of value, a financial transaction device which has been stolen or which
has been revoked or canceled by the issuer thereof, as distinguished from
expired, and notice of such revocation or cancellation has been received by
such person through registered or certified mail or by personal service.
§ 285-13. Receiving or concealing stolen property.
§ 285-14. Fraud on restaurant, bar, tavern, hotel or inn.
upon any bank or other depository, knowing at the time of such making,
drawing, uttering, or delivering, that the maker, or drawer, has not
sufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository, for the
payment of such check, draft, or order, in full, upon its presentation.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person who, with the intent to defraud, shall
make, draw, utter, or deliver within the Township any check, draft, or
order for the payment of money to apply on account or otherwise, upon
any bank or other depository and who shall not have sufficient funds for
the payment for same when presentation for payment is made to the
drawee, except where such lack of funds is due to garnishment,
attachment, levy, or other lawful cause, and such fact was not known to
the person who made, drew, uttered, or delivered the instrument at the
time of so doing.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, receive, possess, conceal, or
aid in the concealment of stolen, embezzled, or converted money,
goods, or property knowing the money, goods, or property to be stolen,
embezzled, or converted.
B. A person who is a dealer in or collector of merchandise or personal
property, or the agent, employee, or representative of such a dealer or
collector, who fails to make reasonable inquiry of a person selling or
delivering stolen, embezzled, or converted property which has a
registration, serial, or other identifying number altered or obliterated
on an external surface of the property, shall be presumed to have
bought or received the property, knowing the property to be stolen,
embezzled, or converted. This presumption may be rebutted by proof.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who is a guest in any hotel, inn,
restaurant, bar or tavern to procure any food, entertainment, or
accommodation without paying therefor, except when credit is given, by
express agreement, with intent to defraud such establishment out of
the payment.
B. Obtaining such food, lodging, or accommodation by false pretense, or
refusal or neglect to pay on demand, or payment with check, draft, or
order upon a bank or other depository on which payment was refused,
§ 285-11 OAKLAND CODE § 285-14
1:274
§ 285-15. Retail fraud.53
A person who does any of the following in any retail and/or wholesale
establishment whose business is to offer property for sale, or in the
immediate vicinity of such an establishment, or within the area of the
sidewalk, parking lot, adjacent yard, or outdoor storage lot, and/or within
the area in which business is being conducted, shall be guilty of retail fraud:
or absconding without paying or offering to pay shall be prima facie
evidence of such intent to defraud.
A. While a store is open to the public, alters, transfers, removes, and
replaces, conceals, or otherwise misrepresents the price at which
property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or
to pay less than the price at which a product is offered for sale.
B. While a store is open to the public, steals property of the store that is
offered for sale.
C. With intent to defraud, obtains or attempts to obtain money or property
from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid
for and belongs to the store.
53.Editor's Note: This section was originally adopted 1-28-1997 by Ord. No. 74.
§ 285-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-15
1:275

ARTICLE IV
Trespass
[Adopted as indicated in section histories]
§ 285-16. Prowling. [Adopted 1-28-1997 by Ord. No. 75 (Ch. 16, Art.
IV, Div. 3, Sec. 16-141, of the 2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 285-17. Trespass upon land or premises of another. [Adopted
1-28-1997 by Ord. No. 69 (Ch. 16, Art. IV, Div. 3, Sec. 16-142, of the
2007 Code of Ordinances)]
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully enter upon the lands or
premises of another without lawful authority after having been forbidden
to do so by the owner or occupant, and it shall be unlawful for any person
being upon the land or premises of another who upon being notified to
depart therefrom by the owner or occupant or the agent or servant of either,
neglects or refuses to depart therefrom.
§ 285-18. Entering or remaining on parking lots, underage persons.
[Adopted 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 90 (Ch. 16, Art. IV, Div. 3, Sec.
16-143, of the 2007 Code of Ordinances)]
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years of age to
enter upon or remain within any parking lot or street parking facility unless
accompanied by a parent, guardian, or responsible adult who is using such
facility for its lawful purpose of vehicular parking.
§ 285-19. Entering or remaining on business parking lots. [Adopted
10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 90 (Ch. 16, Art. IV, Div. 3, Sec. 16-144, of
the 2007 Code of Ordinances)]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or prowl in a place within
the Township without a valid reason, at a time or in a manner such that
a reasonably prudent person would deem unusual for law-abiding
individuals and under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety
of persons or property in the area.
B. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether or not alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes
flight upon the appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify
himself, or endeavors to conceal himself or any object.
A. Definition. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUSINESS PARKING LOT — Any privately owned parking lot providing
free parking during business hours adjacent to any store, office
building, commercial building or industrial building for the convenience
of employees and customers or patrons.
§ 285-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-19
1:277
§ 285-20. Entering or remaining on private or posted property.
[Adopted 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 90 (Ch. 16, Art. IV, Div. 3, Sec.
16-145, of the 2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 285-21. Unauthorized entrance upon private parking area.
[Adopted 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 87 (Ch. 16, Art. IV, Div. 3, Sec.
16-146, of the 2007 Code of Ordinances)]
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon or loiter upon any private
parking area either in a vehicle or on foot, without the express or implied
permission of the owner, lessee, occupant, or agent.
§ 285-22. Trespass on private property; posting of notice;
enforcement. [Adopted 7-10-1973 by Ord. No. 29 (Ch. 16, Art. IV,
Div. 3, Sec. 16-147, of the 2007 Code of Ordinances)]
B. Trespassing after hours. No person shall enter or stay on any business
parking lot at anytime that staying or entering the lot is prohibited by
the owner, as shown by a sign at the parking lot. No person shall place
or leave any vehicle on any business parking lot at any such time.
A. Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or remain upon
any private or posted property without the written permission of the
owner, tenant, or occupant in the legal possession or control of the
property.
B. Posting of signs. Private or posted property includes, but is not limited
to, any private property within the Township regularly used for
commercial purposes, or for parking for any apartment houses on
which signs have been posted. The signs referred to in this subsection
shall read "Trespassing-Loitering forbidden by Township Ordinance,"
followed by a designation of specific hours during which such
trespassing and loitering are prohibited.
A. Before this section shall be effective in any parking area, suitable signs
must be first posted which would apprise the ordinarily observant
person of the restricted use of the parking area. For the purpose of this
section, implied permission shall be deemed granted to any person for
the use designated by such signs. Implied permission shall not be
deemed granted to any person found upon any private parking area
after business hours of the owner, lessee, occupant, or agent of the
parking area.
B. The posting of signs upon a parking area pursuant to this section shall
constitute authority by the owner, lessee, occupant, or agent of the
property for the Township or County Sheriff's Department to enforce
this section.
A. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
§ 285-19 OAKLAND CODE § 285-22
1:278
OWNER — The titleholder or contract titleholder of private property, or
the lessee, tenant, occupant, agent or trustee thereof.
TRESPASS or THE ACT OF TRESPASSING — The unauthorized use of
private property by persons or vehicles without the express or implied
consent, authorization or ratification of the owner.
VEHICLE — Any motor-driven vehicle of any type which utilizes sledtype
runners, skis, wheels, or an endless belt tread, or any combination
thereof, or other similar means of contact with the surface upon which
it is operated, required to be licensed by the state in order to be used
on the public highways.
B. Acts prohibited. No person shall:
(1) Trespass upon the private property of another by making any use
thereof whatsoever, unless the express or implied consent,
authorization or ratification therefor shall have been obtained from
the owner.
(2) Operate, park, leave, stop or stand a vehicle on private property of
another without the express or implied consent authorization or
ratification therefor from the owners.
C. Registration and notice.
(1) Required. To invoke the operation and enforcement of this section,
the owner must register the property by appropriate description on
forms provided by the Township Clerk to be filed with the Township
Clerk, who shall maintain a current roster thereof, and furnish
copies of same to the law enforcement agencies in and for the
Township.
(2) Registration fee. There shall be an annual registration fee paid to
the Township by the owner in such amount as shall be prescribed
by resolution of the Township board.
(3) Posting required. Any property registered as provided herein must
be posted with a notice by the owner in one or more places as to be
plainly visible to persons unfamiliar with such property for the
purpose of giving notice that trespassing is prohibited.
(4) Form of posted notice. The form of the posted notice required by
Subsection C(3) of this section shall be substantially as follows:
"This is private property for the use of __________ only. All others
using this property are trespassing and in violation of Oakland
Township, Code of Ordinances, § 285-22.
This private property has been registered under the provisions of
such section and violators will be prosecuted and unauthorized
vehicles towed away or ticketed therefor."
D. Enforcement, remedies and penalty.
§ 285-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-22
1:279
§ 285-23. Breaking and entering unlawful; exceptions. [Adopted
10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 87 (Ch. 16, Art. IV, Div. 3, Sec. 16-148, of
the 2007 Code of Ordinances)]
(1) Evidence of violation. In any enforcement proceeding for violation
of the provisions of this section, the license plate number displayed
on any vehicle shall be prima facie evidence that the owner thereof
is the person who has placed or used the vehicle on the private
property.
(2) Complaint to be signed. Any person observing a violation of this
section may sign a complaint for the enforcement thereof.
(3) Vehicle may be towed away. Any owner or law enforcement agency
of the Township may cause any vehicle that is violating the
provisions of this section to be towed away; or, any police officer
may issue a ticket therefor and leave it attached to such vehicle
requiring the appearance of the owner thereof in court at the time
and place designated therein to answer for the violation of this
section.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to break and enter, or enter without
breaking, any dwelling, house, tent, hotel, office, store, shop,
warehouse, barn, granary, factory, or other building, boat, ship, railroad
car, or structure used or kept for public or private use, or any private
apartment therein, or any cottage, clubhouse, boathouse, hunting or
fishing lodge, garage, or the outbuildings belonging thereto, or any
other structure, whether occupied or unoccupied, without first
obtaining permission to enter from the owner or occupant, agent, or
person having immediate control thereof.
B. This section shall not apply:
(1) To entering without breaking of any place which at the time of such
entry was open to the public, unless such entry has been expressly
denied.
(2) Where the breaking and entering or entering without breaking was
committed by a peace officer, Fire Department official or other
person authorized by law to break and enter or otherwise enter
without breaking provided the breaking and entering or entering
without breaking was committed in the lawful performance of their
duties as a peace officer, Fire Department official or other person
authorized by law to break or otherwise enter without breaking.
§ 285-22 OAKLAND CODE § 285-23
1:280
ARTICLE V
Destruction of Property
[Adopted 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 87 (Ch. 16, Art. IV, Div. 4, of the
2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 285-24. Malicious destruction of property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously destroy,
injure, or deface real or personal property of another, or the appurtenances
thereof.
§ 285-25. Damaging vehicle.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Intentionally, and without authority from the owner, start or cause to be
started the motor of any motor vehicle, or maliciously shift or change
the starting device or gears of a standing motor vehicle to a position
other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver of such motor
vehicle;
B. Intentionally cut, mark, scratch, or damage the chassis, running gear,
body, sides, top, covering, or upholstering of any motor vehicle, the
property of another or intentionally cut, smash, mark, destroy, or
damage such motor vehicle, or any of the appurtenances, or
attachments thereof, or any spare or extra parts thereon or attached,
without the permission of the owner; or
C. Intentionally release the brake upon any standing motor vehicle, with
intent to injure the machine and cause the same to be removed without
the consent of the owner; provided, that this section shall not apply in
case of moving or starting of motor vehicles by the police under
authority of local ordinance or by members of Fire Departments in case
of emergency in the vicinity of a fire.
§ 285-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-25
1:281

Part 4
Offenses Against Public Peace
ARTICLE VI
Disorderly Conduct in Public Places; Disturbing of Peace
[Adopted 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 87 (Ch. 16, Art. V, of the 2007
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 285-26. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC PLACE — A place to which the public or a substantial group
of persons has access, and shall include but is not limited to highways,
parks, transportation facilities, schools, places of amusement, parking areas
and playgrounds, and hallways and stairs, lobbies, and other portions of
apartment houses not constituting rooms or apartments designed for actual
residence.
§ 285-27. Breach of peace.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or assist in making any noise,
disturbance, trouble, or improper diversion, or any riot, by which the peace
and good order of the Township are disturbed.
§ 285-28. Permitting gathering of disorderly persons.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or suffer any place occupied or
controlled by him to be a resort for noisy, boisterous or disorderly persons.
§ 285-29. Fighting.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any disturbance, fight or
quarrel in a public place.
§ 285-30. Inciting disorder by speech.
It shall be unlawful for any person to utter or use language or make
gestures, or any combination thereof, toward any person which may be
intended to or likely to encourage, induce or incite altercations, breaches of
the peace or riotous behavior or conduct by another person.
§ 285-31. Disorderly intoxication.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be drunk or intoxicated or to be under
the influence of a drug or controlled substance as defined by state law, or
any combination thereof in a public place and either endanger directly the
safety of another person or of property, or act in a manner that causes a
public disturbance.
§ 285-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-32
1:283
§ 285-32. Loitering.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the Township to loiter, loaf,
wander, stand or remain idle either alone or in consort with others in a
public place in such manner so as to:
§ 285-33. Unlawful assembly.
It is unlawful and constitutes an unlawful assembly for a person within the
Township to assemble or act in concert with four or more persons for the
purpose of engaging in conduct constituting the crime of riot.
§ 285-34. Failure of disorderly persons to disperse.
It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to disperse if such
person participates with two or more other persons in a course of disorderly
conduct likely to cause harm or inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, and
intentionally refuses or fails to disperse when ordered to do so by a peace
officer or other public servant engaged in enforcing or executing the law.
§ 285-35. Barking dog; disturbing of peace.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any dog which by loud,
frequent or habitual barking, yelping, howling or other noise materially
disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or public, or causes
annoyance to persons in the neighborhood who are of reasonable and
ordinary sensibilities.
A. Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or any other
public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder
to impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic, or
pedestrians after having been told to move on by a police officer.
B. Commit in or upon any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or
any other public place or building any act or thing which is an
obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of
property or with any business lawfully conducted by anyone in or upon
or facing or fronting on any such public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building, all of which prevents the
free and uninterrupted ingress, egress, and regress, after having been
told to move on by a police officer.
C. Obstruct the entrance to any business establishment, without so doing
for some lawful purpose, or contrary to the expressed wish of the
owner, lessee, managing agent, or person in control or charge of the
building or premises.
§ 285-32 OAKLAND CODE § 285-35
1:284
Part 5
Offenses Against Public Morals
ARTICLE VII
Exposure and Obscene Conduct
[Adopted 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 87 (Ch. 16, Art. VI, Div. 1, Secs.
16-241 and 16-242, of the 2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 285-36. Indecent exposure.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the Township to knowingly make
any open or indecent exposure of his or her person or of the person of
another.
§ 285-37. Indecent or obscene conduct.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the Township to engage in any
indecent or obscene conduct in any public place.
§ 285-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-37
1:285

ARTICLE VIII
Possession and Use of Marijuana
[Adopted 1-28-1997 by Ord. No. 73 (Ch. 16, Art. VI, Div. 1, Sec.
16-243, of the 2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 285-38. Possession and use of marijuana restricted.
It is unlawful for any person to use or knowingly or intentionally possess
marijuana unless the substance was obtained directly from or pursuant to a
valid prescription or order of a practitioner while acting in the practitioner's
professional practice.
§ 285-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-38
1:287

ARTICLE IX
Sniffing Fumes
[Adopted 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 87 (Ch. 16, Art. VI, Div. 1, Sec.
16-244, of the 2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 285-39. Sniffing fumes; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally smell or inhale fumes into
his respiratory or circulatory system for the purpose of causing a condition
of intoxication, euphoria, excitement, exhilaration, stupefaction or a dulling
of the senses or nervous system. This shall not prohibit the inhalation of any
lawfully prescribed medication or any lawfully administered anesthesia for
medical or dental purposes.
§ 285-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-39
1:289

Part 6
Offenses Against Public Safety
ARTICLE X
Weapons
[Adopted 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 87 (Ch. 16, Art. VII, Div. 2, Secs.
16-321 through 16-325, of the 2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 285-40. Use of firearms by intoxicated persons prohibited.
[Amended 6-22-2010 by Ord. No. 87]
It shall be unlawful for any person under the influence of alcoholic liquor,
controlled substance or exhilarating or stupefying substance to use in any
manner or discharge any firearm within this Township.
§ 285-41. Pointing of firearms at other persons.
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, without malice, point or
aim any firearm at or toward any other person, or to discharge any firearm
while so aimed.
§ 285-42. Reckless handling or discharge. [Amended 6-22-2010 by
Ord. No. 87]
It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly or heedlessly or willfully
or wantonly use, handle or discharge any firearm without due caution and
circumspection for the rights, safety or property of others.
§ 285-43. Reckless endangerment; presumption.
It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly engage in conduct which
places or may place another person in danger of death or serious bodily
injury. Recklessness and danger shall be presumed where a person
knowingly points a firearm at or in the direction of another, whether or not
either person believes the firearm to be loaded.
§ 285-44. BB guns; possession by minor.
It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to use or possess
any gun designed and manufactured for propelling BBs not exceeding 0.177
caliber by means of spring, gas or air, outside the curtilage of his domicile
unless he is accompanied by a parent or guardian who is over 18 years of
age.
§ 285-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-44
1:291

Part 7
Offenses On School Grounds
ARTICLE XI
Conduct on School Grounds
[Adopted 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 87 (Ch. 16, Art. VIII, of the 2007
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 285-45. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PRINCIPAL — Any principal of any elementary or secondary school or
the chief administrative officer of any elementary or secondary school or
college.
SCHOOL — Any pre-elementary, elementary (grades K through 6),
secondary (grades 7 through 12) school, any college or combination thereof.
§ 285-46. Admission restrictions; loitering.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a regularly enrolled student
or parent or guardian thereof, or a school official, teacher, or other public
or private school employee to enter or trespass upon or loiter in or upon
any public, or private school building or school property in the Township for
any reason whatsoever unless such person has received written permission
from the principal or other person designated by the principal, to be in
or upon or to remain in or upon such public or private school building
or school property; provided, however, that such written permission need
not be secured by persons engaging in or attending a school authorized
activity or by persons using school playground or playground equipment
after school hours or, when school is not in session, unless such entry or
use shall have been otherwise prohibited by a rule or regulation of the
school board, school principal, or other person, board, or committee with
the authority to prohibit such use or entry.
§ 285-47. Disturbing of peace in schools.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously make or assist
in making any noise, disturbance, or improper diversion by which peace,
quietude, or good order of any public or private school is disturbed.
§ 285-48. Duty of person creating disturbance to leave premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether lawfully or unlawfully in or upon
any public or private school building or school property who is found to be
creating a disturbance in or upon any such school building or property to
fail or refuse to leave immediately when so directed by the principal or by
any other person designated by the principal.
§ 285-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-49
1:293
§ 285-49. Extortion.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use violence, threats of violence, or
other form of coercion force or attempt to force any public or private school
student or other person to give or to lend any money or other thing of value
to any person at any time.
§ 285-50. Destruction of school property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, destroy, or deface any public
or private school building or the grounds, outbuildings, fences, trees, or
other appurtenances or fixtures belonging thereto.
§ 285-49 OAKLAND CODE § 285-50
1:294
Part 8
Offenses Pertaining To Underage Persons
ARTICLE XII
Contributing to Delinquency of Minor
[Adopted 1-28-1997 by Ord. No. 68 (Ch. 16, Art. IX, Div. 1, Sec.
16-381, of the 2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 285-51. Contributing by adult to delinquency of minor.
No adult person, 17 years or older, shall, by any act or by any word,
encourage, contribute toward, cause or tend to cause any minor under the
age of 17 years to become neglected or delinquent so as to tend to come
under the jurisdiction of the Juvenile Court.
§ 285-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-51
1:295

ARTICLE XIII
Open House Parties
[Adopted 9-10-1985 by Ord. No. 48 (Ch. 16, Art. IX, Div. 1, Sec.
16-382, of the 2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 285-52. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CONTROL — Any form of regulation or dominion including a possessory
right.
MINOR — A person not legally permitted by reason of age to possess
alcoholic liquors pursuant to MCLA § 436.1703.
OPEN HOUSE PARTY — A social gathering of persons at a residence, other
than the owner of those with rights of possession or their immediate family
members.
RESIDENCE — A home, apartment, condominium or other dwelling unit and
includes the curtilage of such dwelling units.
§ 285-53. Failure to prevent possession or consumption of liquor or
controlled substances.
No person having control of any residence shall allow an open house party
to take place at said residence if any alcoholic liquor or controlled substance
is possessed or consumed at said residence by any minor where the person
knew or reasonably should have known that an alcoholic liquor or controlled
substance was in the possession of or being consumed by a minor at
said residence, and where the person failed to take reasonable steps to
prevent the possession or consumption of the alcoholic liquor or controlled
substance at said residence.
§ 285-54. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to legally protected religious
observances or legally protected educational activities.
§ 285-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-54
1:297

ARTICLE XIV
Curfew
[Adopted 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 93 (Ch. 16, Art. IX, Div. 2, of the
2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 285-55. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CURFEW HOURS —
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not
limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business operated for
profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of
amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN — A person or public or private agency with whom a minor has
been placed by court.
MINOR — Any person under 17 years of age.
PARENT — A person who is:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access.
REMAIN — To:
§ 285-56. Commission of offenses.
11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday
until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and
A.
B. 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday.
A. A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person; or
At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have
the care or custody of a minor.
B.
A. Linger or stay; or
Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the
owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
B.
A. A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the Township during curfew
hours.
B. A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any
§ 285-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-56
1:299
§ 285-57. Defenses.
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the
Township during curfew hours.
C. The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of
the establishment during curfew hours.
A. It is a defense to prosecution that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or any other
person 21 years or older authorized by a parent to the care-taker
for the minor;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent, guardian, or
caretaker without any detour or stop;
(3) In a vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Engaged in certain employment activity, or going to or from
employment, without any detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk that abuts the minor's or the next-door neighbor's
residence, if the neighbor has not complained to the police;
(7) In attendance at an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another
similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or
from, without any detour or stop, such an activity supervised by
adults;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights, including free exercise of
religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly.
B. It is a defense to prosecution that the owner, operator or employee of an
establishment promptly notified the Police Department that a minor
was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours
and refused to leave.
§ 285-56 OAKLAND CODE § 285-57
1:300
ARTICLE XV
Sale, Use and Possession of Alcoholic Beverages
[Adopted 1-28-1997 by Ord. No. 72 (Ch. 16, Art. IX, Div. 3, of the
2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 285-58. Alcohol sold or furnished to underage person.
Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold or furnished to a person unless the person
has attained 21 years of age. A person who knowingly sells or furnishes
alcoholic liquor to a person who is less than 21 years of age or who fails to
make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is less than 21 years of age,
is guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 285-59. Possessing or transporting alcoholic liquor in motor
vehicle.
A person less than 21 years of age shall not knowingly transport or possess,
in a motor vehicle, alcoholic liquor unless the person is employed by a
licensee under the Liquor Control Act,54 a common carrier designated by
the Liquor Control Commission, and is transporting or having the alcoholic
liquor in a motor vehicle under the person's control during regular working
hours and in the course of the person's employment. A person who violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 285-60. Purchase, consumption or possession by underage
persons; fraudulent identification. [Amended 7-9-2010 by Ord. No.
72-2009A]
A. A person less than 21 years of age shall not purchase or attempt to
purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic
liquor or possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, except as
provided in this section. A person less than 21 years of age who violates
this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the following
fines and sanctions:
(1) For the first violation a fine of not more than $100, and may be
ordered to participate in substance abuse prevention services or
substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation services and may be
ordered to perform community service and to undergo substance
abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense.
(2) For a violation of this subsection following a prior conviction or
juvenile adjudication for a violation of Subsection A above, by
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, but only if the minor has
been found by the court to have violated an order of probation,
failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or
community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine
for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, a fine of not more than
54.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 436.1101 et seq.
§ 285-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-60
1:301
$200, or both, and may be ordered to participate in substance
abuse prevention services or substance abuse treatment and
rehabilitation services, to perform community service, and to
undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her
own expense.
(3) For a violation of this subsection following two or more prior
convictions or juvenile adjudications for a violation of Subsection A
above, by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, but only if the
minor has been found by the court to have violated an order of
probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment,
screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to
pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, a fine of
not more than $500, or both, and may be ordered to participate in
substance abuse prevention services or substance abuse treatment
and rehabilitation services, to perform community service, and to
undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her
own expense.
B. The Secretary of State shall suspend the operator or chauffeur's license
of an individual convicted of violating Subsection A as provided in state
law.
C. A law enforcement agency, upon determining that a person less than 18
years of age who is not emancipated pursuant to state law allegedly
consumed, possessed, purchased or attempted to consume, possess or
purchase alcoholic liquor in violation of Subsection A herein may notify
the parent or parents, custodian or guardian of the person as to the
nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian or custodian is
reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The notice
may be made by any means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual
notice, including, but not limited to, notice in person, by telephone or by
first-class mail. If a person less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for
violating Subsection A herein, his or her parents or legal guardians
shall be notified immediately as provided in this subsection.
D. This section does not prohibit a person less than 21 years of age from
possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the
course of his or her employment if employed by a person licensed by the
Liquor Control Act, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or her
personal consumption.
E. The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person less than 21 years of
age who is enrolled in a course offered by an accredited post-secondary
educational institution in an academic building of the institution under
the supervision of a faculty member is not prohibited by this section if
the purpose of the consumption was solely educational and is a
necessary ingredient of the course.
§ 285-60 OAKLAND CODE § 285-60
1:302
§ 285-61. Stops and detention; seizure of alcohol.
A peace officer who witnesses a violation of § 285-60 may stop and detain
the person for purposes of obtaining satisfactory identification, seizing
illegally possessed alcoholic liquor, and issuing an appearance ticket.
F. The consumption by a person less than 21 years of age of sacramental
wine in connection with religious services is not prohibited by this
section.
G. Subsection A does not apply to a person less than 21 years of age who
participates in any of the following:
(1) An undercover operation in which the person less than 21 years of
age purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of
the person's employer and with prior approval of a local
prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal
enforcement action.
(2) An undercover operation in which the person less than 21 years of
age purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of
the police, Liquor Control Commission or local law enforcement
agency as part of an enforcement action. The police, Liquor Control
Commission or local law enforcement agency shall not recruit or
attempt to recruit a person less than 21 years of age for
participation in an undercover operation at the scene of a violation
of Subsection A.
H. A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a person less than
21 years of age, or notwithstanding Subsection A a person less than 21
years of age who uses fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic
liquor is guilty of a misdemeanor.
§ 285-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-61
1:303

ARTICLE XVI
Sale, Use and Possession of Tobacco
[Adopted 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 83 (Ch. 16, Art. IX, Div. 4, of the
2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 285-62. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CHEWING TOBACCO — Loose tobacco or a flat, compressed, cake of
tobacco that is inserted into the mouth to be chewed or sucked.
CIGARETTE — Any product that contains nicotine, is intended to be burned
under ordinary conditions of use, and consists of:
NONCIGARETTE SMOKING TOBACCO — Tobacco sold in loose or bulk
form that is intended for consumption by smoking.
PACKAGE — A pack, box, carton, or container of any kind in which
cigarettes, smokeless tobacco or other smokeless tobacco products are
offered for sale, sold or otherwise distributed to consumers.
POINT OF SALE — Any location at which a consumer may purchase or
otherwise obtain cigarettes, smokeless tobacco or other tobacco product for
personal consumption.
RETAILER — Any person who sells cigarettes, smokeless tobacco or other
tobacco products to individuals for personal consumption, or who operates
a facility where vending machines or self-service displays are permitted
under § 285-65E.
SMOKELESS TOBACCO — Any product that consists of cut, ground,
powdered, or leaf tobacco that contains nicotine and that is intended to be
placed in the oral cavity or consumed by means other than smoking.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — A preparation of tobacco to be smoked, inhaled,
chewed, or placed in a person's mouth, including by way of example and
not limitation, cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, tobacco snuff, smokeless
tobacco, or noncigarette smoking tobacco.
TOBACCO SNUFF — Shredded, powered, or pulverized tobacco that may
be inhaled through the nostrils, chewed or placed against the gums.
USE OF A TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any of the following:
Any tobacco roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any substance not
containing tobacco; or
A.
Any roll of tobacco wrapped in any substance containing tobacco that,
because of its appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filler, or
its packaging and labeling, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by,
consumers as a cigarette described in Subsection A of this definition.
B.
§ 285-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-62
1:305
§ 285-63. Possession or use of tobacco by underage persons.
It shall be unlawful for a person under 18 years of age to possess or use
a tobacco product in a public place generally open to the public. A person
who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction, punishable by
fines, costs, community service and, counseling as set forth in this section.
Pursuant to a court order, the court may require a person who violates this
section to participate in a health promotion and a risk reduction assessment
program, if available. A person who is ordered to participate in a health
promotion and risk reduction assessment program under this section is
responsible for the cost for participating in the program. In addition, a
person who violates this section is subject to the following:
§ 285-64. Sale or furnishing of tobacco products generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give or furnish a tobacco product
to a person who is less than 18 years of age, or to fail to make diligent
inquiry as to whether the person is less than 18 years of age. In an action
for the violation of this section, proof that the defendant demanded and was
shown, before furnishing tobacco to a person under 18 years of age, a motor
vehicle operator's license or other bona fide photographic identification
showing the age and identity of that person, shall be a defense.
§ 285-65. Retailers; sale to minors; age verification; manner of
sales; sign.
The carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other
lighted smoking device.
A.
B. The inhaling or chewing of a tobacco product.
C. The placing of a tobacco product within a person's mouth.
A. For the first violation, a fine of not more than $50 and the court may
order the person to do one of the following:
(1) Perform not more than 16 hours of community service in a hospice,
nursing home, or long-term care facility.
(2) Participate in a health promotion and risk reduction program, as
described in this subsection.
B. For a second violation, a fine of not more than $100 and, in addition to
participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the
court may order the person to perform not more than 32 hours of
community service in a hospice, nursing home or long-term care facility.
C. For a third or subsequent violation, a fine of not more than $200 and, in
addition to participation in a health promotion and risk reduction
program, the court may order the person to perform not more than 48
hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home or long-term
care facility.
§ 285-62 OAKLAND CODE § 285-65
1:306
§ 285-66. False information or evidence as to age.
It shall be unlawful for any person to furnish fraudulent or false
identification to a person less than 18 years of age, or for a person less
than 18 years of age to use fraudulent or false identification to purchase
or obtain any cigarette, cigar, chewing tobacco, tobacco snuff, or tobacco
product in any other form.
§ 285-67. Advertising of tobacco products.
No outdoor advertising, or advertising visible from outdoors, for a tobacco
product, including billboards, signs, posters, placards, window signs or
banners, may be placed within 1,000 feet of the perimeter property lines of
A. It shall be unlawful for a retailer to sell a tobacco product to any person
younger than 18 years of age.
B. It shall be unlawful for any retailer to not verify by means of
photographic identification containing the bearer's date of birth that a
person purchasing a tobacco product is younger than 18 years of age,
unless the person purchasing a tobacco product is over the age of 26.
C. Except as otherwise provided in Subsection E of this section, it shall be
unlawful for a retailer to sell a tobacco product in any manner other
than a direct, face-to-face exchange without the assistance of any
electronic or mechanical device (such as a vending machine).
D. No retailer may break or otherwise open any cigarette or smokeless
tobacco package to sell or distribute individual cigarettes or a number
of unpackaged cigarettes that is smaller than the quantity in the
minimum cigarette package size permitted by law, or any quantity of
any pipe tobacco, cigarette tobacco, smokeless tobacco or noncigarette
smoking tobacco that is smaller than the smallest package distributed
by the manufacturer for individual consumer use.
E. It shall be unlawful for any retailer to sell any tobacco product from or
through a vending machine or from or through self-service displays,
unless the vending machine and self-service displays are located in
facilities where the retailer ensures that no person younger than 18
years of age is present, or permitted to enter, at any time.
F. All retailers shall post, in a place close to the point of sale and
conspicuous to both employees and customers, a sign produced by the
State Department of Public Health that includes the following
statement: "The purchase of tobacco products by a minor under 18
years of age and the provision of tobacco products to a minor are
prohibited by law. A minor unlawfully purchasing or using tobacco
products is subject to criminal penalties." The sign required under this
section shall be located within six feet of the point of sale and it shall be
5 1/2 inches by 8 1/2 inches in size, with the statement required under
this section printed in thirty-six-point bold face type.
§ 285-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-67
1:307
a public playground or playground area in a public park, elementary school
or secondary school.
§ 285-68. Tobacco products on school property.
A. The use of tobacco products is prohibited throughout school buildings,
grounds and vehicles.
B. A person who violates Subsection A of this section is responsible for a
civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than $50.
C. As used in this section:
SCHOOL DISTRICT — A "school district," "local act school district," or
"intermediate school district," as those terms are defined in the School
Code of 1976, Public Act No. 451 of 1976 (MCLA § 380.1 et seq.); or a
consortium or cooperative arrangement consisting of any combination
of these.55
SCHOOL PROPERTY — A building, facility, or structure and other real
estate owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by a school district in the
Township.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 285-67 OAKLAND CODE § 285-68
1:308
Chapter 299
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcohol beverages — See Ch. 115.
Outdoor assemblies — See Ch. 122.
Open burning — See Ch. 143.
Hunting and firearms — See Ch. 235.
Noise — See Ch. 274.
Offenses — See Ch. 285.
Tree protection, preservation and
removal — See Ch. 389.
§ 285-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-68
1:309

ARTICLE I
Stony Creek Metropolitan Park
[Adopted 3-14-1972 by Ord. No. 21 (Ch. 20, Art. III, of the 2007
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 299-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — The Huron-Clinton Metropolitan Authority, a public body
corporate under the laws of the state, and its duly authorized officers,
employees, agents and representatives.
§ 299-2. Control of swimming, bathing and wading. [Amended
4-9-2003 by Ord. No. 21B]
§ 299-3. Dangerous or obnoxious materials or equipment.
§ 299-4. Signs and handbills. [Amended 4-9-2003 by Ord. No. 21B]
A. Swimming and bathing are prohibited within the boundaries of Stony
Creek Metropolitan Park, except in specially constructed swimming
pool facilities or in areas marked as swimming areas. No person shall
use any swimming pool facility or marked swimming area except in
accordance with posted rules and regulations governing such uses.
B. Wading is prohibited within the boundaries of Stony Creek
Metropolitan Park, except in swimming pool facilities or marked
swimming areas, provided that the prohibitions of this section shall not
apply to fishermen actually engaged in fishing.
A. No person shall deposit or abandon in or on any lands or water areas
within the boundaries of Stony Creek Metropolitan Park any garbage,
sewage, bottles, refuse, trash, waste or other obnoxious material except
in receptacles provided for such purposes.
B. No person shall have in his possession or control any glass bottle or
container in or on any pool area, beach area or baseball diamond in
Stony Creek Metropolitan Park, or in any other locality in said park
where possession of glass bottles and containers is prohibited by posted
notices.
C. No person shall have in his possession or control any slingshot, pellet
gun, air rifle, fireworks, explosives or other dangerous materials within
the boundaries of Stony Creek Metropolitan Park.
A. Handbills, newspapers or other circulars may be offered or distributed
within the boundaries of Stony Creek Metropolitan Park only by passing
them hand-to-hand; such distribution will be allowed only in automobile
§ 299-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-4
1:311
§ 299-5. Unlawful fires.
§ 299-6. Closing of park.
§ 299-7. Dogs, pets, horses and livestock. [Amended 4-9-2003 by
Ord. No. 21B]
parking lots, unless other areas for such distribution are designated by
the Authority.
B. No person shall post, fasten, or affix any placard, bill, notice, or sign
upon any structure, tree, or automobile within the boundaries of Stony
Creek Metropolitan Park, except that temporary directional signs for
group picnics or events may be placed on sign posts designated for such
purposes by the Authority, or other areas as designated by the
Authority. All temporary directional signs must be removed at the
conclusion of the event.
A. No person shall start or maintain a fire within the boundaries of Stony
Creek Metropolitan Park, except in picnic stoves, fireplaces or spaces
provided for such purpose.
B. No person shall dump any burning material or hot ashes into any trash
containers or elsewhere within the boundaries of Stony Creek
Metropolitan Park unless such container or locality shall be marked as a
receptacle for such material.
A. No person shall enter or remain in Stony Creek Metropolitan Park after
the posted closing hours except by written permission of the Authority.
B. No person shall use or occupy any area or facility in Stony Creek
Metropolitan Park when such area or facility is closed to the use of the
public by order of the Authority.
A. No person shall bring into, or have in his possession or control within
the boundaries of Stony Creek Metropolitan Park any dog or pet unless
such dog or pet shall be kept on a leash not over six feet in length and
under the immediate control of some responsible person.
B. No person shall bring into, or have in his possession or control any dog
or pet, in any area of Stony Creek Metropolitan Park except in picnic
areas and other areas designated by the Authority by posted notices,
provided that this section shall not apply to leader dogs for the blind or
to dogs under the control of the Authority.
C. No person shall ride or lead any horse within the boundaries of Stony
Creek Metropolitan Park, except in areas designated by the Authority.
All horses must be in possession of an Authority bridle tag.
D. No person shall permit or allow the running at large, herding, grazing
or driving of any livestock of any kind within the boundaries of Stony
Creek Metropolitan Park.
§ 299-4 OAKLAND CODE § 299-8
1:312
§ 299-8. Alcoholic liquors. [Amended 4-9-2003 by Ord. No. 21B]
§ 299-9. Commercial activities.
No person or organization other than the Authority, its hires and licensees
shall, within the boundaries of Stony Creek Metropolitan Park, advertise,
offer for hire, vend or sell any service, food, beverage, merchandise or other
personal property or advertise, carry on or conduct any other business
or commercial activity, nor shall any person or organization beg or solicit
contributions or donations within the boundaries of Stony Creek
Metropolitan Park.
§ 299-10. Off-the-road vehicles.
No person shall operate, or have in his possession within the boundaries
of Stony Creek Metropolitan Park any off-the-road motor-driven vehicle,
including, by way of example but not by way of limitation, any minibike,
dunemobile, snowmobile, converted snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle,
amphibious vehicle or similar motorized device.
§ 299-11. Preservation of property and natural resources; hunting.
[Amended 4-9-2003 by Ord. No. 21B]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to possess,
transport into or within, or have under his control within the
boundaries of Stony Creek Metropolitan Park, any beer, wine or other
alcoholic liquors.
B. No person shall sell or furnish any beer, wine or other alcoholic liquor
to any person under the age of 21 years within the boundaries of Stony
Creek Metropolitan Park.
C. No person shall have in his or her possession any alcoholic liquor other
than beer or wine within the boundaries of Stony Creek Metropolitan
Park, except alcoholic liquors, in addition to beer and wine, may be
permitted in accordance with MCLA § 436.1915 at the Stony Creek golf
starter building and the banquet tent facility.
D. No person shall have in his possession within the boundaries of Stony
Creek Metropolitan Park any beer, wine or other alcoholic liquors
during times when the same is prohibited by posted notices.
E. No person shall consume any beer, wine or other alcoholic liquor within
the boundaries of Stony Creek Metropolitan Park, except in picnic areas
or other areas designated by the Authority.
A. No person shall injure, deface, disturb, befoul nor in any manner
destroy or cause to be destroyed any portion of Stony Creek
Metropolitan Park or any facility building, sign, structure, equipment,
utility or other property found therein.
§ 299-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-11
1:313
§ 299-12. Musical instruments, radios, tape players and soundamplifying
devices.
No person shall operate or play any musical instrument, radio, mechanical
record or tape player, loudspeaker, public address system or soundamplifying
equipment of any kind within the boundaries of Stony Creek
Metropolitan Park in such a manner as to cause the sound emanating
therefrom to exceed a loudness of 75 decibels when measured on the 70 db
scale at a distance of 15 feet from the sound source without a written permit
issued by the Authority.
§ 299-13. Payment of fees and charges required.
Where a fee or charge is requested for any service, privilege or license
offered by the Authority or its licensees within the boundaries of Stony
Creek Metropolitan Park, no person shall obtain, or attempt to obtain such
service, privilege or license without payment of such fee or charge.
§ 299-14. Disorderly conduct. [Amended 11-8-1987]
§ 299-15. Temporary suspension of regulations by Authority. [Added
4-13-1999 by Ord. No. 21A]
B. No person shall dig for, remove, injure or destroy any tree, flower,
shrub, plant or growing thing or any wildlife, except as otherwise
provided by law, or any rock, mineral, artifact or other material within
the boundaries of Stony Creek Metropolitan Park without written
permission from the Authority.
C. No person shall kill, trap, hunt, pursue or in any manner disturb any
wild bird or animal within the boundaries of Stony Creek Metropolitan
Park without the written permission of the Authority.
A. Generally. No person or group of persons shall engage in any drunken,
loud, boisterous, disorderly or indecent conduct, nor shall any person or
group of persons commit or engage in any assault or other activity
which shall endanger or annoy other persons or disturb the peace or
good order within the boundaries of Stony Creek Metropolitan Park.
B. Loitering and obstruction. No person shall loiter in or on any road,
drive, parking lot or median within the boundaries of Stony Creek
Metropolitan Park in such a manner as to obstruct or hinder the free
flow of vehicular traffic or the passage of pedestrians or to create alarm
for the safety of persons, after having been requested to cease such
obstruction or hindrance or abate such creation of alarm by a person
delegated with authority to enforce this article or assist in the
enforcement of this article, including, without limitation, a sheriff
deputy, a park ranger, a park ranger aide, and/or a Township Ordinance
Enforcing Officer.
§ 299-11 OAKLAND CODE § 299-15
1:314
§ 299-16. Violations and penalties.56
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and upon a determination of
responsibility shall be subject to a civil fine as set forth in Chapter 1, Article
I, Definitions, General Penalty, of the Code of the Charter Township of
Oakland. In addition to ordering a person determined to be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses,
the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or
order necessary to enforce or enjoin violation of this article.
A. Any of the requirements of this article may be temporarily suspended
for a specified period of time upon the occurrence of all of the following,
subject to Subsection B of this section:
(1) The governing board of the Authority shall adopt a resolution
specifying the intent to suspend one or more specific provisions of
this article, including within such resolution:
(a) The specific section or subsections to be suspended;
(b) The purpose for the temporary suspension;
(c) The precise dates during which the suspension shall be
effective.
(2) The Authority shall provide a certified copy of the adopted
resolution to the Township Clerk at least 14 days prior to the
effective date of the suspension; and
(3) The Authority shall post conspicuous notice of the suspension at
the entrance of the park during all periods of time in which the
suspension is in effect. Such notice shall include all of the
information specified in Subsection A(1)(a) through (c) of this
section.
B. A temporary suspension of any requirement of this article contemplated
in a resolution of the governing board of the Authority, as specified in
Subsection A of this section, shall not be effective if, prior to the
proposed effective date of the temporary suspension, the Township
Board adopts a resolution negating the temporary suspension.
56.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 299-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-16
1:315

ARTICLE II
Trailways
[Adopted 12-13-1983 by Ord. No. 46 (Ch. 20, Art. IV, of the 2007
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 299-17. Purpose.
The Township and other municipalities have established trailways. Certain
minimum rules of conduct are necessary for the best interests of the
community and citizens, and for the preservation of such natural assets as
may be located within the trailways.
§ 299-18. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any power-driven vehicle, sports equipment,
motorized device or remote-controlled vehicle, whether propelled by means
of wheels, tracks, runners, skis, or other means, whether or not eligible for
licensing and registration under the Michigan Vehicle Code.57
TRAILWAYS LAND — Land owned by the Trailways Commission, as
described in this article.
§ 299-19. Applicability; description of trailways land.
This article shall apply to and be in effect for all lands located within the
Township owned by the Trailways Commission which was created by an
agreement between the City of Rochester, the Charter Township of Avon
and the Townships of Oakland and Orion dated December 23, 1981. Within
the Township of Oakland, County of Oakland, and the State of Michigan,
said lands are described as those lands formerly owned by the Penn Central
Railroad and commonly known as the "Penn Central Railroad Right-of-Way,"
traversing in a northwesterly-southeasterly direction through Sections 18,
19, 20, 21, 28 and 33 of Oakland Township (Parcels 10-18-503-007,
10-19-503-001, 10-20-503-009, 10-21-503-001, 10-28-503-012,
10-33-503-004) and which lands have the appearance to persons using the
trailways lands as being a trail or former railroad right-of-way because of its
setting or relationship with other properties, or are arranged, delineated or
posted in some way as to cause a person thereon to be aware that he is on
trailways land.
§ 299-20. Regulations and prohibitions.
A. Motor vehicles. No person shall drive, propel or park a motor vehicle or
motorized sports equipment of any nature upon the trailways land,
except motor vehicles used by authorized law enforcement or
57.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 257.1 et seq.
§ 299-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-20
1:317
maintenance personnel, and except in areas specifically designated and
posted for parking.
B. Hours. No person shall enter into or occupy any area of the trailways
land when it is closed, except by written permission of the Trailways
Commission. All areas shall be deemed to be closed between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
C. Camping. No person shall camp or establish temporary lodging places
within the boundaries of the trailways land.
D. Fires. No person shall start or maintain a fire within the boundaries of
the trailways land.
E. Hunting and weapons. No person shall hunt, or discharge any firearm
or weapon including, but not limited to, a bow or BB gun, within the
trailways land.
F. Disposal. No person shall deposit or abandon in or on any lands or
water areas within the trailways land any garbage, glass, trash, waste,
sewage or other obnoxious or polluting material, except in receptacles
provided for that purpose.
G. Damage to property. No person shall injure, deface, disturb, befoul,
change or remove any portion of any marker, structure, equipment,
fence or any other property within the trailways land.
H. Natural features. No person shall dig for, remove, injure or destroy any
tree, flower, shrub, plant or growing thing or any wild bird or animal, or
any earth, rock or other material within the boundaries of the trailways
land without written permission from the Trailways Commission.
I. Closed area. No person shall enter or occupy any portion of the
trailways land which has been designated closed to public use or entry.
J. Horses. No person shall ride or lead a horse within the boundaries of
the trailways land except in designated areas.
K. Obstruction. No person shall locate or deposit any bicycle, equipment
or material upon the trailways land, or loiter, sit or lie upon the
trailways land so as to obstruct persons in their use of the trail.
L. Disorderly conduct. No person shall engage in any drunken, loud,
boisterous, or disorderly or indecent conduct, nor shall any person or
group of persons engage in any activity which shall endanger or annoy
other persons or disturb the peace or good order within the boundaries
of the trailways land.
M. Noise. No person shall operate or play any musical instrument, radio,
mechanical record or tape player or sound amplifying equipment of any
kind within the boundaries of the trailways land in such a manner as to
create excessive noise that disturbs or annoys others.
§ 299-20 OAKLAND CODE § 299-20
1:318
§ 299-21. Vehicles illegally parked.
N. Sales. No person shall sell or offer for sale any article, privilege or
service within the trailways land without a written permit from the
Trailways Commission.
O. Advertising. No person shall display, distribute or place any sign,
advertisement, circular notice, or statement or display any banner
within the trailways land without a written permit from the Trailways
Commission.
P. Groups. No person shall promote, arrange for, or participate in any
function occurring within the trailways land and involving more than 35
persons without a written permit from the Trailways Commission. The
Trailways Commission may impose such conditions upon the issuance
of such permit as it deems necessary to maintain the public use of the
trail, to prevent damage to the trail or any part thereof, and to protect
the public safety.
Q. Trespass to adjacent lands. No person shall go onto land adjacent to
trailways land which is in private ownership, without the expressed
permission of the owner of the land. The person going onto any such
land shall be the owner or a member of the family of the owner, or carry
in his possession written permission allowing entry onto the private
land, signed by the owner.
A. Citation or impoundment. Any motor vehicle or equipment which is
parked in violation of this article may be issued a citation for the
violation, or may be towed away and impounded as provided in
§ 299-22, or both, in the discretion of the Enforcement Officer.
B. Ownership; presumption. In the prosecution for a violation of parking a
motor vehicle in violation of this article, proof that the particular motor
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of this
article, together with proof, by verifying ownership of the motor vehicle
with the Secretary of State, that the defendant named in the complaint
was at the time of the violation the registered owner of the motor
vehicle, shall create in evidence a presumption that the registered
owner of the motor vehicle was the person who parked or placed the
motor vehicle at the point where and for the time during which the
violation occurred. If it appears that the motor vehicle was, at the time
of the violation, leased, proof that the defendant named in the
complaint was the lessee of the motor vehicle at the time of the
violation shall create in evidence a presumption that the lessee of the
motor vehicle, not the registered owner, was the person who parked or
placed the motor vehicle at the point for the time during which the
violation occurred.
C. Parking violations; civil infractions. All violations of this article
pertaining to the parking of motor vehicles are hereby declared to be
civil infractions as provided for in the Michigan Vehicle Code.58
§ 299-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-22
1:319
§ 299-22. Towing.
§ 299-23. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforceable by any deputy sheriff of the County Sheriff's
Department or any state police officer. Said officers shall have the authority
to issue and serve appearance citations pursuant to Section 9f of Public
Act No. 175 of 1927 (MCLA § 764.9f). In addition, the Township Board may
appoint a limited duty officer who shall have authority to issue parking
violation notices and complaints for vehicles illegally parked.
§ 299-24. Violations and penalties.59
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and upon a determination of
responsibility shall be subject to a civil fine as set forth in Chapter 1, Article
I, Definitions, General Penalty, of the Code of the Charter Township of
Oakland. In addition to ordering a person determined to be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses,
the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or
order necessary to enforce or enjoin violation of this article.
A. Authority granted. The County Sheriff's Department is hereby
authorized to remove and tow away, or have removed and towed away
by a commercial towing service, any motor vehicle parked in violation
of this article, which violation is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
B. Impounding. Motor vehicles so towed away for illegal parking shall be
stored in a safe place.
C. Payment of fine and charges. Motor vehicles so towed away for illegal
parking shall be restored to the owner or operator of such motor vehicle
upon payment of the fine and the reasonable towing and storage
charges.
58.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 257.1 et seq.
59.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 299-22 OAKLAND CODE § 299-24
1:320
ARTICLE III
Park Regulations
[Adopted 3-12-2002 by Ord. No. 38A (Ch. 20, Art. II, of the 2007
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 299-25. Purpose.
Consistent with and under the authority of Public Act No. 157 of 1905
(MCLA § 41.421 et seq.), and Public Act No. 156 of 1917 (MCLA § 123.51 et
seq.), this article is adopted for the purposes of providing for the safe and
orderly operation, control and maintenance of Township parks, providing
certain minimum rules of conduct to be observed by persons seeking the use
and enjoyment of the Township parklands, and to ensure the preservation
of such natural and cultural assets as may be located in such parks by
providing for the designation and preservation of certain conservation areas
and otherwise limiting the nature and kind of activities of the general
population that may be involved with such parklands.
§ 299-26. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all lands subject to the control and use of the
Township Parks and Recreation Commission (sometimes also referred to in
this article as the "Parks and Recreation Commission"), whether owned or
leased, located in the Township. Such lands are referred to in this article as
"parks," "park property," and "parkland."
§ 299-27. Rules and regulations.
A. The following rules and regulations shall apply in all parks:
(1) No hunting or trapping shall be permitted, except at such times and
places as may be designated by a duly adopted resolution of the
Township Parks and Recreation Commission for such purpose.
(2) No person shall fire, discharge or have in his possession any rocket,
firecracker, or other fireworks or any substance of an explosive
nature within the parks unless authorized in advance by a permit
issued by or under the authority of the Township Parks and
Recreation Commission.
(3) No person shall at any time discharge or set off anywhere within a
park, a revolver, pistol, shotgun, rifle, air gun, water gun, paintball
gun or any gun, rifle, firearm or bow and arrow or any other
weapon that discharges projectiles either by air, gas, spring,
explosive substance or any other force. This subsection shall not
apply to: any deputy sheriff, police officer, park ranger, or other
duly appointed law enforcement officer while carrying out the
duties and responsibilities of his or her position; any authorized
participant at the time or place of a hunting activity authorized by
the Oakland Township Parks and Recreation Commission under
Subsection A(1) above; or any permitted use of a bow and arrow on
§ 299-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-27
1:321
a Township-designated archery range within a park. [Amended
6-22-2010 by Ord. No. 38A]
(4) No person shall operate a motor-driven vehicle of any kind in a
park, except emergency and park maintenance vehicles, unless on
drives, roadways or parking lots established for that purpose. The
Parks and Recreation Commission may issue vehicular permits for
purposes of allowing vehicles in otherwise prohibited areas in
conjunction with activities or events that have been otherwise
approved or authorized by or under the authority of the Township
Parks and Recreation Commission.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor-driven
vehicle on any park road at a speed exceeding 15 miles per hour or,
if a speed limit is posted, at any speed greater than that posted.
(6) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon park
property, including, but not limited to, any area designated for the
parking of vehicles, in a careless or negligent manner likely to
endanger any person or property.
(7) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle in
any manner upon park property which results in excessive noise or
disturbs the peace, quiet or tranquility of the area.
(8) It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, or cause to be left, any
vehicle in a park between a half hour before sunrise and a half hour
after sunset, except at designated areas with a permit issued by or
under the authority of the Township Parks and Recreation
Commission displayed in the front windshield of the vehicle.
(9) No person shall bring into a park, nor have in possession, sell or
consume in a park, any alcoholic liquor or illegal drug, or other
controlled substance.
(10)No person shall enter or occupy any area of a park during the hours
when it is closed except as permitted by written authority from the
Township Parks and Recreation Commission. All park areas shall be
deemed to be closed between the hours of a half hour after sunset
and a half hour before sunrise unless more restrictive hours have
been established and posted.
(11)No person shall camp or establish temporary lodging places
without a written permit issued by or under the authority of the
Township Parks and Recreation Commission.
(12) All persons walking or exercising pets in a park are required to
clean up all debris resulting from the pets with the exception of
leader, guide, hearing and service animals. Pets must be on a leash
not exceeding 10 feet in length and under control at all times.
§ 299-27 OAKLAND CODE § 299-27
1:322
(13) Persons seeking to reserve a facility or a portion thereof for their
exclusive use, or to make such a use of any facility or portion
thereof which will interfere with its normal use, shall first obtain a
permit for such use issued by or under the authority of the
Township Parks and Recreation Commission.
(14) Groups of over 50 persons wishing to use Township park property
for a function require a written permit issued by or under the
authority of the Township Parks and Recreation Commission.
(15) In addition to other ordinances regulating open and/or outside
burning, the following rules and regulations shall apply to burning
in the parks:
(a) No person shall ignite or use a ground fire or open fire, unless
that person has been issued a written permit by or under the
authority of the Parks and Recreation Commission.
(b) No person shall willfully set or cause to be set on fire any tree,
woodland, brushland, grassland or meadow within any park.
(c) No person shall build any fire in a park, except within
fireplaces, receptacles, barbecues or fire pits approved and
designated by the Parks and Recreation Commission for such
purpose.
(d) No person shall drop, throw, scatter or otherwise deposit any
burning or flammable material such as lighted matches,
burning cigars, cigarettes or tobacco paper within or upon
park property.
(e) Fires shall not be left unattended and all fires shall be
extinguished prior to leaving the immediate area of such fire.
(f) This subsection shall not apply to prescribed burning that has
been approved in advance by the Parks and Recreation
Commission, when such burning is deemed necessary as a park
management tool.
(16)No person shall promote, arrange for, provide or participate in any
play, drama, speech, musical, display, sale or endeavor for the
purpose of attracting, amusing or entertaining the general public,
unless a permit has been secured from the Parks and Recreation
Commission as hereinafter provided.
(a) Permits shall be secured from the Parks and Recreation
Commission by filing an application on forms to be provided.
The applicant shall be scheduled for a hearing at a regular
meeting of the Parks and Recreation Commission as soon as
reasonably possible after the filing of a completed application
with the park manager. The permit shall be granted if the Parks
§ 299-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-27
1:323
and Recreation Commission determines that the granting
thereof:
[1] Will not unreasonably interfere with the use of the public
facility by persons entitled to the use thereof;
[2] Will not be likely to unreasonably damage the facility or
any part thereof;
[3] Will not create a hazard to either pedestrian or vehicular
traffic in the area; and
[4] Will otherwise comply with the requirements for issuance
of permits under this article.
(b) The Parks and Recreation Commission may impose such
conditions upon the issuance of any permit, as it may deem
necessary to comply with the foregoing and to otherwise
comply with the purposes and regulations in this article.
(17)No person shall sell or offer for sale, any article, thing, privilege, or
service without a written permit from the Parks and Recreation
Commission, and no person shall do any begging, hawking, or
peddling.
(18) Destruction of buildings, markers, monuments and other
properties shall be prohibited, and no person shall, on park
property:
(a) Destroy, damage, deface, alter, change or remove any
monument, stone marker, benchmark, stake, post, blaze, sign,
marker, notice, or designation of any conservation area,
boundary line, survey line, or reference point.
(b) Destroy, damage, deface, alter, remove, cut, break, mark upon
or otherwise injure any building, structure, shelter, equipment,
bridge, drain, wall, fountain, lamppost, fence, gate, hedge, or
other improvement.
(c) Deface, destroy, damage, alter, or remove any placard, notice
or sign, whether permanent or temporary, lawfully posted or
exhibited within or upon park property.
(d) Remove, move, excavate, injure or destroy any historical or
prehistorical ruin or any object of antiquity, without permission
of the Parks and Recreation Commission.
(e) Destruction or disturbance of plant or animal life and natural
surroundings shall be prohibited as follows:
[1] No person shall cut, remove, destroy or disturb any tree,
sampling, seedling, bush, shrub or other natural
vegetation, whether alive or dead, or chip, blaze, box,
§ 299-27 OAKLAND CODE § 299-27
1:324
girdle, trim or otherwise deface or injure any such
vegetation, or pick, gather, uproot, remove or destroy any
branch, foliage, flower, plant or grass.
[2] No person shall remove or cause to be removed any sod,
earth, humus, peat, boulders, gravel, soil, minerals or
sand, without written permission of the park manager and/
or Parks and Recreation Commission.
[3] No persons shall kill, injure, molest, disturb, harass or
annoy any bird, animal or reptile; and no person shall
disturb, injure, destroy, or rob the nest, eggs or young of
any such bird, reptile or animal.
(19)No person shall discard or deposit refuse of any kind or nature in or
upon park property except by placing said refuse in containers
provided for such purpose.
(20)No person shall throw, cast, lay, drop or discharge into or leave in
waters administered by the Parks and Recreation Commission any
substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid which may or shall result
in the pollution of said waters.
(21)No person shall expose, distribute, or place any sign,
advertisement, circular notice, or statement, or display a banner,
emblem, or design in the parks without a written permit issued by
or under the authority of the Township Parks and Recreation
Commission.
(22) Baseball, football, soccer, rugby and other games or sports
involving similar physical activities are allowed in areas where
specifically designated and posted. The use of gas-powered model
airplanes or other aircraft, boats or other watercraft, and the use of
model rockets is prohibited except in designated and posted areas.
Persons engaging in such sports, activities or games where not
prohibited shall conduct themselves so as not to jeopardize the
safety of others using the area.
(23)No person shall construct or maintain any item or structure within
a park except on specific permit issued by or under this authority of
the Township Parks and Recreation Commission.
(24)No person shall conduct or participate in any form of gambling,
lottery or game of chance upon park property.
(25)No person shall swim or bathe, except at such times and places as
may be designated and posted for such purposes.
(26)No person shall bring into, use or navigate any boat, canoe, raft or
other watercraft upon any watercourse, lagoon, lake, pond or
wetland located within a park except at such time and places as
may be designated and posted for such purpose.
§ 299-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-27
1:325
§ 299-28. Conservation areas. [Amended 3-12-2002 by Ord. No.
38A]
(27) It shall be lawful to ride or lead a horse within any park with the
following exceptions:
(a) It shall be unlawful to ride, lead or allow a horse in any park, or
portion of a park, where horses and/or horse riding are not
permitted and such parks or park areas are specifically
designated and posted as such.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a horse in a careless
or reckless manner so as to create a nuisance or to endanger
the life, property or persons of others.
(28)No person shall use any loudspeaker, public address system or
sound amplifying equipment of any kind without proper written
permission of the Township park manager or the Parks and
Recreation Commission. Permission shall not be granted if such
equipment is capable of interfering with the use or enjoyment of
the park by others.
(29)No person shall operate any motor vehicle, radio, television,
phonograph, tape recorder, or any other device in such a manner as
to create noise that disturbs or annoys others.
(30)No person shall engage in any loud, abusive, boisterous or
otherwise disorderly conduct tending to create a disturbance or
annoy others.
(31) Bicycles may be operated upon paths, trails, or roadways, unless
otherwise prohibited by postage or signage.
(32) Fishing will be permitted within the parks unless posted otherwise,
provided such fishing activities are in compliance with the laws of
the State Department of Natural Resources.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
CONSERVATION AREA — An area of undeveloped land retaining or
being returned to its natural character and influence, without
permanent improvements or human habitation, which is managed so as
to protect its natural conditions and which:
Generally appears to have been affected primarily by the forces of
nature; or
(1)
Contains ecological, geological, or other features of scientific,
educational, scenic, or historical value.
(2)
B. Designation. The Parks and Recreation Commission may designate
conservation areas within parks by resolution, copies of which shall be
§ 299-27 OAKLAND CODE § 299-28
1:326
§ 299-29. Other rules and regulations.
§ 299-30. Permits and fees.
available for public inspection at the offices of the Parks and Recreation
Commission. Such resolution shall have attached a drawing designating
the area of parkland which is a conservation area. The borders of
conservation areas shall be delineated by posting or other means so as
to inform the public that the area is a conservation area.
C. Maintenance. Conservation areas shall receive minimal maintenance
and for all intents and purposes shall be left in or returned to a natural
condition, subject only to the necessary removal of man-made debris
and the maintenance of pathways, lands, rivers, streams, watercourses
or previously existing easements as required by law or deemed
necessary to the public health, safety and welfare. Nature paths, feeder
stations, and similar nondisruptive uses shall be acceptable within the
designated area.
D. Rules and regulations. All conservation areas shall be subject to the
rules and regulations set forth in § 299-27. In addition, the following
rules and regulations shall apply in all conservation areas
notwithstanding anything contained in § 299-27 to the contrary:
(1) There shall be no commercial enterprise, permanent road,
temporary road, use of motor vehicles, motorized equipment or any
form of motorized transport within a conservation area, except as
may be necessary for maintenance or in case of emergencies.
(2) No bicycles shall be operated within a conservation area.
(3) No pets shall be allowed in a conservation area.
(4) No horses shall be allowed in a conservation area.
(5) It shall be unlawful to use a loudspeaker, public address system,
bullhorn or amplifier within a conservation area.
A. The Parks and Recreation Commission may by resolution adopt
additional rules and regulations applicable to specific parks or portions
of parks, which additional rules and regulations are reasonably
calculated to provide for the orderly use, enjoyment and conduct of
such specific park areas by the public.
B. Such rules and regulations shall be posted in an obvious location on
such parklands where effective.
C. In addition, there may be posted and otherwise clearly marked
restricted or designated areas of conduct such as hiking trails, bridle
paths, fire pit or burning areas, conservation areas, and the like.
A. Application. Applications for permits under this article shall be made on
forms provided at the offices of the Parks and Recreation Commission.
§ 299-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-30
1:327
§ 299-31. Enforcement and penalties.
§ 299-32. Violations and penalties.60
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and upon a determination of
responsibility shall be subject to a civil fine as set forth in Chapter 1, Article
I, Definitions, General Penalty, of the Code of the Charter Township of
Oakland. In addition to ordering a person determined to be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses,
In addition to any other standards to be considered under other
sections of this article for the issuance of permits, the permit shall be
issued by the Township Parks and Recreation Commission, or the park
manager as the authorized designate of the Commission by resolution,
following a determination by the Commission, or the park manager
if designated, that the requested use is not contrary to any of the
following:
(1) The purposes or regulations in this article;
(2) Any rules duly adopted by the Parks and Recreation Commission;
or
(3) The most beneficial use of the park on behalf of the Township
residents.
B. Use fee. A use fee may be charged for the use of park facilities pursuant
to resolution by the Township Parks and Recreation Commission, which
may be adjusted from time to time as deemed necessary and may reflect
a different charge to resident and nonresident use, group use under one
family or organizational use and/or community organization activities.
All fees and use charges so collected will be deposited to the Township
Parks and Recreation Commission account.
C. Conditions. Conditions may be imposed upon the issuance of any permit
to the extent necessary to ensure compliance with the purposes, intent,
rules and regulations set forth in this article.
A. Evidence of violation. In any enforcement proceeding for violations of
the provisions of this article, the license plate number displayed on any
vehicle shall be prima facie evidence that the owner thereof is the
person who has placed or used the vehicle on the park property.
B. Vehicle may be towed away. Any law enforcement agency of the
Township may cause any vehicle that is violating the provisions of this
article to be towed away; or, any police officer may issue a ticket
therefore and leave it attached to such vehicle requiring the
appearance of the owner thereof in court at the time and place
designated therein to answer for the violation of this article.
60.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 299-30 OAKLAND CODE § 299-32
1:328
the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or
order necessary to enforce or enjoin violation of this article.
§ 299-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-32
1:329
Chapter 306
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 274. Offenses — See Ch. 285.
§ 299-32 OAKLAND CODE § 299-32
1:330
ARTICLE I
Solicitors
[Adopted 8-22-2000 by Ord. No. 95 (Ch. 22 of the 2007 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 306-1. Purpose and intent.
This article is adopted with the following purposes and intent:
§ 306-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
OCCUPANT — Any person or business located on any property, and any
person or business which is the owner, lessee or renter of any property and
A. To define and regulate persons doing business in the Township as
solicitors.
B. To establish a Township procedure for registering solicitors.
C. To promote and encourage stable, responsible businesses who will
enrich the Township's ambiance and be assets to public security.
D. To ensure that persons engaged in soliciting shall not conduct a
commercial, for-profit business for which a permanent premises,
approved following submission in approval of a site plan, would
normally be required in the Township.
E. To provide an information record with regard to the persons and
entities who will be engaged in soliciting activities in the interest of
avoiding irresponsible and/or fraudulent sales activities in the
Township.
F. To serve and protect the health, safety and welfare of the general
public.
G. To provide penalties for the violations hereof.
H. To prevent or help to prevent fraudulent activity by promoting
responsible business practices.
I. To scrutinize and monitor those persons or entities that have a tendency
to or in the past have behaved fraudulently or who have, in the past,
avoided accountability for placing a grossly substandard product into
the marketplace.
J. To provide the Township and the public with a means of seeking a
remedy against those who commit fraud and/or cause injury, physical or
financial, to purchasers.
§ 306-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-2
1:331
any invitee, licensee, guest, visitor, agent, representative or employee of
any such owner, lessee or renter of property.
PROPERTY — Any residence, business, building, structure or piece of real
estate.
REGISTERED SOLICITOR — Any person who has obtained a valid
certificate of registration, which certificate is in the possession of the
solicitor and on his person while engaged in soliciting.
RESIDENCE — Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes
by one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure.
SOLICITING — Any one or more of the following activities, unless such
activity takes place in a permanent structure open for business purposes
with such activity being a part of that business purpose.
§ 306-3. Notice regulating soliciting.
Seeking to sell or to obtain orders for the purpose of any goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs, services and the like of any kind, character or
description whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever;
A.
Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of
insurance of any kind, type or character;
B.
Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers or any other type or kind of publication;
C.
Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any other
valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit
association, organization, corporation or project;
D.
Seeking to sell or vend ice cream, foodstuffs, wares or other articles of
whatever nature from any vehicle, on or off any street, roadway, alley,
highway or other passageway within this municipality, whether such
vehicle is motorized or not.
E.
A. Every person desiring to secure the protection provided by this article
pertaining to soliciting shall comply with the following directions: Any
person soliciting within the Township shall abide by any instructions
given any person so soliciting by the occupant of any property within
the Township where the instructions are an invitation to the solicitor to
come upon the property, or a denial to the solicitor of access to the
property. Such instructions may be oral or in writing and, if in writing,
the instructions shall be in the following form: A weatherproof card
approximately three inches by four inches in size containing one of the
following statements: "ONLY SOLICITORS REGISTERED IN OAKLAND
TOWNSHIP INVITED" or "NO SOLICITORS INVITED." The letters on
such cards shall be at least 1/3 inch in height, and such card shall be
exhibited upon or near a main entrance door to the main structure,
building or residence on the property, or at or near any entranceway to
the property. For the purpose of uniformity, the Township Clerk may, on
§ 306-2 OAKLAND CODE § 306-3
1:332
§ 306-4. Violation of posted notice.
It is unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person, whether
registered under this article or not, to enter into any business or to go upon
any property or to ring the doorbell upon or near any door or create any
sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of an occupant
of any such property for the purpose of soliciting in defiance of a notice
exhibited on the property in accordance with the provisions of this article.
§ 306-5. Hours of solicitation.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful, and shall constitute a nuisance, for
any person, whether registered under this article or not, to enter into any
business or to go upon any property or to ring a doorbell, knock or rap upon
any door or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the
attention of an occupant of any such property, for the purpose of soliciting,
prior to 9:00 a.m. of any day and after 9:00 p.m.
§ 306-6. Violations and penalties.62
Any person, persons, firm or corporation or anyone acting on behalf of said
person, persons, firm or corporation who shall violate the provisions of this
article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and subject to
a civil fine as set forth in Chapter 1, Article I, Definitions; General Penalty,
of the Code of the Charter Township of Oakland. In addition to ordering
a person determined to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction to
pay a civil fine, cost, damages and expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall
be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or
enjoin present and future violations of this article. Each day that a violation
occurs shall constitute a separate violation. The penalties provided in this
section are in addition to the licensing sanctions provided in § 306-14.
The provisions of this article do not preclude any Circuit Court action for
the direction of the Township Board, provide such cards to the
Township residents requesting them at the cost thereof.
B. Any such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the property of the
directions contained on the card, and any violation of such directions
shall be deemed a trespass, punishable as a violation hereof.
C. Any solicitor, whether registered under this article or not, who has
entered any property, whether invited or not, shall immediately and
peaceably depart from the property. Failure to depart shall be deemed a
trespass, and a violation hereof.61
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 306-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-6
1:333
injunctive relief, nor shall they abridge any other remedy available to the
Township under present law.
§ 306-7. Registration required.
§ 306-8. Exemptions.
Persons engaging in soliciting which is sponsored by a public, parochial or
private elementary, middle, junior high, or high school or by a recognized
nonprofit charitable or religious organization shall be exempt from the
registration requirements set forth in this article, provided prior written
notification has been given to the Clerk at least 30 days prior to the
commencing of any solicitation activities, providing proof that the
sponsoring organization is a legitimate nonprofit organization and
describing in detail the soliciting activity to take place, the goods or
merchandise to be offered for sale in the course of the soliciting, and those
individuals that are to be engaged in the soliciting activity on behalf of the
sponsoring organization.
§ 306-9. Application for registration.
A. It is unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to engage
in soliciting unless such person is registered in accordance with the
terms of this article.
B. It is unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person under the
age of 18 years to engage in soliciting unless such person is registered
in accordance with the terms of this article and is accompanied by a
supervising adult over the age of 18 years who has been fully identified
on an approved application for a certificate of registration as required
by § 306-9.
C. It is unlawful for any person identified as a supervising adult on an
application for a certificate of registration filed with the Township Clerk
to fail to accompany a person under the age of 18 engaged in soliciting;
and such supervising adult shall be responsible and held separately
accountable for the solicitor's compliance with the provisions of this
article.
D. It shall be unlawful for any adult to knowingly allow or permit a person
under the age of 18 to engage in soliciting without first being registered
pursuant to this article or without being accompanied by a supervising
adult identified on an approved application for a certificate of
registration.
E. It shall be unlawful for a person who is not identified on an approved
application for a certificate of registration to accompany a person under
the age of 18 years engaging in soliciting.
§ 306-6 OAKLAND CODE § 306-9
1:334
A. Every person desiring to engage in soliciting within the Township shall,
prior to engaging in such solicitation, make written application for and
in fact obtain a certificate of registration as provided in this article.
B. Application for a certificate of registration shall be made to the
Township Clerk upon a form provided by the Township. The applicant
shall submit with the application a nonrefundable fee in an amount set
by resolution of the Township Board that is determined to be sufficient
to cover the administrative cost of the application, the process of
certification, the production of badges, and the monitoring of the
solicitor. The applicant shall truthfully state in full the following
information requested on the application.
(1) Name of the applicant.
(2) Current residence address and telephone number of the applicant
and length of residence at such address and, in addition, a business
address and telephone number if other than present residence
address and telephone number.
(3) Address of place of the applicant's residence during the past three
years, if other than present address.
(4) Social security number, age and date of birth of the applicant with
separate written proof (birth certificate or sworn affidavits)
independently verifying that the applicant is the age represented.
(5) Physical description of the applicant.
(6) Current name, telephone number and street address of the person,
corporation, association or other entity with whom the applicant is
employed or whom the applicant represents, and the length of time
of such employment and/or representation.
(7) Name and address of each of the applicant's employers during the
past three years.
(8) Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the
soliciting in which the applicant will engage.
(9) Period of time for which the certificate of registration is sought.
(10) The date, or approximate date, of the most recent previous
application for a certificate of registration in the Township.
(11) A statement whether a certificate of registration issued to the
applicant by the Township under this article has ever been revoked
and, if so, the date of such revocation.
(12) A statement identifying each and every criminal conviction of the
applicant, if any, including the date of the conviction, the convicting
court, and the originally charged crime of each such conviction. In
addition, the applicant shall fully disclose the date and arresting
§ 306-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-9
1:335
agency of each and every arrest, if any, for any crime involving
homicide, criminal sexual conduct, kidnapping, robbery, larceny,
assault/battery, use of a firearm, fraud, extortion, dishonesty, false
statement, or any felony offense involving the illegal entry into
a residential structure or damage to real or personal property,
irrespective of whether or not there was a resulting conviction for
any such arrest.
(13) A legible copy of the applicant's driver's license, having sufficient
clarity to identify the applicant's photograph; if the applicant does
not have a driver's license with a photograph, the application shall
include a photograph at least two inches by two inches in size
showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and
distinguishing manner.
(14) The application shall be signed by the applicant, and all statements
made by the applicant under the application or in connection with
the application shall be sworn statements made under oath.
(15) Such other identification and information necessary to discover the
truth of the matters asserted in the application is required to be set
forth in the application.
C. If the applicant is under the age of 18 years, a supervising adult over
the age of 18 years must truthfully state, in full, the following
information requested as part of the application provided by the
Township:
(1) Name of the supervising adult.
(2) Current residence address and telephone number of the
supervising adult, and length of residence at such address, and, in
addition, a business address and telephone number at which the
supervising adult is employed if other than the present residence
address and telephone number.
(3) Address of place of the supervising adult's residence during the
past three years, if other than present address.
(4) Social security number, age and date of birth of the supervising
adult with separate written proof (birth certificate or sworn
affidavits) independently verifying that the supervising adult is the
age represented.
(5) Physical description of the supervising adult.
(6) Name, telephone number and street address of the person,
corporation, association or other entity with whom the supervising
adult is employed or whom the supervising adult represents, and
the length of time of such employment and/or representation.
(7) Name and address of each of the supervising adult's employers
during the past three years.
§ 306-9 OAKLAND CODE § 306-9
1:336
(8) A statement as to whether the supervising adult has ever been
issued a certificate of registration by the Township and whether
any certificate of registration issued to the applicant by the
Township under this article has ever been revoked and, if so, the
date of such revocation.
(9) A statement identifying each and every criminal conviction of the
supervising adult, if any, including the date of the conviction, the
convicting court, and the originally charged crime of each such
conviction. In addition, the supervising adult shall fully disclose the
date and arresting agency of each and every arrest, if any, for
crimes involving homicide, criminal sexual conduct, kidnapping,
larceny, robbery, assault/battery, use of a firearm, fraud, extortion,
dishonesty, false statements, or any felony offense involving the
entry into or damage of a residential structure, irrespective of
whether or not there was a resulting conviction for any such
offense.
(10) A legible copy of the supervising adult's driver's license, having
sufficient clarity to identify the supervising adult's photograph; if
the supervising adult does not have a driver's license with a
photograph, the application shall include a photograph at least two
inches by two inches in size showing the head and shoulders of the
supervising adult in a clear and distinguishing manner.
(11) The application shall be signed by the supervising adult, and all
statements made by the supervising adult under the application or
in connection with the application shall be sworn statements made
under oath.
(12) A statement acknowledging that the supervising adult has read and
understands the provisions and requirements contained within this
article, and that the supervising adult accepts all responsibility and
shall be separately accountable for compliance with this article by
the solicitor under the age of 18 years which the supervising adult
is to accompany.
(13) Such other identification and information necessary to discover the
truth of the matters asserted in the application is required to be set
forth in the application.
D. The Township Clerk shall cause to be kept in his/her office an accurate
record of every application received and acted upon, together with all
other information and date pertaining thereto and all certificates of
registration issued under the provisions of this article. The Clerk shall
also keep a record of the denial of any such applications as are denied.
Applications for certificates shall be numbered in consecutive order as
filed, and every certificate issued, and any renewal thereof, shall be
identified with a duplicate number of the application upon which it was
issued.
§ 306-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-10
1:337
§ 306-10. Reasons for denial.
An application for a certificate of registration shall be denied if the
applicant or an identified supervising adult:
§ 306-11. Issuance of registration.
Upon compliance with the terms of this article, any person bearing a
certificate of registration shall be entitled to solicit, so long as the
solicitations are otherwise in compliance with applicable local ordinance
and state and federal law.
§ 306-12. Term of registration.
The certificate of registration, when issued, shall be for the period of time
applied for in the application or for 60 days, whichever period is the shorter,
and the certificate shall state the date of expiration.
§ 306-13. Display of certificate.
The Clerk shall issue to any solicitor who has obtained a valid certificate of
registration under this article a clear plastic badge in which the certificate
of registration can and shall be inserted. When soliciting, a solicitor shall
at all times have the badge, specified in this section, containing a valid and
legible certificate of registration attached to his outer clothing and worn
in such a manner as to be clearly visible to others. It shall be unlawful to
engage in soliciting without a valid certificate of registration issued to that
person worn and attached to that person as required herein.
§ 306-14. Grounds for revocation.
A certificate of registration issued under this article shall be revoked if the
holder of the certificate or a person identified as a supervising adult in an
approved application for a certificate of registration:
A. Has ever been convicted of a criminal offense under state or federal law
which involved homicide, criminal sexual conduct, kidnapping, larceny,
robbery, assault/battery, use of a firearm, fraud, extortion, dishonesty,
false statements, illegal entry into a residential structure, or damage of
real or personal property;
B. Has been convicted within the past 10 years of a felony offense under
state law or any criminal offense under federal law and/or remains on
probation or parole with respect to any such offense;
C. Has ever had a certificate of registration revoked, following issuance
under this article; or
D. Has ever been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this
article, any similar ordinance in any other jurisdiction, or any state law
regulating soliciting.
§ 306-10 OAKLAND CODE § 306-14
1:338
§ 306-15. Revocation hearing; suspension.
§ 306-16. Appeal of denial.
Any person denied a certificate of registration by the Township Clerk
pursuant to this article may appeal to the Township Board in writing,
stating reasons why the certificate should be granted. The Township Board
may grant or deny the certificate after a hearing open to the public and
A. Has ever been convicted of a criminal offense under state or federal law
which involved homicide, criminal sexual conduct, kidnapping, robbery,
larceny, assault/battery, use of a firearm, fraud, extortion, dishonesty,
false statement, illegal entry into a residential structure, or damage of
real or personal property;
B. Has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article;
C. Has falsified the information, or has provided misleading information or
statements, as part of the application for a certificate of registration
submitted under this article; or
D. Has otherwise become disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of
registration in accordance with the terms of this article.
A. No certificate shall be revoked until after a public hearing before the
Township Board to determine just cause for such revocation.
B. Pending such hearing, the Township Clerk shall suspend any certificate
of registration issued under this article upon determining that there is
reasonable cause to believe that one or more grounds for revocation
exist, as such grounds are identified in § 306-14.
C. Notice of such revocation hearing shall be given in writing and served
at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. Such written notice
shall be given by the Township Clerk to the holder of the certificate, in
person or by first-class mail, addressed to his or her residence address
as set forth in the application. The notice shall state the grounds of the
complaint against the holder of the certificate, and shall state the time
and place where the hearing shall be held. The suspension pending
such hearing shall be effective immediately upon the giving of such
notice, or the mailing thereof, as aforesaid.
D. At such revocation hearing, the holder of the certificate shall be given
the opportunity to be heard and present facts in the certificate holder's
support, and the Township Board shall give such facts consideration in
making a determination relative to the revocation of the certificate of
registration.
E. At the conclusion of such revocation hearing, if the grounds for
revocation of a certificate of registration have been demonstrated, the
Township Board shall order the certificate revoked and shall state the
reasons for such revocation in the minutes of the hearing.
§ 306-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-16
1:339
such decision shall be final. Also, the Township Board may elect on its
own motion to review any determination of the Township Clerk granting
or denying a certificate of registration. Notice of any such hearing shall
be given in writing to the applicant and served at least five days prior
to the date of the hearing. Such written notice shall be given by the
Township Clerk to the applicant for the certificate of registration in person
or by first-class mail addressed to his residence address as set forth in the
application. At the hearing, the applicant shall be given the opportunity to
be heard and present facts in the applicant's support, and the Township
Board shall give such facts consideration in making a determination relative
to the applicant's appeal of the denial of the application for a certificate
of registration. If, at the conclusion of the public hearing, the Township
Board denies, or upholds the denial, of the application for a certificate of
registration, the Township Board shall state the reasons for such denial in
the minutes of the hearing.
§ 306-16 OAKLAND CODE § 306-16
1:340
Chapter 320
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 143.
Construction standards — See Ch. 165.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 203.
Offenses — See Ch. 285.
Solid waste — See Ch. 355.
Tree protection, preservation and
removal — See Ch. 389.
§ 306-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 306-16
1:341

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Standards
[Adopted 5-13-1986 by Ord. No. 50 (Ch. 4, Art. III, of the 2007 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 320-1. Adoption of property maintenance standards.63
A certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the Township
Clerk, marked and designated as the "International Property Maintenance
Code, 2015," as published by the International Code Council, is adopted as
the Property Maintenance Code of the Township for the control of buildings
and structures as provided in this article; and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the Property Maintenance
Code are referred to, adopted and made a part of this article as if fully set
out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in § 320-2.
§ 320-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections of the Property Maintenance Code adopted in § 320-1
shall be revised as follows:
A. Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the "Property
Maintenance Code of the Charter Township of Oakland," hereinafter
referred to as "this code."
B. Section 103.5 is amended to read as follows:
103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the
department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be
adopted by resolution of the Township Board from time to time.
C. Section 104.1 is amended to read as follows:
104.1. General. The code official shall enforce all of the provisions of
this code. The Building Official of the Township shall serve as the code
official.
D. Section 304.14 is amended to read as follows:
304.14 Insect screens. During the period from March 1 to November
30, every door, window and other outside opening used or required for
ventilation purposes serving any building containing habitable rooms,
food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products
used in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured,
packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting
63.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 320-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-2
1:343
§ 320-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-8-1999 by Ord. No.
8166]
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and subject to a civil fine as set
forth in Chapter 1, Article I, Definitions; General Penalty, of the Code of the
Charter Township of Oakland. In addition to ordering a person determined
to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs,
damages and expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue
any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or enjoin violation of this
article. Each act of violation, and on each day which any such violation shall
occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch, and every swinging door
shall have a self-closing device, in good working condition.64
E. Section 602.1 is amended to read as follows:
602.1 Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in
structures as required by this section, and shall be supplied with heat
during the period from September 1 to May 31.65
64.Editor's Note: The provisions regarding Sections 602.3 and 602.4 of the Property
Maintenance Code, which immediately followed this subsection in original Sec. 4-62 of the
2007 Code of Ordinances, were repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. II).
65.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 320-2 OAKLAND CODE § 320-3
1:344
Chapter 333
REVIEW EXPENSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain and wetlands protection — See Ch.
210.
Land divisions and subdivisions — See Ch.
250.
Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 364.
Tree protection, preservation and
removal — See Ch. 389.
§ 333-1. Intent and purpose.
The intent and purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the obligation
to finance Township reviews for the benefit of private persons or entities
does not fall upon the general public where the purpose or direct benefit
of such Township reviews is not for the Township at large. The intent of
the Township Board is to require persons and entities seeking approvals
which are not for the direct benefit for the Township at large to pay for the
financial burdens incurred by the Township as a result of the requests for
Township reviews.
§ 333-2. Requirements.
A. This chapter shall apply in circumstances in which the Township is
requested for, or otherwise acts upon, an authorization, permission,
permit, recommendation, expert determination, opinion or other
approval or action for the benefit of the person or property which is the
subject of such action, and where the purpose or direct benefit of such
action is not for the Township at large. For purposes of this chapter,
such action shall be referred to as "Township review."
B. Where a Township review reasonably requires one or more Township
consultants, contractors, agent, or other persons or entities not
compensated on a regular Township salary or hourly basis, or if and to
the extent a Township review reasonably requires action by a Township
officer or employee which contemplates work beyond regular salary or
hourly compensation, the person making the request, and/or the owner
of the property which is the subject of the Township review, shall be
obligated to advance the moneys reasonably allocable for the Township
review, together with a reasonable administrative fee. The
administrative fee shall be in an amount estimated by the Township to
be reasonably related to the cost of administering this chapter, and to
the time expended by the Township officers and employees during
normal business hours in undertaking a Township review. If the moneys
for any reason have not been advanced prior to the Township review,
such moneys shall be reimbursed.
§ 320-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-2
1:345
§ 333-3. Escrow.
§ 333-4. Exemption.
If a person does not have adequate funds to pay for the Township review,
as required under this chapter, the fees will be waived upon the filing of
an affidavit of indigency, stating under oath that such person does not have
adequate real or personal property to pay or secure all or any part of the
funds.
§ 333-5. Appeal.
In the event a person or entity called upon to escrow or otherwise pay
moneys under this chapter becomes aggrieved based upon the
administration of this chapter, such person or entity may appeal decisions
made in the administration of this chapter to the Township Board, provided
such appeal must be taken within 21 days of the decision to be appealed by
submitting a letter or other writing to the Township Clerk requesting the
appeal with such time.
Chapter 355
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 143.
Offenses — See Ch. 285.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 320.
Tree removal — See Ch. 389.
C. The amount of money required to be paid under this chapter shall be
reasonably related to the amount of costs and expenses to be incurred
by the Township to complete the Township review and administration.
A. For purposes of administering this chapter, the Township may require
an escrow of moneys with the Township in an amount reasonably
estimated to be required to cover the anticipated costs and expenses to
be incurred in the Township review and administration. Payments from
such escrow shall be based upon a written billing or other written
accounting for the Township review undertaken, and such written
documentation shall be maintained for inspection by the person or
entity providing the funds.
B. In the event it is determined that the amount in escrow is or will be
inadequate to cover all the costs and expenses of the Township review
and administration, the Township may require supplemental moneys to
be placed in escrow for completion of the Township review.
C. To the extent an escrow exceeds the actual cost and expense of the
Township review and administration, as ultimately determined, the
excess shall be returned to the person or entity who posted the escrow.
§ 333-2 OAKLAND CODE § 333-5
1:346
ARTICLE I
Storage of Rubbish
[Adopted 2-18-1981 by Ord. No. 40 (Ch. 24, Art. II, of the 2007 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 355-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RUBBISH — Includes any discarded articles of food, clothing, receptacles,
building materials, automobiles, trucks, trailers, or any automotive products
or parts thereof, recreational item, or machines, or parts thereof, or other
waste products.
§ 355-2. Nuisances; rodents.
The storing, piling or maintaining of any rubbish in such a way as to
encourage or be likely to encourage the breeding of rats and other rodents
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
§ 355-3. Storing, piling and keeping unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to store, pile or
keep or to permit the storing, piling or keeping of any rubbish within the
Township in such a manner as to encourage or be likely to encourage the
sheltering and propagation of rats and other rodents.
§ 355-4. Inspections; enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Township Supervisor or such other
person as may be designated by resolution of the Township Board who shall:
A. Upon inspection of such property within the Township which may be
found to be in violation of the conditions heretofore set forth, issue to
the owner of such property or his agent or persons found thereon
thought to be there by right and leave of such owner, a violation notice
in such form and contents which shall reasonably inform such owner,
his agent or person so in charge of such property of the violations
involved, specifying a time limit in which corrections shall be made, the
cost of reinspection of such premises, and the name and telephone
number of the person to contact for such further reinspection.
B. In the event that such violations are not cured within the time limit so
specified and reinspection called for and fees so prescribed paid within
five days following the time limit specified in such violation notice, then
and under such circumstances, the Township Supervisor, or such other
person so designated by the Township Board, may upon reinspection of
such areas of violation, issue or cause to be issued to the owner of such
property or such agent or other person found to be in charge of such
property, an appearance ticket-complaint which shall be of a form and
§ 355-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-4
1:347
§ 355-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-8-1999 by Ord. No.
8167]
Violation of any provision of this article constitutes a municipal civil
infraction. A person determined to be responsible for a municipal civil
infraction for violation of any provision of this article shall be subject
to a civil fine as set forth in Chapter 1, Article I, Definitions; General
Penalty, of the Code of the Charter Township of Oakland. Each day that
a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate violation. In
addition to ordering a person determined to be responsible for a municipal
civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the Judge
or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order
necessary to enforce or enjoin violation of this article.
style as may be approved by the District Court Administrator for the
52nd Judicial District Court, 3rd Division, which shall set forth with
reasonable certainty, information to inform the owner, his agent or
other person found in charge of such property of the nature of the
complaint asserted against him, the time and place of his required
appearance and the name and identity of the issuing officer or other
complainant.
C. The Township Supervisor, or such other person so designated by the
Township Board, shall upon the issuance of such appearance ticketcomplaint,
make his return to the 52nd Judicial District Court, 3rd
Division, in sufficient time and reasonable certainty as may be required
pursuant to the direction of the District Court Administrator.
67.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 355-4 OAKLAND CODE § 355-5
1:348
ARTICLE II
Solid Waste Disposal Service
[Adopted 4-11-1989 by Ord. No. 55 (Ch. 24, Art. III, of the 2007
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 355-6. Definitions.
§ 355-7. Standards for operation. [Amended 5-12-1998 by Ord. No.
55-1A]
A. Generally. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
SOLID WASTE — Nonhazardous garbage, rubbish, ashes, incinerator
ash, incinerator residue, street cleanings, municipal and industrial
sludges, and solid commercial and solid industrial waste, animal waste,
but does not include human body waste, liquid or other waste regulated
by statute, ferrous or nonferrous scrap directed to a scrap metal
processor or to a reuser of ferrous or nonferrous products.
B. Other words and terms. All other words and terms in this article shall
be construed in accordance with custom and usage in the regulation of
solid waste disposal and transportation, and otherwise according to
meanings generally ascribed.
A. In the operation of licensee, no person shall create a nuisance or permit
solid waste to fall or be spilled or dumped upon, or transported or
delivered to public or private property which is not duly designated for
such purpose in accordance with applicable law.
B. A licensee shall not cause or permit solid waste to fall or be spilled or
dumped upon a place which is not designated for such purpose, and the
licensee shall cause any solid waste in violation of this provision to be
removed and transported to a site duly designated for such purpose
within 12 hours of notice from the Township.
C. If a licensee shall cause or permit solid waste to fall or be spilled upon a
public or private roadway, the licensee shall take immediate action to
ensure that safe travel over the roadway is restored, and as soon as it is
safe to do so, to ensure the road is cleared for travel, and that the solid
waste which fell or was spilled is transported to a site duly designated
for such purpose.
D. Any vehicle used in the business of licensee within the Township shall
display in a conspicuous place the licensee's name and telephone
number so that such vehicle can be readily identified.
E. All solid waste collected or transported by a licensee shall be directly
transported to a transfer facility, processing plant or disposal area duly
licensed and/or authorized in accordance with applicable law.
§ 355-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-8
1:349
§ 355-8. Schedule of collection fees and pickup.
§ 355-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-12-1998 by Ord. No.
55-1A; 6-8-1999 by Ord. No. 81]
§ 355-10. Licensure requirement.
No individual or entity shall hereafter engage in or carry on the business
of the collection of solid waste from any premises within the Township,
residential or nonresidential, unless and until a license for such purpose has
been applied for and issued as provided in this article.
A. Each licensee shall file with the Township Clerk a complete schedule of
collection fees and charges to be made to customers for service. Notice
shall be given to the Township Clerk within 30 days after the effective
date of any change in the fee schedule.
B. Each licensee shall file with the Township Clerk a complete schedule of
the days and areas, including street names, that pickups to customers
are to be made, by street. A licensee shall give notice to the Township
Clerk within 30 days after the effective date of any change in the pickup
schedule. This section shall not prohibit a deviation from the filed
pickup schedule in the event that such deviation is not directly within
the control of the licensee, for example, where weather conditions,
vehicle breakdown, or the like, result in the licensee being unable to
reasonably comply with the filed schedule.
A. Violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a municipal civil
infraction. A person determined to be responsible for a municipal civil
infraction for violation of any provision of this article shall be subject to
a civil fine as set forth in Chapter 1, Article I, Definitions; General
Penalty, of the Code of the Charter Township of Oakland. In addition to
ordering a person determined to be responsible for a municipal civil
infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages, and expenses, the Judge or
Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order
necessary to enforce or enjoin violation of this article.68
B. Each act of violation, and every day upon which such violation shall
occur, shall constitute a separate offense.
C. In addition to the penalties provided in Subsections A and B of this
section, the Township may seek to enjoin or otherwise abate any
violation of this article by any other authorized action.
D. Three or more determinations of responsibility for a violation of any of
the provisions of this article, within a twenty-four-month period, may
result in a revocation of the license following the procedures set forth in
§ 355-16.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 355-8 OAKLAND CODE § 355-11
1:350
§ 355-11. Application for license.
Application for licensure under this article shall be made to the Township
Clerk by filing an application containing at least the following information:
§ 355-12. Inspection and report.
After receipt of an application submitted in accordance with § 355-11, the
Supervisor, or the Supervisor's designate, and all other persons to whom
the application has been sent with a request to inspect, shall conduct
inspections and prepare a report and recommendation on the application,
including in the report any and all matters relating to Township or other
requirements and standards for solid waste collection and transport. The
A. The full name, address and telephone number of the applicant. If the
applicant is a partnership or corporation, the application shall include
the name, address and telephone number of the registered agent and/or
person having the authority and responsibility for the management of
the applicant.
B. The names and addresses of each and every person having an
ownership interest in the business to be licensed.
C. The name, address and phone number of the business constituting the
entity to be licensed.
D. The name, address and telephone number of an individual designated
as the agent of applicant for purposes of communication with the
Township in connection with all matters relating to licensure and
operation of the business in accordance with this article.
E. Detailed description of equipment, personnel and procedures to be
utilized in the proposed business of collecting solid waste, including a
description of each truck and other items of equipment used in the
business. The applicant shall include an affidavit specifying that each
truck meets all requirements of this article.
F. A statement made under oath that all vehicles and equipment to be
utilized in the proposed business have all applicable governmental
licenses and permits.
G. A description of the geographic areas within which the applicant
proposes to collect solid waste.
H. The number of households (separately) the number of nonresidential
premises to be served.
I. The name of each other municipality in which the applicant collects
solid waste.
J. The name and address of each and every site to which solid waste shall
be transported by the licensee.
§ 355-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-12
1:351
report shall be transmitted to the Township Clerk within 30 days after
receipt of a request for inspection.
§ 355-13. Standards for issuance of license.
The Township Clerk shall grant the application unless, based upon facts
set forth in one or more of the reports, it appears that the public health,
safety or general welfare of the Township might be jeopardized, taking into
consideration the following standards:
§ 355-14. Issuance of license; term.
The license shall, if granted under § 355-13, be issued upon payment of
the required license fees, and upon filing of the information required under
§ 355-8. All licenses issued under this article shall expire on the same date
each year, and, specifically, on June 1.
§ 355-15. Appeal of denial for license.
Any person aggrieved by the grant or denial of a license under this article
may appeal to the Township Board by written request made within 20 days
following the grant or denial. Such written request shall set forth the basis
for the claim that the license had been wrongfully granted or denied.
§ 355-16. Renewal, nonrenewal and revocation of license.
A. Whether the applicant's vehicles meet the standards of § 355-7.
B. Whether the applicant has submitted all information required under
this article.
C. Whether there is any specific basis for concluding that grant of the
application would result in the creation of a nuisance or health hazard
to the Township.
A. Licenses issued under this article shall be renewed each year
administratively upon the applicant filing with the Township Clerk an
update of all information required to be submitted with the application
under this article, and payment of the fee as required in § 355-17. Such
renewal shall be subject to the provisions of this article.
B. Any license issued under this article may be revoked by the Township
Board and renewal of a license may be denied, based upon any false
statements made in the application for licensure or for renewal. Such
revocation or nonrenewal may also be made for failure to comply with
the provisions of ordinance, law or actions of the licensee, any one of
which results in or reflects the inability on the part of the licensee to
provide solid waste collection in a safe and healthy manner.
C. Before any license shall be revoked or its renewal denied, written
notice shall be given to the licensee stating the time and place for a
hearing before the Township Board, and further stating that the license
§ 355-12 OAKLAND CODE § 355-16
1:352
§ 355-17. License fees.
A license fee shall be established and may be modified from time to time by
resolution of the Township Board. Such fee shall be utilized for the purpose
of offsetting administration of this article. The fee shall be payable to the
Township Clerk at the time application is made for licensure or renewal.
may be revoked or renewal denied, and setting forth the alleged
grounds for such consideration. At the hearing, an opportunity shall
be given to the licensee to be heard by the Township Board, and an
opportunity to produce evidence and witnesses as the licensee may
choose.
D. In the event of the revocation or nonrenewal of any license, the
Township Board shall specify in the minutes of the hearing reasons for
such revocation or nonrenewal, and shall cause a copy of such minutes
to be mailed or given to the licensee.
§ 355-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 355-17
1:353
Chapter 364
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 68.
Construction standards — See Ch. 165.
Floodplain and wetlands protection — See Ch.
210.
Historic districts and preservation — See Ch.
228.
Land divisions and subdivisions — See Ch.
250.
Mining operations — See Ch. 267.
Tree removal — See Ch. 389.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 415.
§ 355-17 OAKLAND CODE § 355-17
1:354
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 364-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter shall be:
§ 364-2. Construction of language.
The following rules of construction apply to the text of this chapter:
A. To protect public health, safety and welfare by requiring stormwater
management whenever new, expanded or modified developments are
proposed.
B. To promote for the most efficient and beneficial uses of land and water
resources.
C. To ensure that stormwater runoff from development is controlled so
that lake and stream water quality is protected, siltation minimized, and
flooding problems avoided.
D. To provide for cost-effective and functionally effective stormwater
management, and to reduce the need for future remedial projects.
E. To prevent soil erosion and sedimentation by requiring temporary and
permanent erosion control measures.
F. To use the natural drainage system for conveying and receiving
stormwater runoff, and to minimize the need to construct storm drain
pipes.
G. To encourage multiple-purpose stormwater management which
enhances the environmental character of the Township.
H. To allow wetlands to be used for stormwater detention in selected
locations, while ensuring that the natural functions and quality of
wetlands throughout the Township are protected to the maximum
feasible extent.
I. To recognize private responsibility to incorporate stormwater
management systems into the early stages of site planning and design.
J. To allow for off-site stormwater management under specified
conditions.
K. To ensure that all stormwater conveyance and detention facilities will
be properly maintained.
L. To provide penalties for violation of the provisions of this chapter.
A. Particulars provided by way of illustration or enumeration shall not
control general language.
§ 364-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-2
1:355
§ 364-3. Abrogation and conflict of authority.
§ 364-4. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACCELERATED SOIL EROSION — The increased movement of soils that
occurs as a result of man's activities.
CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A storm drain, as defined in this chapter.
DETENTION BASIN — A structure or facility, natural or artificial, which
stores stormwater on a temporary basis and releases it at a controlled rate.
A detention basin may drain completely after a storm event, or it may be a
pond with a fixed minimum water elevation between runoff events.
DISCHARGE — The rate of flow of water at a given point and time,
measured in cubic feet per second.
DISTURBED AREA — An area of land subjected to the removal of vegetative
cover and/or earth-moving activities.
B. Ambiguities, if any, shall be construed liberally in favor of protecting
natural land and water resources.
C. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
D. Terms not specifically defined in this chapter shall have the meaning
customarily assigned to them.
E. In case of conflict between Township maps and the definitions in this
chapter, the definition shall control.
A. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to conflict with present or
future state statutes in the same subject matter. Conflicting provisions
of this chapter shall be abrogated to the extent of the conflict. The
provisions of this chapter shall be construed, if possible, to be
consistent with and in addition to relevant state regulations and
statutes.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements and shall be liberally
construed in favor of the Township Board and shall not be deemed a
limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statutes.
C. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this
chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of this chapter
shall prevail. If there is another ordinance that is inconsistent, the
terms of the ordinance that is most restrictive shall apply.
§ 364-2 OAKLAND CODE § 364-4
1:356
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — All facilities, measures, areas, and structures which
serve to convey, catch, filter, store, and/or receive stormwater, either on
a temporary or permanent basis (also see definitions for primary drainage
system and secondary drainage system).
EARTH CHANGE — A human-made change in the natural cover or
topography of land, including cut and fill activities, which may result in or
contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation of watercourses or wetlands.
Earth change does not include the practice of plowing and tilling soil for the
purpose of crop production.
ENGINEERED GRADING PLAN — A map which shows alterations of
topography, alterations of watercourses, flow directions of stormwater
runoff, and proposed stormwater management and erosion control
measures.
FLOOD — A temporary rise in the level of any water body, watercourse or
wetland which inundates areas not ordinarily covered by water.
FLOODPLAIN — The relatively flat areas or lowlands adjoining a
watercourse or a body of water which has been or may be covered by
floodwater.
INFILTRATION FACILITY — A structure or designated area which allows
runoff to gradually seep into the ground, e.g., french drains, seepage pits,
infiltration basin, dry well, or perforated pipe.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT — A binding agreement which sets forth the
terms and conditions for the maintenance of erosion control measures and
stormwater facilities.
NONEROSIVE VELOCITY — A rate of flow of stormwater which does not
cause erosion.
OFF-SITE FACILITY — All or part of a drainage system which is located
partially or completely off of the development site which it serves.
PEAK RATE OF DISCHARGE — The maximum allowable rate of stormwater
flow from a storm event, as measured at a given point and time in cubic feet
per second.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or organization of any kind, including government agencies,
conducting operations within the Township.
PRIMARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Facilities, structures, and areas which
convey, store, or receive runoff from storms up to a ten-year frequency.
PROPRIETOR — A person, public corporation or authority, or a government
agency that holds an interest in land, whether recorded or not.
PUBLIC STORM SEWER — A drainage system serving a platted subdivision
or other development which has been designed and constructed to be
operated and maintained by the County Water Resources Commissioner or
the County Road Commission.
§ 364-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-4
1:357
RECEIVING BODY OF WATER — Any watercourse, lake, pond or wetland
into which surface waters are directed, either naturally or artificially.
RETENTION BASIN — A holding area for stormwater, either natural or
human-made, which does not have an outlet to adjoining watercourses or
wetlands. Water is removed from retention basins through infiltration and/
or evaporation processes, and retention basins may or may not have a
permanent pool of water.
RUNOFF — The part of precipitation which flows over the land.
SECONDARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Facilities, structures and areas which
convey, store or receive runoff from storms of more than a ten-year
frequency and up to a one-hundred-year frequency.
SEDIMENT — Mineral or organic solid particulate matter that has been
removed from its site of origin by the processes of soil erosion, is in
suspension in water, or is being transported.
SITE — Any tract, lot or parcel of land or combination of tracts, lots or
parcels of land proposed for development.
SOIL EROSION — The wearing away of land by the action of wind, water,
gravity or a combination thereof.
SOIL EROSION CONTROL MEASURES — A structure, facility, barrier,
berm, vegetative cover, basin, and/or other installations designed to control
accelerated soil erosion. Temporary measures are installed to control soil
erosion during construction or until soils in the contributing drainage area
are stabilized. Permanent measures remain after the project is completed.
STORAGE FACILITY — A basin, structure, or area, either natural or humanmade,
which is capable of holding stormwater for the purpose of reducing
the rate of discharge from the site.
STORM DRAIN — A conduit, pipe, swale, natural channel or human-made
structure which serves to transport stormwater runoff. Storm drains may be
either enclosed conduits or unenclosed drains.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURES AND FACILITIES — Any
facility, structure, channel, area, or measure which serves to control
stormwater runoff in accordance with the purposes and standards of this
chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — Maps and written information
which describe the way in which soil erosion and stormwater flows are
proposed to be controlled, both during and after construction.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM — The primary drainage system,
the secondary drainage system, and all erosion control measures, whether
temporary or permanent.
SWALE — Low-lying area with gradual slopes which transports stormwater.
WATERCOURSE — See the definition of "watercourse" in § 210-2.
§ 364-4 OAKLAND CODE § 364-4
1:358
WATERSHED — A land area which contributes runoff to a receiving body of
water, otherwise known as a "drainage area."
WETLANDS — See the definition of "wetlands" in § 210-2.
§ 364-5. Applicability.
A. Generally. Every new development or earth change in the Township
shall have either a stormwater management plan or an engineered
grading plan, depending on the type of development, as listed below.
B. Stormwater management plan.
(1) A stormwater management plan shall be submitted and reviewed in
accordance with requirements of Article II of this chapter. The
following types of developments and earth changes require a
stormwater management plan:
(a) Land development proposals subject to site plan review
requirements in the Zoning Ordinance.
(b) Subdivision plat and condominium proposals.69
(c) Land divisions which involve public or private road
developments regulated under Chapter 250, Land Divisions
and Subdivisions, Part 2, Partition of Platted Lots.
(d) Any proposal to mine, excavate, or clear and grade one acre or
more of land for purposes other than agriculture, routine
landscaping, and gardening.
(e) Development projects of federal, state and local agencies.
(2) Approval of final development plans, site plans, and final
preliminary subdivision plats and condominiums shall not be
granted prior to approval of the stormwater management plan.70
C. Engineered grading plan.
(1) An engineered grading plan shall be submitted and reviewed in
accordance with requirements of Article III of this chapter. The
following types of new construction of single-family housing units
require an engineered grading plan:
(a) Acreage parcels.
(b) Platted subdivision lots.
69.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 364-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-5
1:359
§ 364-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-8-1999 by Ord. No.
81]
(2) The engineered grading plan shall be approved by the Township
Engineer and the designated Township Building Official prior to the
issuance of any building permit.
A. Any person found responsible for violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to a civil fine as set forth in Chapter 1,
Article I, Definitions; General Penalty, of the Code of the Charter
Township of Oakland. In addition to ordering the person determined to
be responsible for a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs,
damages and expenses, the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to
issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or enjoin
violation of this chapter.71
B. The Township Board, in addition to other remedies, may institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to abate or restrain the violation.
C. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be deemed as separate and
distinct offense. Expenses in connection with such action shall be
assessed as damages against the violation.
D. The approval or disapproval of any stormwater management plan shall
not have any effect on any remedy of any person at law or in equity.
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 364-5 OAKLAND CODE § 364-6
1:360
ARTICLE II
Stormwater Management Plan Requirements
§ 364-7. Preapplication conference.72
A preapplication conference shall be held with the Township
Superintendent and/or his designee prior to the submittal of a stormwater
management plan. The purpose of the preapplication conference is to
provide information and guidance that will assist the proprietor in
preparing the required plan.
§ 364-8. Contents of stormwater management plan.
A. Clarity of plan presentation.
(1) Through maps, illustrations, reports, and calculations, the
stormwater management plan shall display the required
information in a clear and logical sequence.
(2) Information submitted to the Township on a site plan or tentative
preliminary subdivision plat or condominium may be used to meet
the requirements of this section, provided that a written statement
identifying the applicable data is provided.73
(3) The stormwater management plan must be sufficiently detailed to
specify the type, location, and size of stormwater management and
erosion control facilities, using preliminary calculations. Detailed
construction drawings are not required at the stormwater
management plan review stage.
(4) If it is proposed to develop a parcel in two or more phases, the
stormwater management plan shall be prepared and submitted for
the total project unless a variation has been approved by the
Township Board.
B. Plan preparation. The stormwater management plan shall be prepared
by a registered civil engineer, registered landscape architect,
registered surveyor, and/or registered architect. Other persons and
professionals may assist in the preparation of the plan.
C. Scale for mapping. The stormwater management plan shall be drawn to
a scale of at least one inch equal to 50 feet for property less than three
acres and one inch equal to 100 feet for property three acres or more in
size.
D. Required information; identification and description. The following
information is required for all stormwater management plans:
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
73.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 364-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-8
1:361
(1) Proprietor's name, address and telephone number.
(2) Name of the township, city or village where residing.
(3) Date (month, day, year) including revisions.
(4) Title block, scale, and North point.
(5) Name of planner, architect, engineer, surveyor, wetland specialist,
landscape architect, and/or other technical experts who have
prepared or assisted in the preparation of the stormwater
management plan.
(6) Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas, etc., on
the parcel and within 100 feet of the site.
(7) Proposed lot lines, property lines, and all structures, parking areas,
etc., within the site and within 100 feet of the site.
(8) Zoning classification of petitioner's parcel and all abutting parcels.
E. Required information; existing conditions. The following information
describing existing site conditions is required:
(1) A site location and vicinity map at a scale of not less than one inch
equal to 2,000 feet which shows watercourses, wetlands,
topography, and other features relevant to stormwater
management. United States Geological Survey quadrangle map
information may be submitted to meet this requirement. The
approximate boundaries of the small watershed within which the
site is located shall be delineated (maps available for reference at
the Township offices).
(2) Topography on the site and within 100 feet of the site at two-foot
contour intervals, referenced to a North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD 88) as bench mark.74
(3) Designation of soils with a high infiltration rate, including soil map
units 14B, 14C, 15B, 15C, 15E, 35A, 62B, 62C, and 63A, as shown
on the soil survey maps of the county, published by the United
States Soil Conservation Service.
(4) Location and flow direction of all watercourses (including lakes,
ponds, creeks, and streams) on the site, including permanent and
intermittent features, as indicated on aerial photographs or United
States Geological Survey topographic quadrangle maps, and
verified through field survey. Elevations shall be indicated,
referenced to a North American Vertical Datum (NAVD 88) as
bench mark.75
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 364-8 OAKLAND CODE § 364-8
1:362
(5) Location of wetlands, based upon the National Wetland Inventory
Maps (available for reference in the Township offices) and verified
by field survey.
(6) Location of the one-hundred-year floodplain for all watercourses.
(7) Outlet points and associated drainage area boundaries.
(8) Preliminary engineering analysis of the existing peak rate of
discharge from the site.
(9) Entry points where stormwater runoff and watercourses enter the
site from off-site locations, with arrows indicating the direction of
the flow.
(10) Location of existing storm drains, ditches, basins, and other
stormwater management facilities.
F. Required information; proposed conditions. The following information
describing the site after the proposed alteration or development is
required:
(1) Proposed changes to the land surface and existing vegetative cover,
including delineation of areas to be cut and filled. Final contours at
two-foot contour intervals shall be provided.
(2) A plan and timetable for the staging of site grading and preparation
activities.
(3) General description and proposed location of temporary and
permanent soil erosion control facilities and measures, including
but not limited to sediment traps, sediment basins, diversion
structures, stone filters around storm drain inlets, berms with filter
fabric, straw bale berms, seeding and vegetative cover.
(4) Preliminary calculations of the effect of the development upon the
peak rate of discharge, and a preliminary determination of the
amount of detention storage required to limit the proposed
discharge to the existing levels.
(5) General description and proposed location of all temporary and
permanent stormwater management facilities, including facilities
for the conveyance, infiltration, and/or storage of runoff. The
anticipated benefits of stormwater management facilities for water
quality and/or flood control shall be indicated.
(6) Proposed outlet points and associated drainage area boundaries.
(7) Proposed flow routes with directional arrows for stormwater runoff
from both the ten-year storm frequency event and the one-hundredyear
storm frequency event.
(8) The receiving watercourses, drains, ditches, and/or basins for
stormwater runoff, whether located on site or off site.
§ 364-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-8
1:363
§ 364-9. Plan submission.
(9) Approximate location of easements to protect and provide access
for the maintenance of the primary and secondary drainage
systems.
(10) Expected alterations of wetlands, floodplains, and watercourses,
including expected changes in the type of vegetation and water
level.
(11) Preliminary listing of activities proposed to maintain stormwater
management and erosion control facilities.
A. The stormwater management plan for each development and earth
change required under § 364-5B shall be submitted to the Township
Clerk.
B. For developments subject to site plan review, the proprietor shall
submit a stormwater management plan to the Township Clerk at the
time that the site plan is submitted.
C. For developments subject to subdivision plat or condominium review,
the proprietor shall submit a stormwater management plan to the
Township Clerk at the time that the tentative preliminary plat or
condominium is submitted.76
D. For other earth changes or activities subject to stormwater
management plan requirements, the plan shall be submitted to the
Township Clerk before construction drawings are submitted.
E. The stormwater management plan must be received at least three
weeks prior to a Planning Commission meeting in order to be reviewed
at that meeting.
F. Compliance with the requirements of this chapter does not eliminate
the need for the proprietor to obtain permits and approvals from county
and state agencies. Such permits and approvals include, but are not
limited to, soil erosion permits from the County Water Resources
Commissioner, drainage approvals from the County Water Resources
Commissioner, road drainage approvals from the County Road
Commission, wetlands permits from the State Department of
Environmental Quality, and dam construction permits from the State
Department of Environmental Quality.
G. Compliance with the requirements of this chapter does not eliminate
the need for the proprietor to comply with other applicable Township
ordinances and regulations.
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 364-8 OAKLAND CODE § 364-9
1:364
§ 364-10. Review procedures.
§ 364-11. Review fees.
The Township Board shall establish fees and escrow requirements by
resolution. Fees and escrow account payments shall be sufficient to cover
administrative and technical review costs anticipated to be incurred by the
Township including the costs of on-site inspections.
H. No grading, site preparation, or removal of vegetative cover shall take
place without stormwater management plan approval and the
installation of erosion control facilities.
I. If it becomes necessary to alter a development or earth change
proposal after the stormwater management plan has been approved, a
revised stormwater management plan may be submitted. All
requirements and standards for stormwater management plans (this
article) shall apply.
A. Planning Commission review.
(1) The Planning Commission shall review stormwater management
plans to assure compliance with the approval standards listed in
§ 364-12.
(2) Engineered grading plans do not require Planning Commission
review.
(3) When the stormwater management plan appears on the Planning
Commission's agenda for the first time, it will be distributed to
Township consultants and staff.
(4) If the Planning Commission determines that all required
information has not been received, the proprietor may request that
the matter be tabled to allow for the submittal of the required
information.
(5) A recommendation to the Township Board to approve, approve with
conditions, or deny approval shall be made at a regular Planning
Commission meeting.
B. Township Board review.
(1) The stormwater management plan approval request shall be placed
on the Township Board agenda no sooner than 15 days after
approval or denial by the Planning Commission.
(2) Following completion of its review of the stormwater management
plan and the Planning Commission's recommendations, the
Township Board shall approve or deny the proposed stormwater
management plan, with or without modifications.
§ 364-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-12
1:365
§ 364-12. Standards for approval.
All developments and earth changes subject to review under the
requirements of this chapter shall be designed, constructed, and maintained
to prevent flooding and protect water quality. The particular facilities and
measures required on site shall reflect the natural features, wetlands, and
watercourses on the site; the potential for on-site and off-site flooding,
water pollution, and erosion; and the size of the site.
A. General standards for on-site and off-site stormwater management.
(1) Stormwater management conveyance, storage and infiltration
measures and facilities shall be designed to prevent flood hazards
and water pollution related to stormwater runoff and soil erosion
from the proposed development.
(2) Stormwater from upstream and off-site locations shall be conveyed
around or through the site, or stored on site.
(3) A primary drainage system which manages runoff from storms up
to a ten-year-frequency storm event shall be provided.
(4) A secondary drainage system, such as an overland flow routing
system to manage runoff from storms up to a one-hundred-yearfrequency
storm event shall be provided (secondary drainage
system).
(5) Every detention basin shall control the release of stormwater for
the ten-year- and one-hundred-year-frequency storm events. For
the ten-year-frequency storm event, the peak rate of discharge
shall not exceed 0.2 cubic foot per second per acre. For the onehundred-
year-frequency storm event, the runoff rate shall not
exceed the predevelopment rate.
(6) Unless otherwise approved, stormwater runoff shall be conveyed
through swales and vegetated buffer strips so as to decrease runoff
velocity, allow for natural infiltration, allow suspended sediment
particles to settle, and to remove pollutants.
(7) Alterations to natural drainage patterns shall not create flooding or
water pollution for adjacent or downstream property owners.
(8) Watercourses shall not be dredged, cleared of vegetation,
deepened, widened, straightened, stabilized or otherwise altered
without applicable permits or approvals from the Township Board
and the State Department of Environmental Quality. If the
watercourse is a designated county drain, approval from the
County Water Resources Commissioner shall also be obtained.
(9) No modifications of major watercourses shall be permitted when
the primary purpose is to increase the flow capacity of the
watercourse.
§ 364-12 OAKLAND CODE § 364-12
1:366
(10) Discharge of runoff from any site which may contain oil, grease,
toxic chemicals, or other polluting materials is prohibited unless
measures to reduce and trap pollutants meet the requirements of
the State Department of Environmental Quality and the Township,
based upon professionally accepted principles.
(11) Drainage systems shall be designed to protect public health and
safety and to be visually attractive.
B. Soil erosion control.
(1) Cutting, filling and grading shall be minimized and the natural
topography of the site shall be preserved to the maximum feasible
extent, except where specific findings demonstrate that major
alterations will still meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter.
(2) All development and other earth changes shall be designed,
constructed and completed in such a manner that the exposed area
of any disturbed land is limited to the shortest possible period of
time.
(3) Soil erosion control measures shall be installed between the
disturbed area and any watercourses (including rivers, streams,
creeks, lakes, ponds and other watercourses), wetlands, or
roadways on or near the site.
(4) Sediment resulting from accelerated soil erosion shall be removed
from runoff water before it leaves the site of the development or
earth change.
(5) Temporary and permanent soil erosion control measures designed
and constructed for the conveyance of water around, through or
away from the development or earth change area shall be designed
to limit the water flow to a nonerosive velocity.
(6) Temporary soil erosion control measures shall be removed after
permanent soil erosion control measures have been implemented.
All developments and earth change areas shall be stabilized with
permanent soil erosion control measures.
(7) If lakes, ponds, rivers, creeks, streams or other watercourses and
wetlands are located on or near the site, erosion control measures
which trap sediment shall be provided. Straw bale berms may be
used as temporary stormwater diversion structures but will not be
considered sufficient by themselves for trapping sediment on site.
The use of sediment basins, sediment traps, filter fabric, and rock
filters in lieu of straw bale berms shall be strongly encouraged.
Other measures may be required if reasonably determined to be
necessary to protect a watercourse or wetland.
§ 364-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-12
1:367
(8) When it is not possible to permanently stabilize a disturbed area
after an earth change has been completed or where significant
earth change activity ceases, temporary soil erosion control
measures shall be implemented within 30 calendar days.
(9) Permanent soil erosion control measures for all slopes, channels,
ditches, or any disturbed land area shall be completed within 15
calendar days after final grading or the final earth change has been
completed. All temporary soil erosion control measures shall be
maintained until permanent soil erosion control measures are
implemented.
(10) Vegetated buffer strips shall be created or retained along the edges
of all lakes, ponds, creeks, streams, other watercourses, and
wetlands, when reasonably determined to be necessary to protect
the watercourse.
C. Stormwater storage and infiltration facilities.
(1) Stormwater storage and/or infiltration facilities which protect
water quality and minimize flooding shall be required for all
developments. Storage facilities may include, but are not limited to,
detention basins, retention basins, infiltration trenches, swales
with check dams, and other facilities.
(2) All detention basins shall be designed to maximize the ability of the
basin to hold and trap sediment. The types of basins listed in this
Subsection C(2) meet Township requirements. The following types
of basins are listed in order of preference, with the most desirable
listed first:
(a) Infiltration facilities, provided that soils and groundwater
conditions are suitable.
(b) Detention basins with a fixed minimum water elevation
between runoff event (wet basins). Wet basins which serve to
trap soil particles on site are preferable to dry basins.
(c) Detention basins which hold stormwater from the one-year
storm event for more than 24 hours before completely draining
to become a dry basin (extended detention). Dry basins without
extended detention shall not be permitted.
(3) Detention and retention basins shall be designed to hold runoff
from a one-hundred-year-frequency storm event. Basins shall be
permanently stabilized to minimize erosion.
(4) Retention and detention basins shall have an overflow system. If
the overflow system cannot discharge to a creek, lake or wetland
without causing flooding on adjacent or downstream properties,
then the basin shall be designed to hold stormwater runoff from
two back-to-back one-hundred-year-frequency storm events.
§ 364-12 OAKLAND CODE § 364-12
1:368
§ 364-13. Off-site stormwater management.
(5) Unless a variation is approved by the Township Board (See Article
IV of this chapter.), detention and retention basins with banks
sloping more than one on five (vertical to horizontal) shall not be
permitted.
(6) Detention basins and associated berms and landscaping shall be
designed to protect public safety and to be visually attractive.
(7) Constructed detention basins shall not be a part of a platted
subdivision lot, but shall be provided in platted outlots or open
space areas.
D. Discharge of stormwater runoff to wetlands.
(1) Stormwater runoff discharged to wetlands must be diffused to
nonerosive velocities before it reaches the wetland.
(2) Wetlands may be used for stormwater detention if the following
conditions are met:
(a) The wetland storage or detention area is set back at least 100
feet from the edge of any lake or stream.
(b) The wetland does not have significant wildlife habitat or
ecological values which would likely be impaired or destroyed.
(c) The wetland has sufficient holding capacity for stormwater,
based upon calculations prepared by the proprietor and
reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer.
(d) Adequate on-site soil erosion control is provided to protect the
natural functioning of the wetland.
(3) During the construction phase of development, adequate erosion
control and protection of wetlands shall be provided as required,
including such things as:
(a) One or more sediment traps or soil settling basins located in
upland locations; and/or
(b) Open-water sediment traps within or adjacent to wetlands,
provided that the proposal meets the wetland protection
requirements of the State Department of Environmental
Quality and the Township for wetlands alteration.
(4) If off-site wetlands are used for stormwater management, an
easement must be ensured in accordance with the requirements of
Article VI of this chapter.
A. Waiver option. In lieu of on-site stormwater detention, the use of off-site
stormwater conveyance, infiltration, and/or detention areas may be
proposed. In such cases, the proprietor shall request a waiver of the
§ 364-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-13
1:369
requirements for on-site stormwater detention. This waiver option does
not allow for changes in requirements for on-site erosion control. Offsite
stormwater management areas may be shared with other
landowners, provided that maintenance agreements have been
approved by the Township Board and recorded.
B. Review by Planning Commission and Township Board. The Planning
Commission shall review the waiver request and shall make a
recommendation to the Township Board. The final decision on a waiver
request shall be made by the Township Board.
C. Stormwater management plan submittal. The waiver request shall be
submitted with a stormwater management plan as provided in this
article, including proposed stormwater management and erosion
control measures, on site and off site.
D. Applicable standards. In addition to the stormwater management
standards specified in this article, the proprietor must demonstrate and
provide assurances for the following:
(1) Stormwater flows and management controls shall not result in
excessive stream channel erosion on site or off site;
(2) High-value or unique wetlands and natural areas shall not be
significantly altered by stormwater flows on site or off site;
(3) Soil erosion shall be managed off site as well as on site;
(4) Off-site stormwater facilities shall be protected through
appropriate easements; and
(5) Adequate provision and agreements for maintenance of stormwater
management facilities shall be made.
E. Performance guarantees, inspections, maintenance, and enforcement.
All provisions of § 364-6 and Article VI of this chapter shall apply to offsite
stormwater conveyance and detention.
§ 364-13 OAKLAND CODE § 364-13
1:370
ARTICLE III
Engineered Grading Plans
§ 364-14. Contents of engineered grading plans.
A. Engineered grading plans for single-family homes and private road
developments shall be submitted by the proprietor.
B. Engineered grading plans shall be prepared by any of the following
registered professionals, alone or in combination: civil engineer, land
surveyor, architect, and/or landscape architect.
C. The engineered grading plan shall include the following information:
(1) The legal property description.
(2) The bench marks used.
(3) Existing grades on a fifty-foot cross section to a minimum of 50 feet
beyond the site property line and sufficient intermediate grades to
determine such things as ditches, swales, adjacent pavement,
buildings and other pertinent features.
(4) All existing topography.
(5) Location of any watercourses, wetlands, lakes and ponds on the
site.
(6) Off-site topography, adjacent building grades, paved parking areas
or drives (indicate direction of drainage), drains, culverts and other
pertinent features. Show typical cross sections of existing drains or
swales.
(7) Existing easements.
(8) Existing utilities (size, depth, location), manholes (rim and inverts),
and culverts.
(9) Street rights-of-way, existing and proposed.
(10) Proposed topography of the site.
(11) Location and description of any proposed stormwater management
and erosion control measures.
(12) Flow direction of stormwater runoff from the site before and after
development, including the direction of overland flow.
(13) Proposed elevations should be underlined or boxed in to
differentiate from existing elevations. It is expected that all hard
surface elevations, such as foundation tops, pavement, and
structures be in hundredths of a foot and all ground elevations be
in tenths of a foot.
(14) A location map.
§ 364-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-15
1:371
§ 364-15. Review procedures and standards.
A. The Township Engineer shall review engineered grading plans to
ensure compliance with the following standards:
(1) Cutting, filling and grading shall be minimized and the natural
topography of the site shall be preserved to the maximum possible
extent.
(2) Sediment caused by accelerated soil erosion shall be trapped and
retained on the site through the use of effective soil erosion control
measures.
(3) Seeding, mulching, establishment of a vegetative cover, or other
permanent soil erosion control measures for all disturbed land
areas shall be completed within 15 calendar days after final
grading or the final earth change has been completed.
(4) When it is not possible to permanently stabilize a disturbed area
after an earth change has been completed or where significant
earth change activity ceases, temporary soil erosion control
measures shall be implemented within 30 calendar days. All
temporary soil erosion control measures shall be maintained until
permanent soil erosion control measures are implemented.
(5) Through the design of site contours, yards, paved areas, roadways,
and driveways, the on-site infiltration and detention of stormwater
runoff shall be reasonably required when determined to be
necessary.
(6) Diversions of stormwater runoff to adjacent properties which
increase the volume, rate of discharge, or pollutants carried by
stormwater shall be prohibited.
B. Engineered grading plans shall be reviewed and approved by the
Township Engineer prior to the issuance of a building permit.
§ 364-15 OAKLAND CODE § 364-15
1:372
ARTICLE IV
Variations
§ 364-16. Township Board authority.
The Township Board shall have the authority to grant variations from the
strict terms of this chapter in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
§ 364-17. Written application requirements.
A written application shall be submitted to the Township Clerk
demonstrating that:
§ 364-18. Hearing required.
Variations from the terms of this chapter shall not be granted unless and
until a hearing shall be held.
§ 364-19. Conditions for approval.
A. Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the
land or project involved, and which are not generally applicable to other
plans or projects;
B. The special conditions and circumstances do not result or have not
resulted from the actions of the applicant or the applicant's
predecessor;
C. Literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would deprive the
applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties under the
terms of this chapter; and
D. Grant of the variation shall not result in an unreasonable risk of
impairment or destruction of property and/or natural resources which
this chapter is designed to protect.
A. Variations shall not be granted unless and until the Township Board
finds that:
(1) The application requirements set forth in § 364-17 have been met;
(2) The reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the
variation, and that the variation is the minimum variation required;
and
(3) Granting of the variation will be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this chapter.
B. In granting any variation, the Township Board may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards consistent with the purposes
and standards of this chapter.
§ 364-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-19
1:373

ARTICLE V
Construction Drawings and Engineering Specifications
§ 364-20. Submittal requirements.
§ 364-21. Review and approval procedures.
§ 364-22. Off-site and upstream runoff calculations.
The peak rate of stormwater discharge from upstream and off-site locations
for both the ten- and one-hundred-year-frequency storm event shall be
included in detailed engineering drawings and specifications. Stormwater
runoff conveyed by watercourses and conveyed via overland flow shall be
determined.
§ 364-23. Engineering design standards.
Engineering design standards approved by the Township shall be the basis
for the Township Engineer's review of engineering drawings and
specifications.
A. Construction drawings and engineering specifications shall be
submitted following stormwater management plan approval but prior to
the issuance of any construction or building permits.
B. Construction drawings and engineering specifications shall be
submitted to the Township Clerk in accordance with reasonable
information requirements and calculations specified by the Township
Engineer.
A. Engineering drawings and specifications shall be reviewed and
approved by the Township Engineer.
B. A building permit, construction permit or certificate of occupancy shall
not be issued unless the detailed engineering drawings and
specifications meet the standards of this chapter, additional
requirements of the Township Engineer, and any applicable
requirements of other government agencies.
§ 364-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-23
1:375

ARTICLE VI
Performance Guarantees, Easements, and Maintenance
§ 364-24. Applicability of requirements.
Requirements of this article concerning performance guarantees,
easements, and maintenance agreements shall apply to proprietors
required to submit a stormwater management plan to the Township for
review and approval. These requirements do not apply to engineered
grading plans.
§ 364-25. Performance guarantees.
§ 364-26. Stormwater management easements.
A. The proprietor shall post some acceptable form of performance bond,
cash escrow, certified check, or other performance security, if required
by the Township Board. The performance guarantee shall be an amount
sufficient to complete stormwater management and erosion control
facilities as specified in the stormwater management plan. Required
performance guarantees shall be provided to the Township after
stormwater management plan approval but prior to the initiation of any
earth change.
B. After determination by the Township Engineer that all facilities are
constructed in compliance with the approved plan, the performance
bond or other securities shall be released.
A. Necessity. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the
proprietor to ensure:
(1) Access for inspections;
(2) Access to stormwater management facilities for maintenance
purposes; and
(3) Preservation of primary and secondary drainage ways which are
needed to serve stormwater management needs of other
properties.
B. Off-site stormwater management. Stormwater management is required
for all areas, including wetlands, used for off-site stormwater
management.
C. Recording required. Easements shall be recorded with the county
register of deeds according to county requirements.
D. Recording prior to building permit issuance. The proprietor must
provide the Township Administrative Official with evidence of the
recording of the easement prior to final subdivision plat or
condominium approval or final construction approval.77
§ 364-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-27
1:377
§ 364-27. Maintenance agreement.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the maintenance agreement is to provide the
means and assurance that maintenance of stormwater management
and erosion control facilities shall be undertaken.
B. Submittal; approval.
(1) All development or earth change subject to stormwater
management plan requirements (Article II of this chapter) shall
submit a maintenance agreement to the Township Clerk.
(2) Maintenance agreements shall be approved by the Township Board
prior to final subdivision plat or condominium approval in the case
of subdivisions, and prior to construction approval in other cases.78
C. Required provisions; agreement to be binding; recording.
(1) The maintenance agreement shall include sufficient terms and
provisions to ensure that both routine and emergency maintenance
shall be accomplished.
(2) The maintenance agreement shall be binding on all subsequent
owners of land served by the stormwater management and erosion
control facilities, and shall be recorded in the land records of the
county prior to approval by the Township Board.
D. Establishment of county drains and maintenance for subdivisions.
(1) Prior to final plat or condominium approval, all stormwater
management facilities for platted or condominium subdivisions
shall be established as county drains, as authorized in the Drain
Code, Public Act No. 40 of 1956 (MCLA § 280.1 et seq.).79
(2) Maintenance fees, as specified by the County Water Resources
Commissioner, shall be provided to the Water Resources
Commissioner.
(3) This requirement may be waived by the Township Board if
compelling reasons are outlined by the proprietor or the Water
Resources Commissioner.
(4) As part of the agreement establishing the county drain, stormwater
facility maintenance responsibilities shall be assigned to the
County Water Resources Commissioner.
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 364-27 OAKLAND CODE § 364-28
1:378
§ 364-28. Notification of violations.
In the event that an owner or developer fails to comply with the
requirements of this chapter or requirements of any maintenance
agreement, the Township shall notify the proprietor in writing of the
violations. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation and
establish a time limit for correction.
§ 364-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 364-28
1:379
Chapter 370
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land divisions and subdivisions — See Ch.
250.
Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 364.
Tree protection, preservation and
removal — See Ch. 389.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 415.
§ 364-28 OAKLAND CODE § 364-28
1:380
ARTICLE I
Right-of-Way Widths
[Adopted 11-10-1981 by Ord. No. 42 (Ch. 26, Art. III, of the 2007
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 370-1. Standards adopted.80
The Master Right-of-Way Plan for County Roads, prepared by the Road
Commission for Oakland County, is hereby adopted and confirmed as the
Oakland Township, Oakland County Proposed Right-of-Way Widths of
Highways within Oakland County, as set out in the schedule on file in
the office of the Township Clerk, said schedule being a road map of the
Township, with an explanation as to the nature, widths and usage.
§ 370-2. Compliance with standards.
Pursuant to Public Act No. 381 of 1925 (MCLA § 252.1 et seq.), and
pursuant to Chapter 250, Land Divisions and Subdivisions, Part 1, Land
Division, and Part 3, Land Division Regulations; the Township engineering
design and standards; and the Zoning Ordinance; all plats of land which
may be offered pursuant to Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCLA § 560.101 et
seq.), shall in all respects comply with said proposed highway right-of-way
requirements, and, further, no structure shall be built or otherwise placed
or located so as to be in conflict with the provisions of the before-mentioned
Public Acts or ordinances, it being the intent of this article to predetermine
the right-of-way widths of such highways in conformity with the Oakland
County Right-of-Way Widths of Highways as heretofore described in § 370-1,
except as may be otherwise permitted by law.
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 370-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2
1:381

ARTICLE II
Sidewalk Maintenance and Repair
[Adopted 5-12-1998 by Ord. No. 82 (Ch. 26, Art. II, of the 2007 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 370-3. Findings, purpose and intent.
§ 370-4. Definitions.
A. In the consideration and enactment of this article, the Township Board
finds that there are public sidewalks in the Township, and that
substantially all persons, directly or indirectly, benefit from the service
provided as follows:
(1) Sidewalks improve pedestrian safety; promote interaction among
residents of a neighborhood; connect homes with other sites of
destination; encourage walking that promotes public health; and,
in general, represent an amenity that may affect property values.
(2) It is reasonably foreseeable that sidewalks shall require
maintenance and repair over time, and that, for a myriad of
reasons, the need for such maintenance and repair with respect to
given areas of sidewalks shall arise at varying times and, generally,
in relatively small segments.
(3) Sidewalks provide special benefits to certain properties which, by
virtue of use, location and other characteristics, such sidewalks are
of particular value, or relate in a special way to the particular
properties. Similarly, sidewalks that are in a condition of disrepair,
as defined below, impose a special burden on the properties to
which they particularly relate.
B. It is the purpose of this article to establish regulations designed to
achieve the proper maintenance and repair of public sidewalks in the
Township, recognizing the special benefit and burden of sidewalks that
relate to particular properties.
C. It is the intent of this article to establish duties and responsibilities on
the part of property owners for the maintenance and repair of sidewalks
that specially relate to their properties as such maintenance and repair
becomes necessary, and to provide an equitable procedure for the
finance of such maintenance and repair.
D. It is the further intent of this article to address the matter of liability for
damage and injuries caused by sidewalks that are in a condition of
disrepair.
A. Generally. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
§ 370-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-4
1:383
§ 370-5. Procedure for achieving maintenance and repair.
CONDITION OF DISREPAIR — A sidewalk having any one or more of
the following characteristics; provided, however, that the existence of
any one or more of these characteristics shall not create a presumption
or other indication that such characteristic or characteristics were the
cause of any injury or damage which may occur:
DEFINED DISTRICT — The particular properties within an area which
are determined by the Township Board to be specially benefited by
specified sidewalks within such area. Such determination by the
Township Board shall be made based upon rationally related usage of
the sidewalks within the area, and/or on the basis of other identified
and particular benefits derived from such sidewalks. A defined district
may or may not include a subdivision and/or one or more street lots.
SIDEWALK — A surface located in a public right-of-way or public
easement under the jurisdiction of the Township constructed primarily
as a dedicated path for pedestrians.
STREET LOTS — One or more lots which front on a given street, where
a sidewalk has been constructed adjacent to such lot or lots in a public
right-of-way or easement.
SUBDIVISION — The lots or units which are part of a development
platted under the Michigan Land Division Act81 (or predecessor Act) or
created under the Condominium Act.82
(1) A hole: place where the surface is missing;
A gap: opening on the surface of the sidewalk itself or between the
sidewalk and the adjacent surface;
(2)
A rise or drop: abrupt change in grade where one surface vertically
separates from an adjacent surface;
(3)
A tilt: incline where the sidewalk surface has rotated and is no
longer oriented in gradient or cross slope;
(4)
A swell or depression: place where the surface undulates due to
uplift or subsidence of underlying materials;
(5)
An object or debris: obstruction that covers some or all of the
surface; or
(6)
A suspension: object or material hanging over the surface of the
sidewalk below a height of eight feet.
(7)
B. Terms not expressly defined. Terms not expressly defined in Subsection
A of this section shall have their customary dictionary meanings, taking
into consideration the context and intent of this article.
81.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 560.101 et seq.
82.Editor's Note: See MCLA § 559.101 et seq.
§ 370-4 OAKLAND CODE § 370-5
1:384
A. Generally. In general, the Township Board, pursuant to MCLA
§ 41.288a, may order the maintenance or repair of sidewalks in a
designated area within the Township because of health, safety, or
welfare of the residents of the Township.
B. Sidewalks within subdivision and adjacent to street lots. The following
regulations shall apply to sidewalks situated in a public right-of-way or
Township easement within subdivisions and/or adjacent to street lots in
the Township.
(1) If the Township Board tentatively determines that maintenance or
repair of sidewalks within a subdivision and/or adjacent to one or
more street lots may be necessary due to being in a condition of
disrepair, or due to one or more other identified reasons:
(a) The Township shall obtain the approval of the state department
of transportation or of the county road commission with regard
to undertaking the maintenance and/or repair of sidewalks in a
right-of-way within their respective jurisdiction.
(b) A plan and cost estimate for maintenance and repair shall be
prepared, along with an assessment roll based upon such cost
estimate, allocating the cost of the project, including the cost
of inspection, engineering, legal, finance and administration,
to the properties involved (e.g., the properties within the
subdivision), and a notice of a public hearing shall be sent to
owners of such lots, units and parcels. The notice shall include
a basic description of the project, the cost estimate, and the
tentative assessment amount, and shall be sent by first-class
mail to the last known address of the owner of the properties
based upon the current tax assessment records in the
Township.
(2) Following the public hearing, if the Township Board determines
that the maintenance and/or repair of certain sidewalks is
necessary due to being in a condition of disrepair, or due to one or
more other identified reason, the Board may adopt a resolution
confirming the assessment roll and determining to contract for
such maintenance and/or repair, and assess the costs to the
properties involved in proportion to the respective benefits
received, payable in five annual installments, provided, however,
prior to entering into such contract, the Township Board may, if
requested in writing by persons representing a number of
properties within the area to be assessed deemed sufficient by the
Township Board, provide an opportunity within a reasonable time
set by the Township for the respective property owners involved to
have the sidewalks maintained and/or repaired at their own
expense according to specifications directed by the Township.
(3) A notice of assessment shall be sent to each property involved
following entry into a contract for the maintenance and/or repair. If
§ 370-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-5
1:385
the amount of the contract is more or less than the cost estimate,
the amount of the assessment upon each property shall be adjusted
accordingly; provided, however, if the cost difference is more than
20% higher than the estimate, the contract shall not be entered
into, and the assessment shall not be finalized unless and until a
new public hearing is noticed and held by the Township Board in
the manner provided in this Subsection B(3).
C. Sidewalks within defined districts. The following regulations shall apply
to sidewalks situated in a public right-of-way or Township easement
that are within a defined district:
(1) If the Township Board tentatively determines that maintenance or
repair of sidewalks within a defined district may be necessary due
to being in a condition of disrepair, or due to one or more other
identified reasons:
(a) The Township shall obtain the approval of the state department
of transportation or of the county road commission with regard
to undertaking the maintenance and/or repair of sidewalks in a
right-of-way within their respective jurisdiction.
(b) A plan and cost estimate for maintenance and repair shall be
prepared, along with an assessment roll based upon such cost
estimate, allocating the cost of the project, including the cost
of inspection, engineering, legal, finance and administration,
to the properties within the defined district, and a notice of a
public hearing shall be sent to owners of the properties in the
defined district. The notice shall include a basic description of
the project, the cost estimate, and the tentative assessment
amount, and shall be sent by first-class mail to the last known
address of the owner of the properties based upon the current
tax assessment records in the Township.
(2) Following the public hearing, if the Township Board determines
that the maintenance and/or repair of certain sidewalks is
necessary due to being in a condition of disrepair, or due to one or
more other identified reasons, the Board may adopt a resolution
confirming the assessment roll and determining to contract for
such maintenance and/or repair, and assess the costs to the
properties within the defined district in proportion to the
respective benefits received, payable in five annual installments;
provided, however, prior to entering into such contract, the
Township Board may, if requested in writing by persons
representing a number of properties within the defined district
deemed sufficient by the Township Board, provide an opportunity
within a reasonable time set by the Township for the respective
property owners involved to have the sidewalks maintained and/or
repaired at their own expense according to specifications directed
by the Township.
§ 370-5 OAKLAND CODE § 370-5
1:386
§ 370-6. Duty to maintain or repair; liability for injuries and
damages.
§ 370-7. Requirement for notice of injury and/or damage.
As a condition to any recovery for injuries sustained by reason of any
defective sidewalk, the injured person shall serve notice upon the Township
within the time and in the manner prescribed by law (MCLA § 691.1404).
§ 370-8. Prohibition upon obstruction of sidewalks.
(3) A notice of assessment shall be sent to each property in the defined
district following entry into a contract for the maintenance and/or
repair. If the amount of the contract is more or less than the cost
estimate, the amount of the assessment upon each property shall
be adjusted accordingly; provided, however, if the cost difference is
more than 20% higher than the estimate, the contract shall not be
entered into, and the assessment shall not be finalized unless and
until a new public hearing is noticed and held by the Township
Board in the manner provided in this Subsection C(3).
D. Assessments as lien. Assessments established under this article shall
constitute a lien upon the property assessed and shall be collected, and
delinquent assessment payments shall accrue interest and penalties, as
provided for in Public Act No. 188 of 1954 (MCLA § 41.721 et seq.).
A. If an area of sidewalk is in a condition of disrepair resulting from the
actions or inactions of one or more private property owners, such owner
shall have the duty to maintain and repair such area of sidewalk. For
purposes of this section, actions and inactions giving rise to such duty
include, but shall not be limited to: surface drainage; growth of trees
and/or other vegetation; on-site construction; vehicular traffic; and
other site activities and inactions resulting in a condition of disrepair.
B. If damage or injury is caused as a result of a breach of the duty stated in
§ 370-3, and if the Township had previously provided notice of the
condition of disrepair and allowed an opportunity for hearing before the
Township Board, or the Board's designee, the breaching owner shall be
liable for all resulting injuries and damages, and all resulting costs and
expenses for carrying out the maintenance and repair representing the
breach of duty, and such owner shall indemnify the Township for any
damages, costs and expenses incurred by the Township as a result of
such breach of duty, including reasonable attorney fees expended by
the Township.
A. No person shall obstruct, or cause or permit the obstruction of any
sidewalk in the Township by the placement on such sidewalk of any
object or material of any kind or nature, or by suspending any sign,
object or material within eight feet above a sidewalk.
§ 370-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-8
1:387
§ 370-9. Interpretation; effect on other provisions.
This article shall be interpreted as creating standards and requirements
in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other standards and requirements
contained in other ordinances or law.
B. Subsection A of this section shall not apply in circumstances in which a
person is temporarily loading or unloading a vehicle adjacent to the
property, if such person has, if reasonably required, secured a device
reasonably calculated to warn users of the sidewalk of the obstruction
so as to avoid injury and/or damage.
§ 370-8 OAKLAND CODE § 370-9
1:388
ARTICLE III
Right-of-Way Oversight
[Adopted 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 100 (Ch. 28, Art. III, of the 2007
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 370-10. Purpose.
The purposes of this article are to regulate access to and ongoing use
of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their
telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and
welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in
compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-
Way Oversight Act, Public Act No. 48 of 2002 (MCLA § 484.3101 et seq.)
and other applicable law, and to ensure that the Township qualifies for
distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and
complying with the Act.
§ 370-11. Conflict.
Nothing in this article shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict
with the Act or other applicable law.
§ 370-12. Definitions.
A. Generally. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ACT — The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way
Oversight Public Act No. 48 of 2002 (MCLA § 484.3101 et seq.).
PERMIT — A nonexclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this
article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way
in the Township for its telecommunications facilities.
TOWNSHIP BOARD — The Township Board of the Charter Township
of Oakland or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation
of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the
Township Board.
TOWNSHIP SUPERINTENDENT — The Township Superintendent or
his designee, or, if there is no appointed Superintendent, then such
term shall mean the Township Supervisor.
B. Other terms. All other terms used in this article shall have the same
meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without
limitation the following:
AUTHORITY — The Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications
Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the
Act.
§ 370-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-12
1:389
§ 370-13. Permit required.
MPSC — The Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department
of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs, and shall have the same meaning
as the term "commission" in the Act.83
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area on, below, or above a public
roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-ofway
does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way.
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES or FACILITIES — The equipment
or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires,
switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can
generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide
telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or
facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas,
equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and
miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial
mobile service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of Title III of the
Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C.
§ 332 and further defined as "commercial mobile radio service" in
47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way
communication device.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER, PROVIDER and
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES — The same as those terms are
as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act,
Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCLA § 484.2102). "Telecommunication
provider" does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when
providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as
defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of the Communications Act of 1934,
Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. § 332 and further defined as
"commercial mobile radio service" in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided
by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the
Act and this article only, a provider also includes all of the following:
A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications
service.
(1)
Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns
telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way.
(2)
(3) A person providing broadband Internet transport access service.
A. Required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a
telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-ofway
in the Township for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for
and obtain a permit pursuant to this article.
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 370-12 OAKLAND CODE § 370-13
1:390
B. Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on
an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section
6(1) of the Act [MCLA § 484.3106(1)]. A telecommunications provider
shall file one copy of the application with the Township Superintendent,
one copy with the Township Clerk, and one copy with the Township
Attorney. Upon receipt, the Township Superintendent shall make copies
of the application and distribute a copy to the directors of each the
following departments and consultants: building, planning,
engineering, fire and police. Applications shall be complete and include
all information required by the Act, including without limitation a route
map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed
facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act [MCLA
§ 484.3106(5)].
C. Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that
any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application
contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is
exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, Public Act No. 442 of
1976 (MCLA § 15.231 et seq.), pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act
[MCLA § 484.3106(5)], the telecommunications provider shall
prominently so indicate on the face of each map.
D. Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the
application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable
application fee.
E. Additional information. The Township Superintendent may request an
applicant to submit such additional information which the Township
Superintendent deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant
shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable
deadlines for such additional information established by the Township
Superintendent. If the Township and the applicant cannot agree on the
requirement of additional information requested by the Township, the
Township or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section
6(2) of the Act [MCLA § 484.3106(2)].
F. Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act [MCLA
§ 484.3105(1)] authorizations or permits previously issued by the
Township under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act,
Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCLA § 484.2251) and authorizations or
permits issued by the Township to telecommunications providers prior
to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan
Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit
requirements of this article.
G. Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act [MCLA
§ 484.3105(3)], within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective
date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in
a public right-of-way in the Township as of such date, that has not
previously obtained authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the
Michigan Telecommunications Act, Public Act No. 179 of 1991 (MCLA
§ 370-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-13
1:391
§ 370-14. Issuance of permit.
§ 370-15. Construction or engineering permit.
A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon,
over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the Township without
first obtaining a construction or engineering permit if required under other
Township ordinances for construction within the public rights-of-way.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of Township ordinances to the
§ 484.2251), shall submit to the Township an application for a permit in
accordance with the requirements of this article. Pursuant to Section
5(3) of the Act [MCLA § 484.3105(3)], a telecommunications provider
submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay
the application fee required under Subsection D of this section. A
provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180
days to submit the permit application if allowed by the Authority, as
provided in Section 5(4) of the Act [MCLA § 484.3105(4)].
A. Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for
a permit is hereby delegated to the Township Superintendent. Pursuant
to Section 15(3) of the Act [MCLA § 484.3115(3)], the Township
Superintendent shall approve or deny an application for a permit within
45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an
application for a permit under § 370-13B for access to a public right-ofway
within the Township. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the Act [MCLA
§ 484.3106(6)], the Township Superintendent shall notify the MPSC
when the Township Superintendent has granted or denied a permit,
including information regarding the date on which the application was
filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The
Township Superintendent shall not unreasonably deny an application
for a permit.
B. Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the Township
Superintendent shall issue the permit in the form approved by the
MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in
accordance with Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act [MCLA
§§ 484.3106(1), (2), 484.3115].
C. Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act [MCLA § 484.3115(4)],
the Township Superintendent may impose conditions on the issuance of
a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications
provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way.
D. Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act [MCLA
§ 484.3115(3)], and without limitation on Subsection C of this section,
the Township Superintendent may require that a bond be posted by the
telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is
required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the
public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after
the telecommunications provider's access and use.
§ 370-13 OAKLAND CODE § 370-15
1:392
contrary, no fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering
permit.
§ 370-16. Conduit or utility poles.
Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act [MCLA § 484.3104(3)], obtaining a
permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this article does
not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility
poles.
§ 370-17. Route maps.
Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act [MCLA § 484.3106(7)], a
telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial
completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the
Township, submit route maps showing the location of the
telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the Township. The
route maps should be in electronic format unless and until the MPSC
determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act [MCLA
§ 484.3106(8)]. In the event the MPSC makes a determination that the route
maps are to be in a format other than electronic and/or are to meet certain
detail requirements, the format and detail of the route maps submitted to
the Township under this section shall be the same as determined by the
MPSC.
§ 370-18. Repair of damage.
Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act [MCLA § 484.3115(5)], a
telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction
or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or
temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the Township, as authorized
by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface
and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and
shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition.
§ 370-19. Establishment and payment of maintenance fee.
In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the Township set
forth in § 370-13, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications
facilities in the Township's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual
maintenance fee to the Authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act (MCLA
§ 484.3108).
§ 370-20. Modification of existing fees.
In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act [MCLA
§ 484.3113(1)], the Township hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any
fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the
effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-ofway,
to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required
under the Act, which shall be paid to the Authority. In compliance with the
§ 370-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-20
1:393
requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act, the Township also hereby approves
modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in
public rights-of-way within the Township's boundaries, so that those
providers pay only those fees required under Section 8 of the Act. The
Township shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the
fee with a copy of this article, in compliance with the requirement of Section
13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications
providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are
otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to
be contrary to the Township's policy and intent, and upon application by a
provider or discovery by the Township, shall be promptly refunded as having
been charged in error.
§ 370-21. Severability.
Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to be
invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under § 370-20 shall be
void from the date the modification was made.
§ 370-22. Use of funds.
Pursuant to Section 10(4) of the Act [MCLA § 484.3110(4)], all amounts
received by the Township from the Authority shall be used by the Township
solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that
requirement, all funds received by the Township from the Authority shall be
deposited into a fund maintained by the Township for right-of-way related
purposes.
§ 370-23. Annual report.
Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act [MCLA § 484.3110(5)], the Township
Superintendent shall file an annual report with the Authority on the use and
disposition of funds annually distributed by the Authority.
§ 370-24. Cable television operators.
Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act [MCLA § 484.3113(6)], the Township
shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for
its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the
effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of
gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem
services provided through broadband Internet transport access services.
§ 370-25. Existing rights.
Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act [MCLA § 484.3104(2)], except as
expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this article shall not affect
any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the Township may
have under a permit issued by the Township or under a contract between
the Township and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the
public rights-of-way.
§ 370-20 OAKLAND CODE § 370-26
1:394
§ 370-26. Compliance.
The Township hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this
article is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions
hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose.
The Township shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act,
including but not limited to the following:
A. Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act,
Public Act No. 442 of 1976 (MCLA § 15.231 et seq.), as provided in the
Act and in § 370-13C;
B. Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit
requirements hereof, in accordance with § 370-13F;
C. Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an
application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the
application fee, in accordance with § 370-13G;
D. Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from
the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit
for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the Township, in
accordance with § 370-14A;
E. Notifying the MPSC when the Township has granted or denied a permit,
in accordance with § 370-14A;
F. Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance
with § 370-14A;
G. Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without
additional or different permit terms, as provided in § 370-14B;
H. Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the
telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-ofway,
in accordance with § 370-14C;
I. Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds
the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to
its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's
access and use, in accordance with § 370-14D;
J. Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for
construction or engineering permits, in accordance with § 370-15;
K. Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the Township's
right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with
§ 370-20;
L. Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with
§ 370-23; and
M. Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay
certain franchise fees, in accordance with § 370-24.
§ 370-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-27
1:395
§ 370-27. Reservation of police powers.
Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act [MCLA § 484.3115(2)], this article shall
not limit the Township's right to review and approve a telecommunication
provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the
Township's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare
of the public.
§ 370-28. Violations and penalties.
A violation of any section in this article shall be a misdemeanor. Nothing
in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the
Township under the Act or otherwise by law in the event of a violation by a
person of this article or a permit issued hereunder.
§ 370-27 OAKLAND CODE § 370-28
1:396
Chapter 389
TREE PROTECTION, PRESERVATION AND REMOVAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 68.
Open burning — See Ch. 143.
Floodplain and wetlands protection — See Ch.
210.
Historic districts and preservation — See Ch.
228.
Land divisions and subdivisions — See Ch.
250.
Mining operations — See Ch. 267.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 299.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 320.
Solid waste — See Ch. 355.
Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 364.
§ 370-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-28
1:397

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 389-1. Findings; purpose.
A. Findings. The Township finds that rapid growth, the spread of
development, and increasing demands upon natural resources have had
the effect of encroaching upon, despoiling, or eliminating many of the
trees and other forms of vegetation and natural resources and
processes associated therewith which, if preserved and maintained in
an undisturbed and natural condition, constitute important physical,
aesthetic, recreation and economic assets to existing and future
residents of the Township. Specifically the Township finds that:
(1) Woodland growth protects public health through the absorption of
air pollutants and contamination, through buffering in the
reduction of excessive noise, wind, storms and visual screening,
and through its cooling effect in the summer months.
(2) Woodlands provide for public safety through the prevention of
erosion, siltation, and flooding.
(3) Trees and woodland growth are an essential component of the
general welfare of the Township by maintaining natural beauty,
recreation, and an irreplaceable heritage for existing and future
Township residents.
(4) The protection of such natural resources is a matter of paramount
public concerns, as provided by Article IV, Section 52 of the
Constitution of 1963, and the Natural Resources and
Environmental Protection Act, Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCLA
§ 324.101 et seq.).
B. Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is:
(1) To provide for the protection, preservation, replacement, proper
maintenance and use of trees and woodlands located on a parcel of
land 25 acres in size or greater in the Township in order to
minimize disturbance to them and to prevent damage from erosion
and siltation, a loss of wildlife and vegetation, and/or the
destruction of the natural habitat.
(2) To place priority on the preservation of woodlands, trees, similar
woody vegetation, and related natural resources.
(3) To protect the woodlands, including trees and other forms of
vegetation, of the Township for their economic support of local
property values when allowed to remain uncleared and/or
unharvested and for their natural beauty, wilderness character of
geological, ecological or historical significance.
§ 389-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-1
1:399
§ 389-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning; the word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
BUILDING ENVELOPE — For platted lots and site condominiums, the
buildable area remaining on a lot after satisfying Township Zoning
Ordinance setback requirements; for all other residential developments, the
building envelope shall include the area of the residential buildings, plus a
reasonable area beyond the buildings, up to 10 feet, so long as the area is
not in any required setback.
COMMERCIAL NURSERY OR TREE FARM — A licensed plant or tree
nursery or farm in relation to those trees planted and growing on the
premises of the licensee, which are planted and growing for sale or intended
sale to the general public in the ordinary course of the licensee's business.
DEVELOPMENT — Any lawful land use authorized under the Township
Zoning Ordinance as amended.
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (dbh) — The diameter, in inches, of a tree
measured at 4 1/2 feet above the existing grade.
DRIPLINE — An imaginary vertical line that extends downward from the
outermost tips of the tree branches to the ground.
GROUND COVER — Low-growing shrubs, woody vegetation, wild flowers
and other small herbaceous plants within a woodland area.
GRUBBING — The effective removal of understory vegetation, ground
cover, shrubs or trees.
HISTORIC TREE — A tree which has been designated by the Planning
Commission to be of notable historic interest to the Township because of its
age, type, size or historic association.
LAND CLEARING — Those operations where trees and vegetation are
removed and which occur previous to construction of a building; e.g., road
right-of-way excavation and paving, lake and drainage systems excavation,
utility excavation, grubbing, and any other necessary clearing operations.
MATERIAL — Soil, sand, gravel, clay, peat, mud, debris and refuse, or any
other material organic or inorganic.
NO TREE AFFIDAVIT — A signed, notarized statement by the owner or
agent stating that no trees exist upon the site of six-inch-diameter breast
height or greater.
(4) To provide for the paramount public concern for these natural
resources in the interest of health, safety and general welfare of
the residents of the Township.
§ 389-1 OAKLAND CODE § 389-2
1:400
OPERATIONS — The locating, moving or depositing of any material, or any
construction use or activity, or a combination thereof which in any way
modifies the conditions of lands subject to this chapter.
OWNER — Any person who has dominion over, control of, or title to
woodlands.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or legal entity of any kind, including governmental
agencies conducting operations within the Township and all tree removal
companies and persons removing trees on behalf of others.
PROTECTIVE BARRIER — A physical structure limiting access to a
protected area, composed of wood or other suitable materials which
ensures compliance with the intent of this chapter. Variations of these
methods may be permitted upon written request if they satisfy the intent of
this chapter.
REMOVE or REMOVAL — The cutting of trees and injury and/or destruction
of any form of vegetation, by whatever method, on any lands subject to this
chapter.
SILVICULTURE — A land use to derive income from growing plants and
trees on land including but not limited to land used principally for fruit
grove and timber production, and not including land used principally for
another use and incidentally for growing trees or plants for income.
SITE PLAN — An illustration of a proposed development as required in the
Zoning Ordinance.
SPECIMEN TREE — A tree which, because of its high value as a
representative tree of a particular type or species, due to its size, age
or other prominent botanical characteristics, has been designated as a
specimen tree by the Planning Commission.
STRUCTURE — Any assembly of materials above or below the surface of
the land or water, including but not limited to houses, buildings, bulkheads,
piers, docks, landings, dams, waterway obstructions, towers, utility
transmission devices.
TRANSPLANT — The digging up by a property owner of a tree from one
place on a property and planting of the same tree in another place on the
same property.
TREE — A living woody plant with an erect perennial trunk, which at
maturity is 13 feet or more in height and which has a more or less definite
crown or foliage.
TREE SURVEY — A minimum one-inch-equals-one-hundred-feet scale
drawing which provides the following information: location of all trees
having six inches or greater diameter breast height, plotted by accurate
techniques, and the common or botanical names of those trees and their
diameter breast height.
UNDERDEVELOPED — A parcel of land which is unplatted and
substantially unimproved. With respect to land which, on the effective date
§ 389-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-2
1:401
of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, is partially improved by
virtue of a building or other improvement located on a portion of the land,
the portion of the land which does not contain the building or improvement
shall be considered underdeveloped.
§ 389-3. Interpretation; effect on other provisions.
In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience, or general welfare. It
is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way
impair or interfere with any existing provisions of law or ordinance, or with
any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which
shall be adopted or issued pursuant to the law relating to activities within
woodlands areas; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a
greater restriction than is required by existing ordinances or by rules,
regulations or permits the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 389-4. Applicability.
A. Approved site plans, plats, site condominiums, and land divisions. This
chapter shall apply to land for which a site plan or land division plan
was or is submitted for approval to the Planning Commission on or after
the effective date of this chapter, or for which a preliminary plat or
preliminary site condominium development plan has received tentative
approval on or after such date, provided the site plan, land division
plan, plat, or condominium plan remain in effect in good standing under
the Zoning Ordinance and other applicable ordinances.
B. Individual trees.
(1) This chapter shall further apply for the protection of any individual
tree with a diameter breast height of 36 inches or greater,
anywhere in the Township, or any individual tree designated as an
historic or specimen tree anywhere in the Township.
(2) A person may nominate a tree within the Township for designation
as an historic or specimen tree based upon its age, type, size or
historical or cultural associations. Such a nomination shall be made
upon that form provided by the Planning Commission.
(a) A nomination for designation of an historic or specimen tree
shall be brought on for consideration by the Planning
Commission. Where the nomination is not made by the owner
of the property where the tree is located, the owner shall be
notified in writing at least 15 days in advance of the time, date
and place that the Planning Commission will consider the
designation. The notice shall be made by registered mail and
shall advise the owner that the designation of the tree will
make it unlawful to remove, damage or destroy the tree
without a tree removal permit. The notice shall further advise
§ 389-2 OAKLAND CODE § 389-4
1:402
§ 389-5. Violations and penalties; enforcement. [Amended 6-8-1999
by Ord. No. 81]
the owner that if he objects to the tree designation the
Planning Commission shall refuse to so designate the tree.
(b) Absent objection by the owner, the Planning Commission may
designate a tree as an historic or specimen tree upon a finding
that because of one or more unique characteristics the tree
should be preserved as an historic or specimen tree.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction. A person determined to be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction shall be subject to a civil fine
as set forth in Chapter 1, Article I, Definitions; General Penalty, of the
Code of the Charter Township of Oakland. In addition to ordering a
person determined to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction to
pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the Judge or Magistrate
shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to
enforce or enjoin violation of this chapter. Each day that a violation is
permitted to exist shall constitute a separate violation.84
B. Any activity conducted in violation of this chapter is declared to be a
nuisance per se, and the Township may commence a civil action in any
court of competent jurisdiction for an order abating or enjoining the
violation.
C. In addition to any penalty provided in the event of a determination of
responsibility for a violation of this chapter, any person who removes or
causes any tree to be removed, except in accordance with this chapter,
shall forfeit and pay to the Township a civil fee equal to the total value
of trees illegally removed or damaged, as computed from the
International Society of Arboriculture Shade Tree Value Formula.
(1) The fee shall accrue to the Township, and, if necessary, the
Township may file a civil action to recover the fee. The Township
shall place any sum collected in the Township Tree Fund.
(2) Alternatively, the Township may require replacement of illegally
removed or damaged trees as restitution in lieu of the fee.
Replacement will be on an inch-for-inch basis computed by adding
the total diameter measured at diameter breast height in inches of
the illegally removed or damaged trees.
(3) The Township may use other reasonable means to estimate the tree
loss if destruction of the illegally removed or damaged trees
prevents exact measurement. The Township may also require a
combination of fee payment and tree replacement.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 389-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-5
1:403
D. The Township may also issue a stop-work order or withhold issuance of
certificates of occupancy, permits, or inspections until the provisions of
this chapter, including any conditions attached to a tree removal
permit, have been fully met.
E. Compliance with this chapter shall be enforced by the Township
Supervisor and other ordinance enforcement officers who are
designated by Township Board resolution.
§ 389-5 OAKLAND CODE § 389-5
1:404
ARTICLE II
Tree Removal Permit
§ 389-6. Requirement established.
Subject to the exceptions enumerated in § 389-11, no person shall remove,
cause to be removed, transplant or destroy, on any land in the Township to
which this chapter applies, any tree having six inches or greater diameter
breast height, or conifer greater than 20 feet in height, without first
obtaining a tree removal permit.
§ 389-7. Plat or plan approval.
Where a final subdivision plat, site plan, site condominium development
plan or land division plan has been reviewed and approved by the Township,
and conforms with this chapter, the plat or plan, together with any
additional terms and conditions attached thereto, shall be considered to
have fulfilled the requirements for a tree removal permit.
§ 389-8. Residential development.
A. Generally. In addition to other requirements of this chapter, there shall
be compliance with the following requirements in all residential
developments.
B. Building envelopes. The developer shall designate building envelopes
for all structures.
(1) Platted subdivisions. The building envelope for platted lots and site
condominiums shall be the buildable area remaining on a lot after
satisfying Township Zoning Ordinance setback requirements.
(2) Other residential developments. For all other residential
developments, the developer shall designate as building envelopes
the building areas, plus reasonable area beyond the buildings up to
10 feet, so long as the area is not in any required setback.
(3) Activities within building envelope. No additional tree removal
permit shall be required for construction of structures or
improvements or other activities within a building envelope.
(4) Activities outside building envelope. Subject to the exceptions
enumerated in § 389-11, construction or activities beyond the
building envelope shall require an additional tree removal permit.
The Planning Commission may waive the requirement for a tree
removal permit when the Township Engineer verifies that tree
removal is necessary and there is no reasonable alternative in
connection with drainage improvements or driveways.
§ 389-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-9
1:405
§ 389-9. Nonresidential development.
For nonresidential developments which require land cleaning, such clearing
shall be limited to designated street rights-of-way, drainage retention/
detention basins and utility areas, and areas necessary for the construction
of buildings, structures or other site improvements. An objective in
determining the layout and design of buildings and parking shall be the
prevention of protected trees, with a priority given for preservation of the
largest trees deemed to have a reasonable likelihood of survival.
§ 389-10. Minimum preservation requirement.
The developer shall preserve and leave standing and undamaged a
minimum of 40% of the total number of trees having six inches or greater
diameter breast height which exist within the platted area prior to
development. However, trees contained within the designated building
envelopes or within required drainage detention and retention areas shall
not count toward the required minimum preservation percentage.
§ 389-11. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding the requirement of §§ 389-6 through 389-10, the following
activities are permitted unless otherwise prohibited by statute or other
Township ordinances.
A. Agriculture exception. Tree removal or transplanting occurring during
use of land for agriculture or the operation of a commercial nursery or
tree farm, provided this exception shall only be applicable if the
commercial nursery or tree farm has been licensed with the state and in
operation on the property for three years or more, or the property
owner records an affidavit that the commercial nursery or tree farm
shall continue in active operation for a period of no less than five years.
B. Conservation of natural resources. Conservation of soil, vegetation,
water, fish, wildlife, and other natural resources.
C. Emergencies. Actions made necessary by an emergency, such as
tornado, windstorm, flood, freeze, dangerous and infectious insect
infections or disease, or other disaster, in order to prevent injury or
damage to persons or property or restore order.
D. Public utilities. Repair or maintenance work performed by public
utilities necessitating the trimming or cutting of trees.
E. Dead or damaged trees. Removal or trimming of dead, diseased or
damaged trees, where the damage resulted from an accident or
nonhuman cause, and provided that the removal or trimming is
accomplished through the use of standard forestry practices and
techniques.
F. Residential parcels containing less than 25 acres. Tree removal or
transplanting occurring during the use of the parcel in support of one
§ 389-9 OAKLAND CODE § 389-11
1:406
§ 389-12. Application for tree removal permit.
residential dwelling and permitted residential accessory uses. All
contiguous land owned in common shall be included in the acreage
calculations. This provision shall not exempt such parcels from
regulation under the terms of this chapter at the time of application for
approval of site plans, plats, site condominiums, and land divisions as
outlined in § 389-4A.
G. Outdoor recreation. Outdoor recreation such as the utilization of field
trails or woodlands on publicly owned property for nature study, hiking,
horseback riding, trapping and hunting as otherwise legally permitted
and regulated.
H. Tree management. Where a tree management plan, prepared by a state
registered forester, or registered landscape architect, is submitted to
and approved by the Township Supervisor, after consultation with the
Township expert, tree cutting may occur without a permit. To qualify
under this exception, tree management activity shall be for the purpose
of reducing the density of trees so as to promote and maintain the
health and viability of the remaining trees. The management plan shall
include the means by which cut trees shall be removed from the
property without damaging remaining trees. The person seeking
approval and exemption under this provision shall establish an escrow
with the Township Clerk for the purpose of covering the cost of the
Township's expert.
A. Time of application. Application for a tree removal permit shall be made
before removing or transplanting trees on sites to which this chapter
applies.
B. Application and fee.
(1) A person seeking removal of any designated historical tree,
specimen tree, or any tree with 36 inches diameter breast height or
greater shall submit an application to the Township Clerk on an
approved form, along with a nonrefundable application/permit fee
as determined by the Township Board. Completion of the approved
form shall suffice as application for a tree removal permit.
(2) Where the site is proposed for development necessitating site plan,
site condominium, plat review, request for a tree removal permit at
the time of preliminary site plan, preliminary site condominium
plan, or preliminary plat submittal, along with an additional
nonrefundable application/permit fee as determined by the
Township Board.
(3) Where the site is proposed for development necessitating approval
for division of land, request for a tree removal permit shall be
included at the time of application for division of land, along with
an additional nonrefundable application/permit fee as currently
§ 389-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-12
1:407
established or hereafter adopted by resolution of the Township
Board from time to time.
C. Contents of application.
(1) In addition to or in conjunction with information required for site
plan, site condominium, or plat review, or for application for
division of land, an application for a tree removal permit shall
submit 16 copies of the following information to the Township
Clerk:
(a) Description and statement of activity purpose. Detailed
description and statement of the purpose of the proposed
activity.
(b) Tree survey. Tree survey for all areas for which a tree removal
permit is required.
(c) Location of trees. Trees having six inches or greater diameter
breast height, that are proposed to remain, to be transplanted
or to be removed from the areas for which a tree removal
permit is required, shall be so designated and identified by
common or botanical name on a minimum one-inch-equals-onehundred-
feet scale drawing.
(d) Tree identification. A statement that all trees being retained
will be identified by some method, such as painting, flagging,
etc., and, where protective barriers are necessary, that they
will be erected before work starts.
(e) Tree protection. A statement describing how trees intended to
remain will be protected during development.
(f) Cost of replacement. A cost estimate for the proposed tree
replacement program with a detailed explanation including the
number, size and species.
(g) Topographical survey. A topographical survey sealed by a
registered engineer or registered surveyor, with contours
drawn at an interval of not more than two feet, and vertical
contour data at an interval of no more than one foot for all
areas to be disturbed by proposed tree removal operations,
extending for a distance of at least 50 feet beyond the limits of
such areas. Indicated elevations shall be based on United
States Geological Survey datum.
(h) Grade changes. Designation of proposed grade changes and
proposed drainage pattern changes.
(i) Soil conditions. Existing general soil conditions throughout the
parcel.
§ 389-12 OAKLAND CODE § 389-12
1:408
(2) When requesting a tree removal permit for an area that does not
require site plan, site condominium, or plat review, or application
for land division, the applicant shall, in addition to the information
required in Subsection C(1) of this section, submit 16 copies of the
following information to the Township Clerk:
(a) A completed use permit application, on a use form
predescribed by the Township, which includes the following
information:
[1] The name, address and telephone number of the applicant
and of the applicant's agent.
[2] The name, address and telephone number of the owner of
the property.
[3] The project location, including, as applicable, the street,
road or highway, section number, name of subdivision, and
name of any watercourse which will or may be impacted.
(b) Where the applicant is not the owner of the property, a written
authorization from the owner permitting the proposed activity.
(c) A nonrefundable application/permit fee as determined by the
Township Board.
D. "No tree" affidavit.
(1) Where proposed activity requires site plan, site condominium, or
plat review, or application for land division, and is located on site
with no trees of six diameter breast height or greater, the developer
shall, at the time of plan, plat, or application submittal, include a
"no tree" affidavit.
(2) Where "no tree" affidavit is submitted, the Township shall conduct
an inspection of the site. If the inspection substantiates the
developer's claims, the developer shall be relieved of the necessity
of providing the information listed in Subsection C(1) of this section
as it pertains to this chapter.
(3) If, during the inspection by the Township, the site is found to have
tree specimens with a diameter breast height of less than six
inches, but which are of value because of quantities such as health,
habitat, size, species, or other positive attributes, the Township
may require the developer to request a tree removal permit.
(4) Forest management. An owner may be granted a tree removal
permit for the purpose of maintaining and improving a woodlands
area by professional forestry management methods. Applications
for this permit must, in addition to the information listed in
Subsection C(2)(a), (b) and (c) of this section, be accompanied by a
management plan for the subject area prepared by a forester
licensed and registered in the state. The management plan shall
§ 389-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-12
1:409
§ 389-13. Application review standards.
The following standards shall govern the granting or denial of an
application for a tree removal permit.
include a description of and a schedule for the program, justifying
reasons for the work specified, and a summary of the benefits to
be obtained. Work under a forest management use permit shall be
directed by a licensed and registered forester. Under the forest
management use permit, provisions of this chapter which are
applicable solely to development or land clearing activities shall
not apply. The Township shall not levy any fee for this special
permit.
A. Preservation and conservation. No application shall be denied solely
because some trees grow on the site. Nevertheless, tree preservation
and conservation shall be of paramount concern and importance.
B. Developmental alternatives. Prevention and conservation of wooded
areas, trees, similar woody vegetation, wildlife and related natural
resources and processes shall have priority over development when
there are feasible and prudent location alternatives on site for proposed
building, structures or other site improvements.
C. Diversity of species. Diversity of tree species shall be maintained where
essential to preserving a wooded area.
D. Woodland integrity. The integrity of a stand of trees shall be maintained
irrespective of whether such stand crosses property lines.
E. Quality of woodland. The reviewing authority shall evaluate the quality
of the involved tree area, including in its evaluation consideration of:
(1) Soil quality;
(2) Habitat quality;
(3) Tree species (including diversity of tree species);
(4) Tree size and density;
(5) Health and vigor of tree stand;
(6) Wildlife within the woodland area;
(7) Understory species and quality;
(8) Impact on the human environment, such as wind block, noise
buffer, and cooling effect; and
(9) Historic or specimen trees within the woodland area.
F. Land clearing. Where the proposed activity consists of land clearing, it
shall be limited to designated street rights-of-way, drainage and utility
§ 389-12 OAKLAND CODE § 389-13
1:410
§ 389-14. Application review procedure.
areas and areas necessary for the construction of buildings, structures
or other site improvements.
G. Grubbing. Where grubbing is permitted, it shall not include the removal
of any trees with a diameter breast height of greater than three inches.
H. Residential development. Where the proposed activity involves
residential development, residential units shall, to the extent
reasonably feasible, be designed and constructed to blend into the
natural setting of the landscape.
I. Compliance with statutes and ordinances. The proposed activity shall
comply with all applicable statutes and ordinances.
J. Relocation or replacement; limitation. The proposed activity shall
include necessary provisions for tree relocation or replacement, in
accordance with § 389-17, and tree protection, in accordance with
Article III of this chapter. Tree removal or transplanting shall be limited
to instances where:
(1) Necessary for construction. Removal or transplanting is necessary
for the construction of a building, structure or other site
improvement, and the permit application has shown there is no
feasible and prudent location alternative on site for a proposed
building, structure or other site improvement; or
(2) Disease, damage, etc. The tree is diseased, damaged or in danger
of falling, is located too close to existing or proposed buildings or
structures, interferes with existing utility service or drainage,
creates unsafe vision clearance or does not conform to other
Township ordinances or regulations.
K. Consideration of total acreage. The reviewing authority shall consider
the total acreage of woodlands existing within the Township.
L. Burden of demonstrating hardship. The burden of demonstrating that
no feasible and prudent alternative location for structures or
improvements without undue hardship shall be upon the applicant.
A. Review and authority.
(1) The Township Clerk shall review all applicable materials submitted
for a tree removal permit to verify that the applicant has provided
all required information.
(2) All applicable materials shall be reviewed by the Township Planner
for his technical analysis and recommendation. The Township
Planner shall notify the Planning Commission of his
recommendation for either granting or denial of the tree removal
permit.
§ 389-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-14
1:411
(3) All applicable materials shall be reviewed by the Township Forester
for his technical analysis and recommendation. The Township
Forester shall notify the Planning Commission of his
recommendation for either granting or denial of the tree removal
permit.
(4) Where the site is proposed for development necessitating site plan
review, site condominium approval, or plat approval by the
Planning Commission, the Planning Commission shall be
responsible for granting or denying the tree removal permit,
subject to approval, reversal, or modification by the Township
Board with respect to site condominium or plat approvals.
(5) Where the site is proposed for development necessitating land
division, the Planning Commission shall be responsible for granting
or denying the tree removal permit, subject to approval, reversal,
or modification by the Township Supervisor.
(6) Where the site plan review, site condominium approval, or plat
approval by the Planning Commission is not required by Township
ordinance, and where the development does not necessitate land
division, denying of a tree removal permit shall be the
responsibility of the Planning Commission.
B. Notice. Prior to a determination by the Planning Commission on a tree
removal permit application, notice of the application and the date, time
and location of a Planning Commission meeting at which the application
will be considered shall be published in a paper of general circulation
within the Township. A copy of the notice shall be mailed to those
persons to whom real property adjacent to the proposed activity is
assessed, including property directly across public rights-of-way and
easements. Where the proposed activity does not require site
condominium or plat approval, the notice shall indicate a date prior to
which written comments regarding the application may be submitted to
the Township for consideration by the reviewing authorities.
C. Denial of tree removal permit. Whenever an application for a tree
removal permit is denied, the permit applicant shall be notified, in
writing, of the reasons for denial.
D. Granting of a tree removal permit. Whenever an application for a tree
removal permit is granted, the reviewing authority shall:
(1) Conditions. Attach to the granting of the permit any reasonable
conditions considered necessary by the reviewing authority to
ensure the intent of this chapter will be fulfilled and to minimize
damage to, encroachment in or interference with natural resources
and processes within wooded areas;
(2) Completion of operations. Fix a reasonable time to complete tree
removal operations; and
§ 389-14 OAKLAND CODE § 389-14
1:412
§ 389-15. Appeal.
§ 389-16. Display of permit; inspection.
§ 389-17. Tree relocation or replacement.
A tree removal permit grantee shall replace or relocate each removed tree
having six inches or greater diameter breast height.
(3) Security. Require the permit grantee to file with the Township a
cash or corporate surety bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit in
an amount determined necessary by the Township to ensure
compliance with tree removal permit conditions and this chapter.
(4) Validity of a permit.
(a) Any and all permits issued by the Township as requirements of
this chapter shall be declared null and void if commencement
of work so permitted is not started within a reasonable time,
but not to exceed six months.
(b) In no case will the permit be valid for more than 24 months.
Permits not used within this period will become null and void,
and future work will require a new application.
(c) For purposes of this section, a permit shall be used when the
work authorized by the permit is completed.
A. A permit approved by the Planning Commission shall not be issued until
10 calendar days following the date of the approval. Any person who is
aggrieved by the granting or denying of a permit required by this
chapter may request an appeal of the decision to the Township Board.
B. A request for appeal must be filed within 10 calendar days following the
grant or denial. If an appeal is requested during such ten-day period,
the issuance of any permit shall be suspended pending the outcome of
the appeal.
C. The Township Board upon review, may reverse, affirm or modify the
determination and/or permit issued by the Planning Commission.
A. The tree removal permit grantee shall conspicuously display the permit
on site. The permit grantee shall display the permit continuously while
trees are being removed or replaced or while activities authorized
under the permit are performed, and for 10 days following completion.
B. The permit grantee shall allow Township representatives to enter and
inspect the premises at any reasonable time, and failure to allow
inspection shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
A. Basis for determining relocation or replacement. The permit grantee
shall relocate or replace removed trees on a diameter breast height or
height basis, as follows: For deciduous trees, replacement shall be on a
§ 389-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-17
1:413
total caliper basis, that is, for example, for each tree with a twelveinch-
diameter breast height, there shall be replacement trees with an
aggregate of calipers totaling 12 inches, provided no replacement trees
shall have a diameter breast height less than 2 1/2 inches; for conifers,
replacement shall be based upon total height, with no replacement tree
having a height less than six feet. If it is determined, based upon the
opinion of a registered forester or registered landscape architect that
replacement to the extent required under this provision will result in
plantings which do not have sufficient area for growth in the future,
a reduction in the requirement specified in this subsection may be
permitted to the extent necessary to ensure adequate room for growth,
with the provisions of § 389-17B(2), to apply with regard to those trees
which have not been planted under this provision.
B. Replacement tree location.
(1) Approval required. The Township shall approve tree location or
replacement locations in order to provide optimum enhancement,
preservation and protection of wooded areas. To the extent feasible
and desirable, trees shall be relocated or replaced on site and
within the same general area as trees removed.
(2) Tree Fund. Where it is not feasible and desirable to relocate or
replace trees on site or at another approved location in the
Township, the tree removal permit grantee shall pay into the
Township Tree Fund, which fund is hereby created, an amount of
money approximately the current market value of the replacement
trees that would otherwise be required. The Township shall use the
Tree Fund for the purpose of maintaining and preserving wooded
areas and for planting and maintaining trees within the Township.
§ 389-17 OAKLAND CODE § 389-17
1:414
ARTICLE III
Tree Protection During Construction
§ 389-18. Placing materials near tree.
No person may conduct any activity within the dripline of any tree
designated to remain, including, but not limited to, placing solvents,
building material, construction equipment or soil deposits within the
dripline.
§ 389-19. Attachment to trees.
During construction, no person shall attach any device or wire to any
remaining tree.
§ 389-20. Protective barrier.
Before development, land clearing, filling or any land alteration for which
a tree removal permit is required, the developer shall erect and maintain
suitable barriers to protect remaining trees. Protective barriers shall
remain in place until the Township authorizes their removal or issues a
final certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. Wood, metal or other
substantial material shall be utilized in the construction of barriers. Barriers
are required for all trees designated to remain, except in the following
cases:
A. Rights-of-way and easements. Street right-of-way and utility easements
may be cordoned by placing stakes a minimum of 50 feet apart and
tying ribbon, plastic tape, rope, etc., from stake to stake along the
outside perimeters of areas to be cleared.
B. Large, separate area. Large property areas separate from the
construction or land clearing area onto which no equipment will
venture may also be cordoned off as described in Subsection A of this
section.
§ 389-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-20
1:415

ARTICLE IV
Variances
§ 389-21. Authority established.85
The Township Board may grant a variance from the regulations of this
chapter if a finding by the Township Board is made that undue hardship
would result from strict compliance.
§ 389-22. Conditions to be prescribed.86
In granting any variance, the Township Board shall prescribe conditions
that it deems necessary or desirable for the public interest.
§ 389-23. Findings required for variance.
No variance shall be granted unless the Township Board finds:
A. That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting said
property such that the strict application of the provisions of this chapter
would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land;
B. That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the petitioner; and
C. That the variance will further the objectives and policies of this chapter,
the Code of Ordinances and the Master Plan.
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 389-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 389-23
1:417
Chapter 400
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Emergency response cost recovery — See Ch.
190.
Offenses — See Ch. 285.
§ 389-23 OAKLAND CODE § 389-23
1:418
ARTICLE I
Parking Restrictions
[Adopted 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 85 (Ch. 30, Art. II, of the 2007
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 400-1. Prohibited parking areas.
A vehicle shall not be parked, except if necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the law or the directions of a police officer or
traffic control device, in any of the following places:
A. On a sidewalk.
B. In front of a public or private driveway.
C. Within an intersection.
D. Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
E. On a crosswalk.
F. Within 20 feet of a crosswalk, or if there is not a crosswalk, then within
15 feet of the intersection of property lines at an intersection of
highways.
G. Within 30 feet of the approach to a flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic
control signal located at the side of a highway.
H. Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of a point
on the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by an official sign or marking.
I. Within 50 feet of the nearest rail or a railroad crossing.
J. Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to a fire station and on the side
of a street opposite the entrance to a fire station within 75 feet of the
entrance if properly marked by an official sign.
K. Alongside or opposite a street excavation or obstruction, if the
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic.
L. On the roadway side of a vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb
of a street.
M. Upon a bridge or other elevated highway structure or within a highway
tunnel.
N. At a place where an official sign prohibits stopping or parking.
O. Within 500 feet of an accident or incident at which a police officer,
firefighter or other emergency personnel are in attendance.
P. In front of a theater.
§ 400-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-1
1:419
Q. In a place or in a manner which blocks immediate egress from an
emergency exit conspicuously marked as an emergency exit of a
building.
R. In a place or in a manner which blocks or hampers the immediate use of
an immediate egress from a fire escape conspicuously marked as a fire
escape providing an emergency means of egress from a building.
S. In a parking space clearly identified by an official sign as being reserved
for use by disabled persons which is on public property or private
property available for public use, unless the person is a disabled person
as described under state law (MCLA § 257.19a), or unless the person is
parking the vehicle for the benefit of a disabled person. In order for the
vehicle to be parked in the parking space, the vehicle shall display one
of the following:87
(1) A certificate of identification issued under state law, [MCLA
§ 257.675(5)], to a disabled person on the lower left corner of the
front windshield;
(2) A special registration plate issued under state law [MCLA
§ 257.803(d)] to a disabled person;
(3) A similar certificate of identification issued by another state to a
disabled person;
(4) A similar special registration plate issued by another state to a
disabled person; or
(5) A special registration plate to which a disabled person tab is
attached issued under the State Act.
T. In violation of an official sign restricting the period of time for or
manner of parking.
U. In a space controlled or regulated by a meter or a public highway or in a
publicly owned parking area of structure, if the allowable time for
parking indicated on the meter has expired.
V. On a street in such a way as to obstruct the delivery of mail to a rural
mailbox by a carrier of the United States Postal Service or within 15
feet of any mailbox on any street between hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m., except Sundays and federal legal holidays.
W. In a clearly identified access aisle or access lane immediately adjacent
to a space designated for parking by persons with disabilities.88
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
88.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 400-1 OAKLAND CODE § 400-1
1:420
§ 400-2. Violation as civil infraction.
A person who violates this article is responsible for a civil infraction.
§ 400-3. Enforcement.92
Notwithstanding any provision of any ordinance of the Township to the
contrary, the Township Supervisor, or a person designated by the
Supervisor, may authorize personnel other than a police officer, as a parking
enforcement agent to issue and serve citations for violations of its parking
ordinance after the completion of a program of training. Additionally, the
Township Supervisor, or a person designated by the Supervisor, may
authorize persons other than a police officer or personnel to issue citations
for violations of disabled person parking after the person has successfully
completed a program of training.
X. On a street or other area open to the parking of vehicles that results in
the vehicle interfering with the use of a curb-cut or ramp by persons
with disabilities.89
Y. Within 500 feet of a fire at which fire apparatus is in attendance, if the
scene of the fire is outside a city or village. However, volunteer
firefighters responding to the fire may park within 500 feet of the fire in
a manner not to interfere with fire apparatus at the scene. A vehicle
parked legally previous to the fire is exempt from this subsection.90
Z. In a place or in a manner that blocks the use of an alley.91
89.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
90.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
91.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 400-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-3
1:421

ARTICLE II
Overweight Vehicles
[Adopted 10-26-1999 by Ord. No. 88 (Ch. 30, Art. III, of the 2007
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 400-4. Enforcement.
§ 400-5. Violations and penalties.
A. Stopping vehicles for weighing.
(1) A Township police officer, sheriff's deputy or weighmaster of the
Township, having reason to believe that the weight of a vehicle and
load is unlawful, may require the driver to stop and submit to a
weighing of the vehicle by means of either portable or stationary
scales approved and sealed by the State Department of Agriculture
as a legal weighing device and may require that the vehicle be
driven to the nearest weighing station of the Department of State
Highways and Transportation for the purpose of allowing an officer
or agent of the Department of State Highways and Transportation
or County Road Commission to determine whether the conveyance
is loaded in conformity with this article.
(2) When the deputy, police officer or weighmaster, upon weighing a
vehicle and load, determines that the weight is unlawful, the
deputy, officer or weighmaster may detain the vehicle in a suitable
place and remain standing until that portion of the load is shifted or
removed as necessary to reduce the gross axle load weight of the
vehicle to the limit permitted under this article. All materials so
unloaded shall be cared for by the owner or operator of the vehicle
at the risk of the owner or operator.
B. Wheel and axle loads, restrictions, violations. The maximum axle load
shall not exceed the number of pounds designated in MCLA § 257.722.
A. An owner of a vehicle or a lessee of a vehicle of an owner/operator who
causes or allows a vehicle to be loaded and driven or moved on a
highway when the weight of that vehicle violates the provisions of
MCLA § 257.722 is responsible for a civil infraction and shall pay a civil
fine in an amount equal to:
(1) Three cents per pound for each pound of excess load over 1,000
pounds when the excess is 2,000 pounds or less;
(2) Six cents per pound of excess load when the excess is over 2,000
pounds but not over 3,000 pounds;
(3) Nine cents per pound for each pound of excess load when the
excess is over 3,000 pounds but not over 4,000 pounds;
(4) Twelve cents per pound for each pound of excess load when the
excess is over 4,000 pounds but not over 5,000 pounds;
§ 400-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-5
1:423
§ 400-6. Marked vehicle of weighmaster.
A weighmaster, sheriff's deputy or police officer shall not stop a truck or
vehicle in movement upon a road or highway in the Township for any
purpose, unless driving a duly marked vehicle, clearly showing the emblem,
insignia or seal of the state, county or Township.
§ 400-7. Failure to stop on request.
A driver or owner of a vehicle who knowingly fails to stop and submit to
the weighing of the vehicle or load when requested or ordered to do so
by a deputy, police officer or weighmaster of the Township is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
§ 400-8. Adoption of rules.
The Motor Carrier Safety Rules, promulgated to accomplish the purpose
of the Motor Carrier Safety Act, MCLA §§ 480.11 to 480.19, by authority
conferred on the Department of State Police by MCLA § 480.14, is hereby
adopted by reference as if fully set out in this article.
§ 400-9. References in rules.
References in the Motor Carrier Safety Rules to "governmental units" shall
mean the Township.
§ 400-10. Designation of weighmaster.
The Township Board may designate one or more agents or officials as
weighmaster of the Township who, in addition to the sheriff's deputy and
other police officers, shall enforce this article. Each weighmaster, when
enforcing these provisions, shall drive a duly marked vehicle, clearly
showing the emblem, insignia or seal of the Township and equipped with
flashing, rotating or oscillating lights, which shall not be activated except in
those circumstances where the warning produced by the lights is required
for public safety, and with a siren which shall not be used except when the
vehicle is in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of this
(5) Fifteen cents per pound for each pound of excess load when the
excess is over 5,000 pounds but not over 10,000 pounds; and
(6) Twenty cents per pound for each pound of excess when the excess
is over 10,000 pounds.
B. The court shall have discretionary power as to the amount of the civil
fine within the schedule provided by this article and may impose the
civil fine provided in MCLA § 257.907(3) for a civil infraction where, at
the time of the violation, either the motor vehicle, motor vehicle and
semitrailer, or trailer did not exceed the total weight which would be
lawful for each unit by a proper distribution of the load upon the various
axles supporting each unit.
§ 400-5 OAKLAND CODE § 400-10
1:424
article. Furthermore, each weighmaster shall carry, and display on request,
an identification card denoting his title.
§ 400-11. Issuance of citation.
Any weighmaster of the Township, sheriff's deputy or police officer having
reason to believe that a person, vehicle or load is in violation of any of
the provisions of this article may issue to the driver or owner of a vehicle
an appearance citation, pursuant to MCLA §§ 764.9a through 764.9g, and
consistent with MCLA §§ 257.741 through 257.750.
§ 400-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-11
1:425

ARTICLE III
Vehicle Regulations
[Adopted 6-25-2002 by Ord. No. 98 (Ch. 30, Art. I, Sec. 30-1, of the
2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 400-12. Adoption of vehicle standards.
The Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act No. 300 of 1949 (MCLA § 257.1 et
seq.), and as it may be amended from time to time hereafter, is hereby
adopted by reference and shall be enforced by and in the Township. Printed
copies of the Michigan Vehicle Code shall be kept in the office of the
Township Clerk and made available for inspection by and distribution to the
public.
§ 400-13. Word usage.
References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall mean
the Township Board; references to "municipality" shall mean the Township;
references to "local ordinances" shall mean the ordinances of the Township,
and references to the "Township" shall mean the Charter Township of
Oakland.
§ 400-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-13
1:427

ARTICLE IV
Uniform Traffic Provisions
[Adopted 4-22-2003 by Ord. No. 99 (Ch. 30, Art. I, Sec. 30-2, of the
2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 400-14. Adoption of traffic standards.
The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages as
promulgated by the Director of the Michigan Department of State Police
pursuant to the Administrative Procedures Act of 1969, Public Act No. 306
of 1969 (MCLA § 24.201 et seq.) and made effective October 30, 2002, and
all future amendments and revisions of the Uniform Traffic Code when they
are promulgated and effective in this state are incorporated by reference.
§ 400-15. Word usage.
References to "governmental unit" or "municipality" in the Uniform Traffic
Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages shall mean the Charter Township
of Oakland.
§ 400-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-15
1:429
Chapter 415
WATER AND SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Land divisions and subdivisions — See Ch.
250.
Stormwater management and erosion
control — See Ch. 364.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 370.
§ 400-15 OAKLAND CODE § 400-15
1:430
ARTICLE I
Water Supply and Sewage Disposal System
[Adopted 9-8-1970 by Ord. No. 18 (Ch. 32, Art. II, of the 2007 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 415-1. Establishment of system.
It is hereby determined and declared to be desirable and necessary for the
public health, safety and welfare of the Township to operate all water and
sewer facilities of the Township as one combined water supply and sewage
disposal system of the Township, and to operate and maintain the same
on a public utility rate basis, in accordance with the provisions of Public
Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCLA § 141.101 et seq.), and such system is hereby
established.
§ 415-2. Operation and maintenance as one system.
The water supply and sewage disposal system of the Township (hereinafter
referred to as the "system") shall be operated and maintained as one system
on a combined rate basis and shall include all water mains, and laterals,
pumping stations, sewers, sewage disposal facilities and all attendant
facilities and equipment which are used or useful in the operation and
maintenance of a water supply and sewage disposal system, now in
existence or hereafter acquired.
§ 415-3. Supervision and control.93
The operation, maintenance, alteration, repair and management of the
system shall be under the supervision and control of the Township Board
and administered as a regular department of the Township government. The
Township Board may employ such person or persons in such capacity as
it deems advisable to carry on the efficient management and operation of
the system, and may make such rules, orders and regulations as it deems
advisable and necessary to assure the efficient management and operation
of the system.
§ 415-4. Connection to sanitary sewers; time limit.
No premises within the Township from which sanitary sewage emanates
shall be used or occupied after the effective date of the ordinance from
which this article is derived, unless said premises are connected to a
sanitary sewer of the Township; provided, however, that if no public sanitary
sewage collection facility is available [as defined in Section 12751 of Public
Act No. 368 of 1978 (MCLA § 333.12751)] to the premises on the effective
date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, such premises
shall have 12 months after a public sanitary sewage collection facility does
become available to such premises to make such connection.
93.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-5
1:431
§ 415-5. Water service charges.
§ 415-6. Sewage treatment charges.
Each premises connected with the sanitary sewer system shall be charged
for sewage treatment by the system a charge as currently established or
hereafter adopted by resolution of the Township Board from time to time.
§ 415-7. Connection and installation charges.
The charges for each water supply or sanitary sewer installation or
connection made or to be made with respect to any premises to be serviced
by the system shall be as currently established or hereafter adopted by
resolution of the Township Board from time to time.
§ 415-8. Payment of water and sewer charges.
A. Except as herein otherwise provided, water to be furnished by the
system to each premises shall be measured by a meter installed and
controlled by the Township. Charges for water supply services to each
premises connected with the water supply system shall be as currently
established or hereafter adopted by resolution of the Township Board
from time to time.
B. The Township shall be charged for and shall pay for all water supply
services furnished or provided it by the system in accordance with the
foregoing rates. Charges against the Township shall be payable
quarterly from the current fund of the Township or from the proceeds of
taxes, which the Township within constitutional limitations is hereby
authorized and required to levy in an amount sufficient for such
purpose.
A. Capital and lateral benefit charge payments. All capital charges, lateral
benefit charges, and connection charges shall be payable in full when
due, provided that existing residential or eleemosynary structures shall
have the option of paying the capital charges and lateral benefit
charges over a period of 30 years in equal installments, as a part of the
water service and sewer treatment quarterly billing. If the time
payment method of payment is elected, the amount of the capital and
lateral benefit charges shall be increased 50%. Any existing structure
which elects to pay the debt service charge over a period of years may
prepay the unpaid balance of such charge at any time, with a twentyfive-
percent discount on the then-remaining balance. Providing further
that nonresidential structures shall have the option of deferredpayment
basis, not to exceed five years, with a minimum of 30% down,
the balance prorated over the term of the payments.
B. Billing. Each customer shall be billed for water service and sewer
treatment charges provided by the system quarterly, in a single billing,
although the charges shall be separately itemized. Such bills shall be
§ 415-5 OAKLAND CODE § 415-8
1:432
§ 415-9. Accounting period.
The system shall be operated on the basis of a fiscal year commencing on
April 1 of each year and ending on March 31 of the next following year.
due and payable 15 days after the close of the quarter (three months)
covered by such bill.
C. Penalties. If any water or sewer bill is not paid on or before the due
date, then a penalty of 10% shall be added thereto. In the event that any
such bill is not paid within 30 days after the due date, the Township
shall have the right to discontinue and shut off water and/or sewer
service to the premises for which such payment delinquency exists, and
such service shall not be reestablished until all delinquent charges and
penalties, plus a turn-on charge as currently established or hereafter
adopted by resolution of the Township Board from time to time have
been paid.
D. Lien. The charges for water and/or sewer services, pursuant to the
provisions of Section 21 of Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCLA § 141.121),
shall be a lien on all premises served thereby, unless notice is given that
a tenant is responsible, and whenever any such charge against any
piece of property shall be delinquent for six months, the Township
official or officials in charge of the collection thereof shall certify
annually, on July 1 of each year, to the Tax Assessing Officer of the
Township, the fact of such delinquency, whereupon such charge shall be
by him entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such premises
and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner
as general Township taxes against such premises are collected and the
lien thereof enforced; provided, however, where notice is given that a
tenant is responsible for such charges and service as provided by said
Section 21, no further service shall be rendered such premises until a
cash deposit in the amount as currently established or hereafter
adopted by resolution of the Township Board from time to time shall
have been made as security for payment of such charges and service.94
E. Enforcement. In addition to the foregoing, the Township shall have the
right to recover all charges and penalties herein provided through court
action.
F. Free service. No free service shall be furnished by said system to any
person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or
instrumentality.
G. Other services. Service to other municipalities, or premises therein,
shall be by contractual agreement between the Township and the
municipality served.
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-10
1:433
§ 415-10. Funds and bank accounts. [Amended 1-13-1981 by Ord.
No. 39]
A. Generally. The revenues of the system shall be set aside, as collected,
and deposited in a separate depository account in a bank duly qualified
to do business in the State of Michigan, to be selected by the Township
Board, in an account to be designated "Water and Sewage Disposal
System Receiving Fund" (hereinafter, for brevity, referred to as the
"Receiving Fund"), and said revenues so deposited shall be transferred
from the Receiving Fund periodically in the manner and at the times
hereinafter specified. The terms "revenues" and "net revenues" as used
in this article shall have the meanings as defined in Section 3 of Public
Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCLA § 141.103).95
B. Operation and Maintenance Fund. Out of the revenues in the Receiving
Fund there shall be first set aside quarterly into a depository account
designated Operation and Maintenance Fund, a sum sufficient to
provide for the payment of the next quarter's current expenses of
administration and operation of the system and such current expenses
for the maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the same
in good repair and working order.
C. Bond and Interest Redemption Fund. There shall next be set aside into
a depository account designated Bond and Interest Redemption Fund, a
sum sufficient to provide for the payment of the principal, interest, and
bond service charges of any bonds, and any contractual obligations of
the Township relative to bonds issued by the county, in connection with
the financing of the acquisition, construction, improvement,
enlargement, or extension of any water or sewer system serving the
Township or part thereof, which will become due and payable during
the next quarter.
D. Replacement Fund. There shall next be established and maintained a
depository account designated "Replacement Fund," which shall be
used solely for the purpose of making major repairs and replacements
to the system if needed. There shall be set aside into said fund, after
provision has been made for the Operation and Maintenance Fund,
such sums as the Township Board shall deem necessary for this
purpose.
E. Improvement Fund. There shall next be established and maintained an
Improvement Fund for the purpose of making improvements,
extensions and enlargements to the system. There shall be deposited
into said fund, after providing for the foregoing funds, such sum as the
Township Board shall determine.
F. Reserve Fund. Monies remaining in the Receiving Fund at the end of
any operating year, after full satisfaction of the requirements of the
foregoing funds, may, at the option of the Township Board, be
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-10 OAKLAND CODE § 415-10
1:434
transferred to the Improvement Fund or used for any other lawful
purpose of the Township.
G. Accounts. All monies belonging to any of the foregoing funds or
accounts may be kept in one bank account, in which event the monies
shall be allocated on the books and records of the Township within this
single bank account in the manner set forth in this section:
(1) All funds derived from the collection of rates for services furnished
by the system on hand in any account on the effective date of the
ordinance from which this article is derived shall, within 15 days
thereof, be transferred to the Receiving Fund and be distributed
therefrom in accordance with the terms of this article.
(2) In the event the monies in the Receiving Fund are insufficient to
provide for the current requirements of the Operation and
Maintenance Fund, any monies and/or securities in other funds of
the system shall be transferred to the Operation and Maintenance
Fund, to the extent of any deficit therein.
(3) Monies in any fund or account established by the provisions of this
article may be invested in obligations of the United States of
America in the manner and subject to the limitations provided in
Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCLA § 141.101 et seq.). In the event
such investments are made, the securities representing the same
shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust company having on
deposit the fund or funds from which such purchase was made.
Income received from such investments shall be credited to the
fund from which said investments were made.
H. Special disbursement. Notwithstanding the foregoing priority of
accounts and funds, whenever the Township shall receive payments of
lateral benefit charges, as provided in this section, which it has, by
contract, agreed to disburse in a manner different from that provided in
this section for other revenues of the system, such moneys shall be
disbursed as provided in such contract directly from the Receiving
Fund.
§ 415-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-10
1:435

ARTICLE II
Cross-Connections
[Adopted 3-11-1977 by Ord. No. 77 (Ch. 32, Art. III, Div. 2, of the
2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 415-11. Adoption of rules; purpose; administration. [Amended
6-5-2002 by Ord. No. 77A]
§ 415-12. Plan. [Amended 6-5-2002 by Ord. No. 77A]
§ 415-13. Authority; designated agent. [Amended 6-5-2002 by Ord.
No. 77A]
A. Adoption by reference. The Township adopts by reference, as amended
from time to time, the Water Supply Cross-Connection Control Rules of
the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality ("MDEQ"), Public
Act No. 399 of 1976 (MCLA § 325.1001 et seq.) R 325.11401 through R
325.11407 of the Administrative Code.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this article is to promote and protect the public
health, safety and welfare by the preservation and elimination of crossconnections
which have been recognized as the cause of public health
problems due to the hazard caused to drinking water quality.
C. The County Water Resources Commissioner Operations and
Maintenance Division shall be the designated authority and
administrator of the cross-connection control program.
A. Pursuant to Public Act No. 399 of 1976 (MCLA § 325.1001 et seq.) R
325.11404 of the Administrative Code, the Township hereby adopts by
reference the County Water Resources Commissioner Operation and
Maintenance Division's Cross-Connection Control Program, as
approved by the State Department of Environmental Quality, as may be
amended from time to time.
B. The plan outlines the conduct of the Township, in conjunction with the
County Water Resources Commission, Operations and Maintenance
Division, with respect to a cross-connection control program including
the method for performing initial inspections, determining inspections/
reinspection frequencies, backflow prevention assembly and tracking
and testing schedules, annual reporting, generation of compliance,
noncompliance, pertinent typing information request and water service
shutoff notices.
C. Upon approval by the State Department of Environmental Quality
Water Division, the plan will become an instrument of this division for
providing program conduct and policies.
A. The County Water Resources Commissioner, Operations and
Maintenance Divisions, shall be the designated authority and
administrator of the cross-connection control program.
§ 415-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-13
1:437
§ 415-14. Water discontinuance.
B. The designated authority/agent shall be either designated by the
County Water Resources Commissioner, Operations and Maintenance
Divisions or be appointed by the County Water Resources
Commissioner, Operations and Maintenance Division.
A. The authority/agent shall have the right to request entry to any facility
for the sole purpose of inspecting for cross-connections. If the request
for entry to any facility is denied, the authority/agent shall bring this
denial to the attention of the Township. The Supervisor, after
considering the petition, may authorize the authority/agent to seek a
search warrant from the Magistrate, may require the authority/agent to
make further attempts to gain access or, if an emergency condition is
known to exist with reasonable certainty, to authorize the authority/
agent to terminate the water service pursuant to Subsection 5.10(c) of
the plan. If the water service is terminated under this section, the
facility affected shall be entitled to a hearing before the Township
Board upon reasonable notice, not to exceed three business days, to
determine whether and under what circumstances, water service
should be restored.
B. If a facility fails to comply in correcting any deficiencies identified
during the cross-connection inspection and subsequent reinspection,
follow-up inspection, and the steps as outlined in the approved crossconnection
control plan, the water service to the facility will be
discontinued until such time that the deficiencies are corrected and
approved by the authority/agent.
§ 415-13 OAKLAND CODE § 415-14
1:438
ARTICLE III
Sewer Use Regulations
[Adopted 2-13-1990 by Ord. No. 59 (Ch. 32, Art. IV, Div. 2, of the
2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 415-15. Purpose. [Amended 1-8-2002 by Ord. No. 59-2001A;
2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 59-2007A]
A. The purpose of this article is the protection of the environment, and of
public health and safety by abating and preventing pollution through
the regulation and control of the quantity and quality of wastes
admitted to or discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment
system under the jurisdiction of the Township and enabling the
Township to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required
by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et
seq., and the general pretreatment regulations, being 40 CFR 403.
B. The objectives of this article are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
system which will interfere with the operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting sludge, or will pose a hazard to the
health or welfare of the people or of employees of the City of
Detroit Water and Sewerage Department;
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater
system which will pass inadequately treated through the system
into receiving waters, the atmosphere or the environment, or
otherwise be incompatible with the system;
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim wastewater or
sludge from the system in an economical and advantageous
manner; and
(4) To provide for the recovery of the costs from users of the
wastewater collection and treatment system sufficient to
administer regulatory activities and meet the costs of the
operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the
system.
C. This article provides for the regulation of contributors to the Detroit
and Township wastewater collection and treatment system through the
issuance of wastewater discharge permits to certain users and through
the enforcement of general requirements for all users, authorizes
monitoring and enforcement, and authorizes fees and penalties.
§ 415-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-16
1:439
§ 415-16. Authority. [Amended 1-8-2002 by Ord. No. 59-2001A;
2-13-2007 Ord. No. 59-2007A96]
By virtue of the obligations and authority placed upon the Township by the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the "Clean Water Act,"
as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.; the 1963 Constitution of the
State of Michigan; Part 31 of Public Act No. 451 of 1994 (MCLA § 324.3101
et seq.); the 2012 City of Detroit Charter; the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit for the City of Detroit Publicly Owned
Treatment Works (POTW); the consent judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of
Detroit et al., Federal District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan
Case No. 77-1100, as amended; and existing or future contracts between
the Board of Water Commissioners and suburban communities or other
governmental or private entities; or by virtue of common law usage of the
system, this article shall apply to every user contributing or causing to be
contributed, or discharging, pollutants or wastewater into the wastewater
collection and treatment system of the City of Detroit POTW.
§ 415-17. Definitions. [Amended 1-8-2002 by Ord. No. 59-2001A;
2-13-2007 Ord. No. 59-2007A]
For purposes of this article and unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings
ascribed to them by this section:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the "Clean Water Act," as amended, being 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
AS-BUILT PLANS — Engineering drawings prepared after installations of
wastewater facilities which shall show a statement by a registered engineer
or surveyor certifying this to be as-built plans and shall include, but not
be limited to, length of sewer, invert elevation, locations with respect to
property lines, wye and riser locations and depths, sewer material and joints
used, and mechanical, electrical, and structural details for pump stations,
wastewater treatment facilities, and other appurtenances.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER —
Responsible corporate officer, where the industrial user submitting the
reports required by this article is a corporation, who is either:
The president, vice president, secretary, or treasurer of a
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other
person who performs similar policy or decisionmaking functions for
the corporation; or
(1)
The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having
gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 in
second-quarter 1980 dollars, when authority to execute documents
(2)
A.
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-16 OAKLAND CODE § 415-17
1:440
AVAILABLE CYANIDE — The quantity of cyanide that consists of cyanide ion
(CN), hydrogen cyanide in water (HCNaq), and the cyano-complexes of zinc,
copper, cadmium, mercury nickel and silver, determined by EPA Method
OIA-1677, or other method designated as a standard method or approved
under 40 CFR 136.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — Programs, practices,
procedures or other directed efforts initiated and implemented by the user
which can or do lead to the reduction, conservation or minimization of
pollutants being introduced into the ecosystem, including but not limited to
the Detroit sewer system. BMPs include, but are not limited to, equipment
or technology modifications, process or procedure modifications,
reformulation or redesign of products, substitution of raw materials, and
improvements in housekeeping, maintenance, training, or inventory control
and may include technical and economic considerations.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD) — The quality of dissolved
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure five days at 20° C. expressed in terms of
mass and concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)] as measured by
standard methods.
BOARD — The Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Detroit.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes
inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building's sewer (house
sewer). The latter begins five feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
BYPASS — The intentional diversion of a waste stream from any portion of
an industrial user's treatment facility. (See 40 CFR 403.17.)
CENTRALIZED WASTE TREATMENT (CWT) FACILITY — Any facility that
treats any hazardous or nonhazardous industrial waste received from off
site by tanker truck, trailer/roll-off bins, drums, barges, or any other forms
of shipment including:
COMPATIBLE INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER — Wastewater that is produced
by an industrial user which has a pollutant strength or characteristics
similar to those found in domestic wastewater, and which can be efficiently
and effectively transported and treated with domestic wastewater.
has been assigned or delegated to said manager in accordance with
corporate procedures; or
A general partner or proprietor where the industrial user submitting
the reports required by this article is a partnership or sole
proprietorship respectively.
B.
A facility that treats industrial waste received exclusively from off site;
and
A.
A facility that treats industrial waste generated on site as well as
industrial waste received from off site.
B.
§ 415-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-17
1:441
COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT — Pollutants which can be effectively removed
by the POTW treatment system to within the acceptable levels for the POTW
residuals and the receiving stream.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE — A collection of individual samples which are
obtained at regular intervals and collected on a time-proportional or flowproportional
basis over a specified period and which provides a
representative sample of the average stream during the sampling period.
A minimum of four aliquot per 24 hours shall be used where the sample is
manually collected. (See 40 CFR 403, Appendix E.)
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION — The information which would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as
trade secrets of the industrial user.
CONSENT JUDGMENT — The judgment issued by Federal District Court on
September 14, 1977, U.S. EPA v City of Detroit et al., CA No. 77-1100, as
amended.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The Detroit Water and Sewerage Department
which has been officially designated as such by the state under the
provisions of 40 CFR 403.12. [See 40 CFR 403.12(a).]
COOLING WATER — The noncontact water discharged from any use such
as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, and whose only function is the
exchange of heat.
COUNTY — The County of Oakland, State of Michigan, or the Oakland
County Water Resources Commissioner.
COUNTY AGENCY — The County Water Resources Commissioner.
References to the "County Department of Public Works, County Drain
Commissioner" shall also mean County Water Resources Commissioner.97
DAYS — Consecutive calendar days for the purpose of computing a period
of time prescribed or allowed by this article.
DEBT SERVICE CHANGE — Charges levied to customers of the wastewater
system which are used to pay principal, interest and administrative costs of
retiring the debt incurred for construction of the wastewater system. The
debt service charge is separate and distinct and may be in addition to the
user charge as defined in this section.
DEPARTMENT — The City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, and
authorized employees of the Department.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the state.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Detroit Department of Water and
Sewerage, or the Director's designee.
DISCHARGER — A person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes,
or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW.
97.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-17 OAKLAND CODE § 415-17
1:442
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations which is discharged to, or otherwise enters, a treatment works.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY, ADMINISTRATOR or EPA
ADMINISTRATOR — The United States Environmental Protection Agency
or, where appropriate, the authorized representatives or employees of the
EPA.
FACILITY — A location which contributes, causes or permits wastewater
to be discharged into the POTW including, but not limited to, a place of
business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private,
commercial or charitable.
FATS, OILS OR GREASE (FOG) — Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps,
fats, waxes, oils, and any other nonvolatile material of animal, vegetable or
mineral origin that is extractable by solvent in accordance with standard
methods.
FLOW PROPORTIONAL SAMPLE — A composite sample taken with regard
to the flow rate of the waste stream.
FOOTING DRAIN — A pipe or conduit which is placed around the perimeter
of a building foundation and which intentionally admits groundwater.
GRAB SAMPLE — An individual sample collected over a period of time not
exceeding 15 minutes, which reasonably reflects the characteristics of the
stream at the time of sampling.
GROUNDWATER — Subsurface water occupying the saturation zone, from
which wells and springs are fed.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank
trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE — The discharge or the
introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source
regulated under 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b), (c) or (d).
INDUSTRIAL USER — A person who contributes, causes or permits
wastewater to be discharged into the POTW, including, but not limited to,
a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or
private, commercial or charitable but excludes single-family and multifamily
residential dwellings with discharges consistent with domestic waste
characteristics.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any liquid, solid or gaseous waste or form of
energy, or combination thereof, resulting from any processes of industry,
manufacturing, business, trade or research, including the development,
recovery or processing of natural resources.
INFILTRATION — Any waters entering the system from the ground, through
such means, as but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections
or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include and is distinguished from
inflow.
§ 415-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-17
1:443
INFILTRATION/INFLOW — The total quantity of water from both infiltration
and inflow.
INFLOW — Any waters entering the system through such sources as, but
not limited to, building downspouts, footing or yard drains, cooling water
discharges, seepage lines from springs and swampy areas, and storm drain
cross-connections.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge from other sources, both:
LOCAL — A prefix denoting jurisdiction by the Township.
MAY — "May" is permissive.
MUNICIPALITY — Charter Township of Oakland.98
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance
with 33 U.S.C. § 1317(b) and (c) which applies to a specific class or category
of industrial users.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES)
PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface water or groundwater.
NEW SOURCE —
Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or
its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
A.
Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's
NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal
in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations
or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local
regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, as amended, being
33 U.S.C. § 1345, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), as amended,
[including the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and
state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan
prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA], the Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and
Sanctuaries Act.
B.
Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or
may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under 33
U.S.C. § 1317(c) which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section,
provided that:
A.
98.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 415-17 OAKLAND CODE § 415-17
1:444
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE (O&M) — All work, materials,
equipment, utilities and other effort required to operate and maintain the
wastewater transportation and treatment system consistent with ensuring
adequate treatment of wastewater to produce an effluent in compliance
with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations,
and includes the cost of replacement.
OWNER — The owners of record of the freehold of the premises or lesser
estate therein, a mortgagor or vendee in possession, assignee of rents,
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site where no other source is located; or
(1)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(2)
The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the
same general type of activity as the existing source, should be
considered.
(3)
Construction on a site where an existing source is located resulting in
a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the
criteria of Subsection A(2) or (3) of this definition but otherwise alters,
replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment; or
B.
Construction of a new source has commenced where the owner or
operator has:
Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
(a)
Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or
facilities that are necessary for the placement, assembly, or
installation of new source facilities or equipment; or
(b)
(1)
Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its
operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial
loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies
do not constitute a contractual obligation under this section.
(2)
C.
§ 415-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-17
1:445
receiver, executor, trustee, lessee, or other person, firm or corporation in
control of a building.
PASS-THROUGH — Discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations, which alone or in conjunction
with a discharge from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, unit of
government, school district, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agent or assigns.
pH — The intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution, calculated by
taking the negative base-ten logarithm of the hydrogen ion activity. Activity
is deemed to be equal to concentration in moles per liter.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt, or industrial, municipal and agricultural waste which is
discharged into water.
POLLUTION — The introduction of any pollutant that, alone or in
combination with any other substance, can or does result in the degradation
or impairment of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity
of water.
PRETREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the removal
of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in
wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or
otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction,
removal or alteration may be attained by physical, chemical or biological
processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by
federal, state or local law, rules and regulations.
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirements related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment
standard imposed on an industrial user. [See 40 CFR 403.3(r).]
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — All national categorical pretreatment
standards, the general prohibitions specified in 40 CFR 403.5(a), the
specific prohibitions delineated in 40 CFR 403.5(b), and the local or specific
limits developed pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c), including the discharge
prohibitions specified in § 415-21B.
PRIVATE — A prefix denoting jurisdiction by a nongovernmental entity.
PUBLIC — A prefix denoting jurisdiction by any governmental subdivision
or agency.
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer of any type controlled by a governmental entity.
§ 415-17 OAKLAND CODE § 415-17
1:446
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment works as
defined by 33 U.S.C. § 1292(2)(A), which is owned by a state or municipality,
as defined in 33 U.S.C. § 1362, including:
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designed to
provide treatment to wastewater, including recycling and reclamation of
wastewater.
QUALIFICATION LEVEL — The measurement of the concentration of a
contaminant obtained by using a specified laboratory procedure calculated
at a specified concentration above the detection level. It is considered
the lowest concentration at which a particular contaminant can be
quantitatively measured using a specified laboratory procedure for
monitoring of the contaminant.
REPLACEMENT — The replacement in whole or in part of any equipment,
appurtenances and accessories in the wastewater transportation or
treatment systems to insure continuous treatment of wastewater in
accordance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal
regulations.
REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE — Any sample of wastewater, which accurately
and precisely represents the actual quality, character, and condition of
one or more pollutants in the waste stream being sampled. Representative
samples shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with 40 CFR 136.
SANITARY WASTEWATER — The portion of wastewater that is not
attributable to industrial activities and is similar to discharges from
domestic sources, including, but not limited to, discharges from sanitary
facilities and discharges incident to the preparation of food for on-site
noncommercial consumption.
SERVICE AREA — Any area whose wastewater is received by the Township
or the county for the transmission for treatment by the City of Detroit
DWSD.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or discharge water.
See the following definitions modifying sewer:
Any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, or
reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial waste of a liquid nature;
A.
Sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to
a POTW treatment plant; or
B.
The municipality, as defined in 33 U.S.C. § 1362, which has jurisdiction
over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a
treatment works.
C.
BUILDING SEWER — In plumbing, the extension from the building
drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. Also called "house
connection."
A.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer intending to receive both wastewater
and stormwater, surface or drainage water.
B.
§ 415-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-17
1:447
SEWER SERVICE CHARGE — The sum of the applicable user charge,
surcharges and debt service charges.
SHALL — "Shall" is mandatory.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS — Any user of the POTW who:
COMMON SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting
properties have equal rights.
C.
D. COUNTY SEWER — A public sewer controlled by the county agency.
INTERCEPTING SEWER — A sewer that received dry-weather flow
from a number of transverse sewers of outlets in frequently additional
predetermined quantities of stormwater, if from a combined system,
and conducts such waters to a point for treatment of disposal.
E.
LATERAL SEWER — That portion of the sewer system located under the
street, within the street right-of-way, or easement and which collects
sewage from a particular property for transfer to the trunk line or
interceptor. A sewer which is designed to receive a building sewer.
F.
MUNICIPAL SEWER — A public sewer exclusive of a county sewer or
City of Detroit sewer.
G.
PUBLIC SEWER — A common sewer controlled by a governmental
agency or public utility.
H.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried
waste from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and
institutions, together with minor quantities of groundwater,
stormwater, surface water and drainage water and are not admitted
intentionally.
I.
STORM SEWER — A sewer that carries stormwater and surface water,
street wash and other wash waters, or drainage, but excludes domestic
wastewater and industrial wastewater. Also called a "storm drain."
J.
TRUNK SEWER or TRUNK LINE — A sewer which connects the lateral
sewer to the intercepting sewer and to which building sewers may be
connected.
K.
Has an average discharge flow of 25,000 gallons per day or more
of process wastewater excluding sanitary, boiler blowdown, and
noncontact cooling water;
A.
Has discharges subject to the national categorical pretreatment
standards;
B.
Requires pretreatment to comply with the specific pollutant limitations
of this article;
C.
Has in its discharge toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to 33 U.S.C.
§ 1317, or other applicable federal and state laws or regulations, that
D.
§ 415-17 OAKLAND CODE § 415-17
1:448
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE — Any violation which meets one or
more of the following criteria:
are in concentrations and volumes which are subject to regulation
under this article as determined by the department;
Is required to obtain a permit for the treatment, storage or disposal
of hazardous waste pursuant to regulations adopted by this state or
adopted under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by
the Federal Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended, and
may or does contribute or allow waste or wastewater into the POTW,
including, but not limited to, leachate or runoff; or
E.
Is found by the City of Detroit or the Township to have a reasonable
potential for adverse effect, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on the POTW operation, the quality of sludge,
the POTW's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the POTW.
F.
"Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits," defined as those
in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during a sixmonth
period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum limit or the
average limit for the same parameter;
A.
"Technical review criteria (TRC) violations," defined as those in which
33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter
taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the
daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable
TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);
B.
Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum
or longer- term average) that the department determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or passthrough
including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the
general public;
C.
Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment
to human health or welfare, or to the environment, or has resulted in
the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority;
D.
Failure to meet a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local
control mechanism, or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance within 90 days
after the scheduled date;
E.
Failure to provide required reports such as baseline monitoring reports,
ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and
reports on compliance with compliance schedules within 30 days after
the due date;
F.
G. Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
§ 415-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-17
1:449
SLUG — Any discharge of a nonroutine episodic nature including, but not
limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary bath discharge.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987,
as amended.
STANDARD METHODS — Methods set forth in 40 CFR 136, "Guidelines for
Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants" or the laboratory
procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of
"Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" prepared
and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control
Federation, or methods set forth in 40 CFR 136, "Guidelines for Establishing
Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants." Where these two references
are in disagreement regarding procedures for the analysis of a specific
pollutant, the methods given in 40 CFR 136 shall be followed.
STATE — State of Michigan.99
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUPERINTENDENT — The Director of the Township Department of Public
Works or his duly authorized representative.
SUPERVISOR — The Township Supervisor of the Township or his/her
authorized representative.100
SURFACE WATER —
SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TOTAL) — The total suspended matter which floats
on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and
is removable by laboratory filtration or as measured by standard methods.
TOTAL EQUIVALENT MASTER METERED WATER CONSUMPTION — The
equivalent to the total amount of potable water used by a municipality as
recorded by a master water meter for sewered premises, and shall include,
but not be limited to, fire protection water, gardening and lawn water.
Any other violation or group of violations which the department
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the
local pretreatment program.
H.
All water on the surface as distinguished from groundwater or
subterranean water.
A.
Water appearing on the surface in a diffused state, with no permanent
source of supply or regular course for any considerable time, as
distinguished from water appearing in watercourses, lakes, or ponds.
B.
99.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-17 OAKLAND CODE § 415-17
1:450
TOTAL PCB — The sum of the individual analytical results for each of the
PCB Aroclors 1016, 1221, 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, and 1260 during any
single sampling event with any aroclor result less than the quantification
level being treated as zero.
TOTAL PHENOLIC COMPOUNDS — The sum of the individual analytical
results for each of the phenolic compounds of 2-chlorophenol,
4-chlorophenol, 4-chloro-3-methylphenol, 2,4-dischlorophenol,
2,4-dinitrophenol, 4-methylphenol, 4-nitrophenol, and phenol during any
single sampling event expressed in mg/l.
TOWNSHIP — Charter Township of Oakland.101
TOXIC POLLUTANT — Any pollutant or combination of pollutants
designated as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the
United States Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of
the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1317, or included in the Critical
Materials Register promulgated by the State Department of Environmental
Quality, or by other federal or state laws, rules or regulations.
TRADE SECRET — The whole, or any portion or phase, of any proprietary
manufacturing process or method, not patented, which is secret, is useful
in compounding an article of trade having a commercial value, and whose
secrecy the owner has taken reasonable measures to prevent from
becoming available to persons other than those selected by the owner to
have access for limited purposes but excludes any information regarding
the quantum or character of waste products or their constituents
discharged or sought to be discharged into the Detroit wastewater
treatment plant, or into the wastewater system tributary thereto.
UPSET — An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with limits imposed under this article or with
national categorical pretreatment standards due to factors beyond the
reasonable control of the industrial user but excludes noncompliance to
the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment
facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance,
or careless or improper operation.
USER — Any person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes or
permits the discharge of wastewater into the POTW as defined in this
section.
USER CHARGE — A charge levied on users of a treatment works for the
cost of operation and maintenance of sewerage works pursuant to Section
204(b) of PL 92-500 and includes the cost of replacement.
WASTEWATER or WASTE STREAM — The liquid and water-carried
industrial or domestic wastes of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to or permitted to enter the POTW including infiltration and
inflow waters, stormwater, and cooling water.
101. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II).
§ 415-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-17
1:451
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS — Permits issued by the department
in accordance with § 415-21D.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Groundwater, lakes, rivers, streams, all other
watercourses and waters within the confines of this state as well as
bordering this state in the form of the Great Lakes.
§ 415-18. Abbreviations. [Amended 1-8-2002 by Ord. No. 59-2001A;
2-13-2007 by Ord. No. 59-2007A]
For purposes of this article, the following acronyms shall have the meanings
designated by this section:
BMR Baseline monitoring report
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
DWSD Detroit Water and Sewerage Department
EPA Environmental Protection Agency
FOG Fats, oil or grease
1 Liter
MDEQ Michigan Department of Environmental Quality
mg Milligrams
mg/l Milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
P Phosphorus
POTW Publicly owned treatment works
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, being 42 U.S.C.
§ 6901 et seq.
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
TSS Total suspended solids
U.S.C. United States Code
§ 415-19. General regulations of county sewage disposal systems.
A. Generally. All sanitary sewer systems connected directly or indirectly
into the intercepting sewer or sewers of the County Department of
Public Works shall meet the requirements set forth in this section.
B. Plans, permits and bonds.
(1) Prior to connection and prior to start of construction, all sanitary
sewer systems shall have engineering plans and specifications
prepared by a professional engineer and shall be approved by the
County Department of Public Works.
§ 415-17 OAKLAND CODE § 415-19
1:452
(2) A connection permit shall be obtained by the owner or contractor
from the County Department of Public Works. Said connection
permit shall show the location of the work, the extent of the work,
information regarding the contractor, the owner and the engineer,
and any other pertinent information as shall be determined
necessary by the Department of Public Works. A fee shall be
charged for said permit to cover the cost of inspection of each
connection, and to verify the result of the acceptance test. The
permit fee shall be for each connection plus for each new manhole
constructed. Inspection requested during other than normal
working hours shall be performed only if deemed necessary by the
County Department of Public Works. The fee for such inspection
shall be in addition to the normal connection permit fee.102
(3) Individual building sewers which are directly connected into the
county sanitary sewer system shall conform to all applicable
requirements of this article. A connection permit, for which a
charge will be made by the County Department of Public Works,
shall be obtained from the Department of Public Works before such
connection is made. Prior to the issuance of such connection
permit, the person obtaining such permit shall have obtained the
written approval of the local unit of government. Connection shall
be made in a workmanlike manner and in accordance with methods
and procedures established by the Department of Public Works.
The party to whom such a permit is issued shall be responsible for
notifying the Department of Public Works 24 hours in advance of
the date and time when such a connection is made so that proper
inspection of same can be made by the Department.103
(4) Prior to the adjustment, reconstruction, relocation or any other
altering of the sewers of the county, including manhole structures,
the contractor or the person responsible for the work shall first
obtain a permit to do such work from the County Department of
Public Works. Said permit fee shall be determined by the
Department of Public Works.
(5) Prior to construction and during the life of permits obtained in
accordance with Subsection B(2), (3) and (4) of this section, all
owners or contractors shall: yearly furnish to the County
Department of Public Works a satisfactory surety bond as security
for the faithful performance of the work in accordance with the
plans and specifications and departmental standards, and yearly
furnish to the County Department of Public Works a cash deposit.
Such deposit shall provide funds for emergency work and/or such
other work as may be deemed necessary by the County Department
of Public Works, arising as a result of construction by the owner or
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-19
1:453
contractor. Such bonds shall not be cancelled by the owner, the
contractor or the surety without first having given 10 days' written
notice to the County Department of Public Works. Cash deposits
may be returned to the owner or contractor within 10 days of
receipt of written request therefor, except that no deposits will be
returned until such time as all outstanding permits have received
final inspection and approval. In the event that it becomes
necessary for the County Department of Public Works to expend
funds for work arising as a result of construction by the owner
or the contractor, then the cost of such work shall be deducted
from the aforementioned cash deposit. The owner or contractor
shall have the right and opportunity to correct any deficiencies
promptly before any deposit funds will be spent by the County
Department of Public Works. The owner or contractor shall, within
30 days of the mailing of written notice thereof, pay to the County
Department of Public Works the entire amount of such cost. Failure
to comply with these rules and regulations and the standards of the
County Department of Public Works may result in the immediate
termination of the surety and cash bonds.104
C. Bulkhead. The contractor shall install a suitable bulkhead to prevent
construction water, sand, silt, etc., from entering the existing sewer
system. Such bulkhead shall be left in place until such time as removal
is authorized by the County Department of Public Works.
D. Acceptance test. All sanitary sewer systems shall be subjected to
infiltration, air, or exfiltration tests or a combination thereof in
accordance with the following requirements prior to acceptance of the
system by the County Department of Public Works and prior to removal
of the bulkhead as required in Subsection C of this section. All final
acceptance tests shall be witnessed by the County Department of Public
Works.
(1) Infiltration test. All sewers over twenty-four-inch diameter shall be
subjected to infiltration tests. All sewers of twenty-four-inch
diameter or smaller where the groundwater level above the top of
the sewer is over seven feet shall be subjected to an infiltration
test. Maximum allowable infiltration shall not exceed 250 gallons
per inch of diameter per mile of pipe per 24 hours for the overall
project. Maximum allowable infiltration shall not exceed 500
gallons per inch of diameter per mile of pipe per 24 hours for any
individual run between manholes.
(2) Air test or exfiltration test.
(a) All sewers of twenty-four-inch diameter or less, where the
groundwater level above the top of the sewer is seven feet or
less, shall be subjected to air tests or exfiltration tests.
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-19 OAKLAND CODE § 415-19
1:454
(b) For exfiltration tests, the internal water level shall be equal to
the external water level plus seven feet as measured from the
top of pipe. The allowable exfiltration rate shall be the same as
that permitted from infiltration.
(c) The procedure for air testing of sewers shall be as follows:
[1] The sewer line shall be tested in increments between
manholes. The line shall be cleaned and plugged at each
manhole. Such plugs shall be designed to hold against the
test pressure and shall provide an airtight seal. One of the
plugs shall have an orifice through which air can be
introduced into the sewer. An air supply line shall be
connected to the orifice. The air supply line shall be fitted
with suitable control valves and a pressure gauge for
continually measuring the air pressure in the sewer. The
pressure gauge shall have a minimum diameter of 3 1/2
inches and a range of 0 to 10 PSIG. The gauge shall have
minimum divisions of 0.10 PSIG and an accuracy of plus or
minus 0.04 PSIG.
[2] The sewer shall be pressurized to four PSIG greater than
the greatest back pressure caused by groundwater over
the top of the sewer pipe. At least two minutes shall be
allowed for the air pressure to stabilize between 3.5 and
four PSIG. If necessary, air shall be added to the sewer to
maintain a pressure of 3.5 PSIG or greater.
[3] After the stabilization period, the air supply control valve
shall be closed so that no more air will enter the sewer.
The sewer air pressure shall be noted and timing for the
test begun. The test shall not begin if the air pressure is
less than 3.5 PSIG, or such other pressure as is necessary
to compensate for groundwater level.
[4] The time required for the air pressure to decrease 1.0
PSIG during the test shall not be less than the time shown
in the "Oakland County Department of Public Works Air
Test Tables."
[5] Manholes on sewers to be subjected to air tests shall be
equipped with a one-half-inch-diameter galvanized capped
pipe nipple extending through the manhole, three inches
into the manhole wall and at an elevation equal to the top
of the sewer pipe. Prior to the air test, the groundwater
elevation shall be determined by blowing air through the
pipe nipple to clear it and then connecting a clear plastic
tube to the pipe nipple. The tube shall be suspended
vertically in the manhole and the groundwater elevation
determined by observing the water level in the tube. The
air test pressure shall be adjusted to compensate for the
§ 415-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-19
1:455
maximum groundwater level above the top of the sewer
pipe to be tested. After all tests are performed and the
sewer is ready for final acceptance, the pipe nipple shall
be plugged in an acceptable manner.
(3) If a sewer fails to pass any of the previously described tests, the
contractor shall determine the location of the leaks, repair them
and retest the sewer. The tests shall be repeated until satisfactory
results are obtained. All visible leaks and cracks shall be repaired
regardless of test results.
E. Stormwater and groundwater control.
(1) Yard drains, patio drains, catch basins, downspouts, weep tile,
perimeter and footing drains or any other structure used for the
collection and conveyance of stormwater and/or groundwater shall
not be permitted to discharge into any sanitary sewer connected
directly or indirectly to the county system, except as provided
under Subsection E(2) of this section.
(2) Perimeter and footing drains from buildings existing before July 23,
1981, shall not be required to disconnect from the sanitary sewer
system, provided that federal, state or local law or regulation does
not require, or may not require subsequent to the adoption of these
standards and regulations, the disconnection of such perimeter and
footing drains.105
(3) The crock-to-iron joint shall be sealed by approved flexible adaptor
fittings such as those manufactured by Fernco Joint Sealer
Company, or as approved by the County Department of Public
Works. The iron pipe inside the building shall be plugged and
leaded and remain plugged and watertight until such time as the
plumbing is carried on to the first floor, the basement backfilled
and the roof is on the building, thereby providing that no water
from the excavated basement will enter the sanitary sewer.
F. Building sewers. House connection sewer from lateral sewer in street
or easement to within five feet from house shall be:
(1) Six-inch-diameter extra-strength vitrified sewer pipe,
manufactured in accordance with current NCPI Designation ER
4-67 Standards, or equal, with DPW-approved premium joint;
(2) Six-inch-diameter Class 2400 asbestos cement pipe with Ring-Tite,
Fluid-Tite or DPW-approved joint;
(3) Six-inch-diameter, service strength, cast-iron soil pipe with hot
poured lead joint, or DPW-approved equal;
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-19 OAKLAND CODE § 415-19
1:456
(4) Six-inch-diameter extra-strength (ES) solid wall pipe extruded from
Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styren (ABS) plastic meeting the minimum
cell classification 2-2-3 as defined in ASTM Specification D1788-68;
or
(5) Other pipe and joints as may be approved by the County
Department of Public Works. Copies of the County Department of
Public Works approved joint shall be on file at the offices of each
community in the systems. House connection sewers shall be sixinch
minimum diameter, except that four-inch pipe of comparable
strength and joint material may be used if permitted by the local
unit of government. All joints shall be tight and when tested for
infiltration, or exfiltration, shall not exceed the requirements of
Subsection D of this section.
G. Septic tank abandonment and waste disposal.
(1) Prior to connecting an individual building sewer to the sewers of
the county, either directly or indirectly, all existing wastewater
treatment facilities, including septic tanks, tile fields, and sump
pumps shall be physically and permanently disconnected from the
building sewer.
(2) Septic tank sludge shall be discharged into the sewers of the
county, directly or indirectly, only at locations specified by the
County Department of Public Works, and only after obtaining
proper septic tank dumping tickets.
(3) The liquid and solids from an abandoned septic tank shall not be
drained, dewatered, pumped or in any other manner discharged to
the sewers of the county, except as provided for above.
H. Ownership, operations and maintenance responsibility. All new sanitary
sewer systems, except individual building sewers, connected directly or
indirectly into the intercepting sewer or sewers of the county shall be
owned, operated and maintained by the governing community. This
includes, but is not necessarily limited to, on-site sewer systems serving
condominiums, apartment projects, shopping centers and mobile home
parks.
I. Manholes.
(1) All manholes constructed on sanitary sewer systems shall be
provided with lid frames bolted to the cone section of the manhole
with rubber O-ring gaskets compressed between the frame and the
top of the cone in accordance with the current "Standard Manhole
Detail" of the County Department of Public Works. Adjustments to
manhole tops shall be accomplished by using precast concrete
adjustment rings bolted to the cone section of the manhole with
rubber O-ring gaskets compressed between each adjacent ring.
Mortar and brickwork adjustment at the top of manholes will not be
allowed. All manhole riser and cone sections shall have modified
§ 415-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-19
1:457
groove and tongue joint with rubber gasket. The bolted frame,
bolts, adjustment rings and O-ring gaskets shall be in accordance
with the standards of the County Department of Public Works.
(2) All manholes shall be provided with bolted waterproof covers in
accordance with the current "Standard Manhole Detail" of the
County Department of Public Works. Although not recommended,
and only under certain circumstances, consideration will be given
to the burying of manholes in lieu of providing bolted covers and
only upon written request to the County Department of Public
Works.
J. As-built plans. Prior to the acceptance of any sewer system and prior to
the removal of the bulkhead as required in Subsection C of this section
(except under extenuating circumstances as may be approved by the
Director), as-built plans shall be provided to the County Department of
Public Works. Said as-built plans shall show a statement by a registered
engineer or surveyor certifying this to be "as-built plans" and shall
include, but not be limited to, length of sewer, invert elevation,
locations with respect to property lines, wye and riser locations and
depths, and sewer material and joints used.
K. Requirements for connection. All combined sewer systems connected
directly or indirectly to the intercepting sewer of the county shall meet
the following requirements:
(1) Subsections B, C, F, G, H, I and J of this section are required for
sanitary sewer system connecting to interceptor sewers of the
county as hereinbefore mentioned.
(2) Prior to acceptance of the system and prior to removal of the
bulkhead as required under Subsection C of this section, all
combined sewer systems shall be subjected to an infiltration test in
accordance with the infiltration requirements of the County
Department of Public Works as outlined in Subsection D of this
section. Said test shall be witnessed by the County Department of
Public Works.
(3) Downspouts and footing drain tile may be connected to a combined
sewer if permitted by the local unit of government.
(4) No requirements of the County Department of Public Works, or
permits issued hereunder by said Department, shall relieve the
property owner of complying with all the rules and regulations of
the local unit of government, wherein such property is located,
when such rules and regulations are not in conflict with the
requirements of the Department of Public Works.
(5) All sewer construction shall comply with the general specifications
of the County Department of Public Works. Copies of said
specifications may be obtained from the office of the Department of
Public Works.
§ 415-19 OAKLAND CODE § 415-19
1:458
§ 415-20. Clinton-Oakland Sewage Disposal System; granting of
permits.
(6) Construction of new combined sewer systems shall be prohibited
except when no prudent or feasible alternative exists.
A. Scope. This section sets forth the procedures and regulations governing
the granting of permits to connect into the Twelve Towns Relief Drains
directly and to all other county drains that are tributary directly or
indirectly to the facilities under the jurisdiction of the Clinton-Oakland
Sewage Disposal System.106
B. General regulations.
(1) Each municipality is requested to furnish an up-to-date plan of its
sewerage system. The plan should include the location, size and
direction of flow in all existing sewers. Sewers should be identified
as separated or combined. Pumping stations, flow regulation and
diversion structure should be shown.
(2) Plans for laterals shall be submitted in the name of the municipality
by the municipal officials or a firm of consulting engineers officially
authorized to do so. Generally, this authority will be vested in the
Township Engineer or a single firm of consulting engineers
retained as the Township Engineer. All plans submitted to this
office shall bear the signature of the above designated official.
(3) A letter requesting the approval of plans by the County Water
Resources Commissioner's office and the State Department of
Environmental Quality shall be addressed to the County Water
Resources Commissioner and be accompanied by a minimum of five
sets of plans. Upon approval of the plans, the Water Resources
Commissioner's office will retain one set and forward the
remaining sets to the State Department of Environmental Quality
along with a letter requesting their approval. Copies of this letter
will be sent to the applicant municipality and the consulting
engineer. The State Department of Environmental Quality, upon its
approval of the plans, will return at least three sets of approved
plans bearing the construction permit number to the applicant
municipality. The applicant municipality will keep one set, send one
set to the County Water Resources Commissioner and send one set
to the consulting engineer. In the event that the applicant
municipality or consulting engineer require an extra set of
approved plans, additional sets shall be included with the initial
request for approval.
(4) Plan detail. Plans submitted to this office for review must meet the
following requirements:
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-20
1:459
(a) General location plan which shows the relationship to existing
sewerage facilities, including outlet sewer interceptors,
pumping stations, etc.
(b) Detail plan and profile drawings along with criteria of
hydraulic design (storm frequency, line capacity, line velocities,
tributary areas, etc.).
(c) Material and construction standards, regular and special.
(d) Desirable scale and size for plan and profile drawings are:
[1] Horizontal scale: one inch equals 100 feet, one inch equals
50 feet.
[2] Vertical scale: one inch equals 10 feet, one inch equals five
feet.
[3] Plan size: 24 inches by 36 inches.
C. Regulations governing connections in combined sewer areas (including
Twelve Towns Relief Drains and county combined drains tributary
thereto).
(1) A connection permit must be obtained prior to connection from the
Oakland County Water Resources Commissioner's Office. A legal
description of the property to be served by the connection is
required.
(2) The fee as determined by the Water Resources Commissioner for
connection permits shall be as adopted by resolution by the
Township Board from time to time which is to cover the cost of the
inspection of the tap.
(3) The connection to the county drain will be made under the
supervision of an inspector from the Water Resources
Commissioner's office in accordance with approved plans of said
connection.
(4) A minimum of 24 hours' notice (excluding Saturday, Sunday, and
holidays) must be given prior to tap to enable this office to arrange
for inspection.
(5) Requests for inspection shall be directed to the technician charged
with the responsibility of permit issuance.
(6) All lines connected to county drains shall be clean (free from silt,
dirt, debris, etc.).
(7) Yard drains, catch basins, downspouts, weep tile, perimeter drains
or other structures used for the collection and conveyance of
stormwater will be permitted to outlet into the county combined
drains, provided said properties lie within said combined drainage
district.
§ 415-20 OAKLAND CODE § 415-20
1:460
(8) The contractor, during the construction of a lateral, shall install a
suitable bulkhead to prevent sand, silt, dirt or other debris from
entering the county drain. Upon work completion and removal of
any debris that may have collected, the contractor shall contact the
inspection office for permission to remove the bulkhead.
(9) A connection from any industrial plant or facility using chemical
processes shall be provided with a readily available sampling point
(manhole or equivalent).
(10) All wastes discharged into county drains shall meet the standards
as specified in the current City of Detroit ordinance governing
domestic and industrial wastes.
D. Regulations to prevent the discharge of stormwater and groundwater
into the Clinton-Oakland Sewage Disposal System from those areas
lying outside the designated combined sewer area.107
(1) System requirements. All sanitary sewer systems (NOTE: "System"
defined as a lateral having two or more connections. A construction
permit from the State Department of Environmental Quality is
required for a sewer system.) (lying in these areas of the COSDS
district, designated as separated) to be connected directly or
indirectly into the intercepting sewer or sewers of the Clinton-
Oakland Sewage Disposal System (COSDS) prior to connection
shall meet the following requirements:
(a) A connection permit shall be obtained by the owner or
contractor from the County Water Resources Commissioner's
office. Said connection permit shall show the location of the
work, the extent of the work, information regarding the
contractor, the owner and the engineer, the scheduled date of
infiltration test and any other pertinent information as shall be
determined necessary by the County Water Resources
Commissioner. A fee shall be charged for said permit to cover
the cost of inspection of the connection and system connected.
(b) All sewer systems shall be subjected to infiltration, air, or
exfiltration tests or a combination thereof in accordance with
the following requirements prior to acceptance of the system
by the County Water Resources Commissioner's office.
[1] Infiltration test. All sewers over twenty-four-inch diameter
shall be subjected to infiltration tests. All sewers of twentyfour-
inch diameter or smaller where the groundwater level
above the top of the sewer is over seven feet shall be
subjected to an infiltration test.
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-20
1:461
[2] Maximum allowable infiltration. Maximum allowable
infiltration shall not exceed 250 gallons per inch of
diameter per mile of pipe per 24 hours for the overall
project. Maximum allowable infiltration shall not exceed
500 gallons per inch of diameter per mile of pipe per 24
hours for any individual run between manholes.
[3] Air test or exfiltration test.
[a] All sewers of twenty-four-inch diameter or less, where
the groundwater level above the top of the sewer is
seven feet or less, shall be subjected to air tests or
exfiltration tests.
[b] For exfiltration tests the internal water level shall be
equal to the external water level plus seven feet as
measured from the top of pipe. The allowable
exfiltration rate shall be the same as that permitted
from infiltration.
[c] The procedure for air testing of sewers shall be as
follows:
[i] The sewer line shall be tested in increments
between manholes. The line shall be cleaned and
plugged at each manhole. Such plugs shall be
designed to hold against the test pressure and
shall provide an airtight seal. One of the plugs
shall have an orifice through which air can be
introduced into the sewer. An air supply line shall
be connected to the orifice. The air supply line
shall be fitted with suitable control valves and a
pressure gauge for continually measuring the air
pressure in the sewer. The pressure gauge shall
have a minimum diameter of 3 1/2 inches and a
range of 0 to 10 PSIG. The gauge shall have
minimum divisions of 0.10 PSIG and an accuracy
of ± 0.04 PSIG.
[ii] The sewer shall be pressurized to 4.0 PSIG
greater than the greatest back pressure caused
by groundwater over the top of the sewer pipe. At
least two minutes shall be allowed for the air
pressure to stabilize between 3.5 and 4.0 PSIG. If
necessary, air shall be added to the sewer to
maintain a pressure of 3.5 PSIG or greater.
[iii] After the stabilization period, the air supply
control valve shall be closed so that no more air
will enter the sewer. The sewer air pressure shall
be noted and timing for the test begun. The test
shall not begin if the air pressure is less than 3.5
§ 415-20 OAKLAND CODE § 415-20
1:462
PSIG, or such other pressure as is necessary to
compensate for groundwater level.
[iv] The time required for the air pressure to decrease
1.0 PSIG during the test shall not be less than the
time shown in the "Oakland County Drain
Commissioner's Air Test Tables."
[v] Manholes on sewers to be subjected to air tests
shall be equipped with a one-half-inch-diameter
galvanized capped pipe nipple extending through
the manhole, three inches into the manhole wall
and at an elevation equal to the top of the sewer
pipe. Prior to the air test, the groundwater
elevation shall be determined by blowing air
through the pipe nipple to clear it and then
connecting a clear plastic tube to the pipe nipple.
The tube shall be suspended vertically in the
manhole and the groundwater elevation
determined by observing the water level in the
tube. The air test pressure shall be adjusted to
compensate for the maximum groundwater level
above the top of the sewer pipe to be tested. After
all tests are performed and the sewer is ready for
final acceptance, the pipe nipple shall be plugged
in an acceptable manner.
[vi] If a sewer fails to pass any of the previously
described tests, the contractor shall determine
the location of the leaks, repair them and retest
the sewer. The tests shall be repeated until
satisfactory results are obtained.
[vii] All visible leaks and cracks shall be repaired
regardless of test results.
(2) Stormwater and groundwater control.
(a) Yard drains, patio drains, catch basins, downspouts, weep tile,
perimeter and footing drains or any other structure used for
the collection and conveyance of stormwater and/or
groundwater shall not be permitted to discharge into any
sanitary sewer connected directly or indirectly to the county
system, except as provided below;
(b) Perimeter and footing drains from buildings existing before
July 23, 1981, shall not be required to disconnect from the
sanitary sewer system, provided that federal, state or local law
or regulation does not require, or may not require subsequent
to the adoption of these standards and regulations, the
disconnection of such perimeter and footing drains.
§ 415-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-20
1:463
(c) The crock-to-iron joint shall be sealed by approved flexible
adaptor fittings such as those manufactured by Fernco Joint
Sealer Company, or as approved by the County Water
Resources Commissioner's office. The iron pipe inside the
building shall be plugged and leaded and remain plugged and
watertight until such time as the plumbing is carried on to the
first floor, the basement backfilled and the roof is on the
building, thereby providing that no water from the excavated
basement will enter the sanitary sewer.
(3) Building sewers.
(a) House connection sewer from lateral sewer in the street or
easement five feet from house shall be:
[1] Six-inch-diameter extra-strength vitrified sewer pipe,
manufactured in accordance with current NCPI
designation ER 4-67 Standards, or equal, with Water
Resources Commissioner approved premium joint;
[2] Six-inch-diameter ABS plastic solid wall sewer pipe
conforming to ASTM designation D-2751 SDR 35 or 23.5;
[3] Six-inch-diameter PVC plastic solid wall sewer pipe
conforming to ASTM designation ASTM D-3034 SDR 35 or
ASTM D-2665 Schedule 40; or
[4] Other pipes and joints as may be approved by the County
Water Resources Commissioner.
(b) House connection sewers should be six-inch minimum
diameter; however, four-inch pipe of comparable strength and
joint material may be used if permitted by the local unit of
government. All joints shall be tight and when tested for
infiltration, shall not exceed 500 United States gallons per inch
of diameter, per mile, per 24 hours.
(c) The crock-to-iron joint shall be sealed by an approved
bituminous filler, enclosed in concrete to provide a watertight
seal. The iron pipe inside the building shall be plugged and
leaded and remain plugged and watertight until such time as
the plumbing is carried on to the first floor, thereby providing
that no water from the excavated basement will enter the
sanitary sewer.
(d) The municipality shall issue tap permits for each structure that
is connected into the COSDS and be responsible to see that the
above specifications pertinent to materials and installations
are followed.
(4) The COSDS, through its agent, the Water Resources Commissioner,
shall, at his option, be permitted to set up and operate flow-
§ 415-20 OAKLAND CODE § 415-20
1:464
§ 415-21. General wastewater disposal regulations; violations and
penalties. [Amended 1-8-2002 by Ord. No. 59-2001A; 2-13-2007 by
Ord. No. 59-2007A]
metering equipment to gauge sanitary flow, either on a temporary
or permanent basis, in any sanitary sewer lying within the said
"separated areas."
(5) Plans and specifications covering the construction of all new
sewers, both combined and sanitary (separate), lying within the
COSDS service area shall be submitted to the office of the County
Water Resources Commissioner for review and approval prior to
construction.
(6) The quality of domestic and industrial waste outletted into the
COSDS facilities shall conform to the current City of Detroit
ordinance pertinent to domestic and industrial wastes. It is the
contractual obligation of the municipality, reference Section 16 of
the contract with county, to use COSDS facilities to enforce these
standards.
(7) No requirements of the COSDS or permits issued hereunder by
said system through its agent, the County Water Resources
Commissioner, shall relieve the property owner of complying with
all the rules and regulations of the local unit of government,
wherein such property is located, where such are not in conflict
with requirements of the COSDS.
(8) All sewer construction shall comply with the general specifications
of the County Water Resources Commissioner; copies of said
specifications may be obtained from the office of the Water
Resources Commissioner.
A. Delegation of authority. The City of Detroit, through the Detroit Water
and Sewerage Department, as the state-approved control authority, is
authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this section on
behalf of the Township. The Township has executed and hereby ratifies
its delegation agreement with the City of Detroit through the Detroit
Water and Sewerage Department, which sets forth the terms and
conditions of such delegated authority, consistent with these sections,
and shall allow the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department to perform
the specific responsibilities of control authority pursuant to state and
federal law.
B. Discharge prohibitions.
(1) General pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge or cause to
be discharged into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or
wastewater which will cause interference or pass-through. These
general discharge prohibitions shall apply to all users of the POTW
whether or not the user is subject to national categorical
§ 415-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-21
1:465
pretreatment standards or to any other federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements. In addition, it shall be
unlawful for a user to discharge into the POTW:
(a) Any liquid, solid or gas, which by reason of its nature or
quantity, is sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to create a fire or explosion hazard or to be
injurious in any other way to persons, to the POTW, or to the
operations of the POTW. Pollutants, which create a fire or
explosion hazard in a POTW, include, but are not limited to,
waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140° F.
or 60° C. using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;
(b) Any solid or vicious substance in concentrations or quantities,
which are sufficient to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer
or other encumbrances to the operation of the POTW,
including, but not limited to, grease, animal guts or tissues,
bones, hair, hides or fleshlings, entrails, whole blood, feathers,
ashes, cinders, sand, cement, spent lime, stone or marble dust,
metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, strings,
fibers, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastic, tar,
asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel
or lubrication oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes, or
tumbling and deburring stones;
(c) Any wastewater having a pH of less than 5.0 units or greater
than 11.5 units;
(d) Any wastewater containing petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable
cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin, or toxic pollutants in
sufficient concentration or quantity either singly or by
interaction with other pollutants to cause interference, or passthrough,
or constitute a hazard to humans or animals;
(e) Any liquid, gas, solid or form of energy, which either singly or
by interaction with other waste is sufficient to create toxic gas,
vapor, or fume within the POTW in quantities that may cause
acute worker health and safety problems, or may cause a
public nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent
entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair;
(f) Any substance which is sufficient to cause the POTW's effluent
or any other product of the POTW, such as residue, sludge, or
scum to be unsuitable for reclamation processing where the
POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case
shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to
be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria
guidelines or regulations developed under 33 U.S.C. § 1345,
with any criteria, guidelines, or developed and promulgated
regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed
pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Federal Clean Air
§ 415-21 OAKLAND CODE § 415-21
1:466
Act, the Federal Toxic Substances Control Act, or with state
criteria applicable to the sludge management method being
used;
(g) Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate either the
Consent Judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit et al., Federal
District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan Case No.
77-1100, or the City of Detroit's National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System permit;
(h) Any discharge having a color uncharacteristic of the
wastewater being discharged;
(i) Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit
biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at
the introduction into a public sewer which exceeds 150° F. or
which will cause the influent at the wastewater treatment plant
to rise above 104° F. (40° C.);
(j) Any pollutant discharge which constitutes a slug;
(k) Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes
of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established in compliance with applicable federal or state
regulations;
(l) Any floating fats, oil or grease which are sufficient to cause
interference with or pass through the POTW; or
(m) Any solid materials having a specific gravity greater than 1.2 or
a cross-section dimension of 1/2 inch or greater which are
sufficient to cause interference with the POTW.
(2) Specific pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge wastewater
containing in excess of the following limitations:
(a) Compatible pollutants. See Appendix C108 to this section.
(b) Noncompatible pollutants. No user shall discharge wastewater
containing in excess of:109
Arsenic (As) 1.0 mg/l
Cadmium (Cd) See Appendix C to this section
(Editor's Note: Appendix C is
included as an attachment to
this chapter.)
Chromium (Cr) 25.0 mg/l
108. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-21
1:467
Copper (Cu) 2.5 mg/l
Cyanide (CN) (available) 1.0 mg/l
Iron (Fe) 1,000.0 mg/l
Lead (Pb) 1.0 mg/l
Mercury (Hg) 0.005 mg/l
Nickel (Ni) 5.0 mg/l
Silver (Ag) 1.0 mg/l
Zinc (Zn) 7.3 mg/l
Total phenolic compounds or
see Appendix B to this section
(Editor' Note: Appendix B is
included as an attachment to
this chapter.)
1.0 mg/l
All limitations are based on samples collected over an
operating period representative of an industrial user's
discharge, and in accordance with 40 CFR 136.
[1] The limitation for total PCB is nondetect. Total PCB shall
not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon United
States EPA Method 608, and the quantification level shall
not exceed 0.2 ugm/l, unless a higher level is appropriate
because of demonstrated sample matrix interference.
Where one or more samples indicate detectable levels of
total PCB, the user shall be required to demonstrate
compliance. For purposes of this section, this
demonstration may be made using analytical data showing
that the total PCB concentration is below the detection
level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with
Subsection I(4) of this section.
[2] The limitation of mercury (Hg) is nondetect. Mercury (Hg)
shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon
United States EPA Method 245.1, and the quantification
level shall not exceed 0.2 ugm/l, unless a higher level is
appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix
interference. Where one or more samples indicate
detectable levels of mercury, the user shall be required to
demonstrate compliance. For the purposes of this section,
this demonstration may be made using analytical data
showing that the mercury concentration is below the
detection level, or submission of a BMP in accordance with
Subsection I(4) of this section. All limitations are based on
samples collected over an operating period representative
of an industrial user's discharge, and in accordance 40
CFR 136.
§ 415-21 OAKLAND CODE § 415-21
1:468
(c) Compliance period. Within 30 days of the effective date of the
ordinance from which this subsection is derived, the
department shall notify all industrial users operating under an
effective wastewater discharge permit of the requirement to
submit a compliance report within 180 days after the effective
date of the ordinance from which this subsection is derived.
The compliance report shall demonstrate the user's
compliance or noncompliance with these limitations, and, in
the event of noncompliance, include the submission of a plan
and schedule for achieving compliance with the stated
limitation. In no event shall a compliance schedule exceed 18
months from the effective date of the ordinance from which
this subsection is derived. An industrial user who does not
demonstrate compliance may petition the department for a
second extension as part of an administrative consent order.
The department shall include appropriate monitoring,
reporting, and penalties into an administrative consent order
that relates to a second extension, and shall enter into such an
agreement only upon a good-faith showing by the industrial
user of the actions taken to achieve compliance with this
provision.
(3) National categorical pretreatment standards. All users shall
comply with the applicable national categorical pretreatment
standards and requirements promulgated pursuant to the act as set
forth in 40 CFR Subchapter N, Effluent Guidelines and Standards,
which are hereby incorporated by reference and with all other
applicable standards and requirements; provided, however, that
where a more stringent standard or requirement is applicable
pursuant to state law or regulation, or to this article, then the more
stringent standard or requirement shall be controlling. Affected
dischargers shall comply with applicable reporting requirements
under 40 CFR 403 and as established by the department. The
national categorical pretreatment standards, which have been
promulgated as of the effective date of the ordinance from which
this section is derived, are delineated in Appendix A110 to this
section.
(a) Intake water adjustment. Industrial users seeking adjustment
of national categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the
presence of pollutants in their intake water must comply with
the requirements of 40 CFR 403.15. Upon notification of
approval by the department, the adjustment shall be applied by
modifying the permit accordingly. Intake water adjustments
are not effective until incorporated into an industrial user's
permit.
110. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 415-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-21
1:469
(b) Modification of national categorical pretreatment standards.
The department may apply to the United States Environment
Protection Agency, or to the State Department of
Environmental Quality, whichever is appropriate, for
authorization to grant removal credits in accordance with the
requirements and procedures in 40 CFR 403.7. Such
authorization may be granted only when the POTW treatment
plant can achieve consistent removal for each pollutant for
which a removal credit is being sought, provided that any
limitation of such pollutants in the NPDES permit neither are
being exceeded nor pose the prospect of being exceeded as a
result of the removal credit being granted. Where such
authorization is given to the department, any industrial user
desiring to obtain such credit shall make an application to the
department, consistent with the provisions of 40 CFR 403.7
and of this article. Any credits which may be granted under this
section may be subject to modification or revocation as
specified in 40 CFR 403.7, or as determined by the
department. A requisite to the granting of any removal credit
may be that the industrial user pay a surcharge based upon the
amounts of such pollutants removed by the POTW, such
surcharge being based upon fees or rates which the Board may
establish and, when appropriate, revise from time to time.
Permits shall reflect, or be modified to reflect, any credit
granted pursuant to this section.
(c) New sources. Industrial users who meet the new sources
criteria shall install, maintain in operating condition, and start
up all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable
pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within
the shortest feasible time and not to exceed 90 days, new
sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards.
(d) Concentration and mass limits. When limits in a categorical
pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of
pollutant per unit of production, the department may convert
the limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of
pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for
purposes of calculating effluent limitations applicable to
individual industrial users. Equivalent limitations shall be
calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c)(3) and/or 40
CFR 403.6(c)(4) and shall be deemed pretreatment standards
for the purposes of 33 U.S.C. § 1317(d) and of this article.
Industrial users will be required to comply with the equivalent
limitations in lieu of the promulgated categorical standards
from which the equivalent limitations were derived.
(e) Reporting requirements for industrial users upon effective
date of categorical pretreatment standards-baseline report.
Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
§ 415-21 OAKLAND CODE § 415-21
1:470
pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final
administrative decision made upon a category determination
submission under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing industrial users subject to such categorical
pretreatment standards and currently discharging into or
scheduled to discharge into the Detroit POTW shall submit to
the department a report containing the information listed in
40 CFR 403.12(b)(1) through (7). Where reports containing
this information have already been submitted to the director
or regional administrator in compliance with the requirement
of 40 CFR 128.140(b), the industrial user will not be required
to resubmit this information. At least 90 days before
commencement of any discharge, each new source and any
existing sources that become industrial users after the
promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard shall submit to the department a report which
contains the information listed in 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1) through
(5). In such report, new sources shall include information
concerning the method of pretreatment the source intends to
use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources
shall provide estimates of the information requested in 40 CFR
403.12(b)(4) and (5).
(4) Dilution prohibited. Except where expressly authorized to do so by
an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no user shall
increase the use of process water, or in any way dilute or attempt to
dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in
the national categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other
pollutant specific limitation or requirement imposed by the
Township, the City of Detroit or by the state.
(5) Hauled-in wastewater. Any waste material or wastewater which is
hauled into or within the service region for discharge to the POTW
is subject to the requirements of this article, including, but not
limited to, permits, inspection, monitoring and enforcement.
Unloading liquid or solid waste from hauling vehicles, directly or
indirectly, into the POTW, with or without the benefit of
pretreatment, is prohibited unless the person proposing to unload
such waste has applied for and received a permit from the
department for unloading such waste in accordance with the
Board's rules pertaining thereto. The discharger shall be subject to
applicable terms and conditions, surcharges, fees or rates as
established by the Board. Hauled-in wastewater shall only be
discharged at points designated by the POTW after authorization or
approval issued pursuant to the general permit requirements
specified in Subsection D of this section. The department may
establish specific limitations for sludge from municipally owned or
operated POTW treatment plants which are different than the
specific limitations in this article.
§ 415-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-21
1:471
(6) Centralized waste treatment. It is unlawful for a centralized waste
treatment (CWT) facility to discharge any industrial waste or
wastewater into the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit
from the department. Any authorization granted, or permit issued,
by the department to a centralized waste treatment (CWT) facility
shall specify the type of wastewater for which treatment is
provided, and discharge approval is sought, from the POTW. Unless
such industrial waste or wastewater is determined by the
department to require further authorization, a centralized waste
treatment (CWT) facility that has submitted an application to, and
received previous approval from, the department to discharge
wastewater is not required to obtain further authorization from the
department before discharging such wastewater. An industrial
user, that provides centralized waste treatment services and files
an application for the treatment and discharge of such types of
wastewater to the POTW, shall provide the following minimum
information in support thereof:
(a) The general nature, source and process generating the type of
wastewater. Any wastewater, which is generated from those
processes and is subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards as delineated in Appendix A111 to this section, shall
be so designated;
(b) The identity of the toxic pollutants known or suspected to be
present in the wastewater;
(c) At least one sample report showing the results of an analysis
for the EPA priority pollutants for each type of wastewater for
which application is made in Subsection F(1) of this section;
(d) A statement, that is certified by a professional engineer, which
addresses the treatability and compatibility of the wastewater,
received or collected by the facility's treatment process;
(e) The identity of the materials and/or pollutants whose transport
or treatment are regulated by the EPA, by the state, or by any
other governmental agency. Upon request, the centralized
waste treatment (CWT) facility shall provide a copy of its
permit and/or license to the department; and
(f) Other information requested by the department including, but
not limited to, information required by Subsection D(3)(a)
through (r) of this section, or by rules adopted by the Board.
The discharge from a centralized waste treatment (CWT)
facility will be deemed approved for those specific types of
wastewater delineated in a permit and, upon issuance of such
permit in accordance with the procedures contained in
Subsection D of this section, will be deemed approved for
111. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 415-21 OAKLAND CODE § 415-21
1:472
discharge into the POTW. The centralized waste treatment
(CWT) facility shall comply with all applicable provisions
contained in Subsection D of this section regarding permits.
In furtherance of its obligations as control authority, the
department may include in the permit a requirement to report
at selected intervals the information mandated in Subsection
B(6)(a) through (f) of this section. All users granted a permit
under this section shall maintain records which, at a minimum,
identify the source, volume, character, and constituents of the
wastewater accepted for treatment and disposal. These
records may be reviewed at any time by the department.
(7) Groundwater discharges. Unless authorization has been granted by
the department, the discharge of any groundwater into the POTW
is prohibited. The department may authorize the discharge of
groundwater resulting from maintenance and related activities of
gas, steam, or electrical utilities through the use of general
permits. Subject to appropriate reporting requirements, the
general permit shall authorize discharge in accordance with the
terms of the permit. Utilities shall comply with this provision within
180 days after its enactment. If a person, who proposes to
discharge groundwater resulting from purge, response activity, or
UST projects, has applied for and received a permit from the
department, the department may authorize the discharge of such
wastewater. Permits shall be issued in accordance with the
procedures contained in Subsection D of this section, or in
accordance with any rules adopted by the Board.
(8) Township right of revision. The City of Detroit and the Township
reserve the right to establish rules or regulations adopted by the
Board, additional or more stringent limitations or requirements on
discharges to the POTW. Ninety days after adoption by the Board,
industrial users shall comply with such rules and regulations.
(9) Accidental discharges.
(a) Each industrial user, which does not currently have an
approved spill prevention plan or slug control plan, shall
provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other substances regulated by this article, and all
significant industrial users shall submit to the department
detailed plans which show facilities and operating procedures
to be implemented to provide protection against such
accidental discharges. Facilities and measures to prevent and
abate accidental discharges shall be implemented, provided,
and maintained at the owner's or industrial user's cost or
expense. Unless the significant industrial user has an approved
spill prevention or slug control plan, all existing significant
industrial users shall complete and submit such a plan within
60 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this
section is derived. New significant industrial users shall submit
§ 415-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-21
1:473
such a plan prior to the time they commence discharging.
For purposes of this section, the information provided shall
include the approximate average and maximum quantities of
such prohibited materials or substances kept on the premises
in the form of raw materials, chemicals and/or waste therefrom
and the containment capacity for each. Only substances that
are in a form which could readily be carried into the POTW
and constitute a concentration of 5% or greater in the raw
material, chemical solution or waste material, are required to
be reported. Volumes of less than 55 gallons, or the equivalent
thereof, need not be reported unless lesser quantities could
cause pass-through or cause interference with the POTW. The
industrial user shall promptly notify the department of any
significant changes or modifications to the plan including, but
not limited to, a change in the contact person, or substance
inventory.
(b) At least once every two years, the department shall evaluate
whether a significant industrial user needs a plan to control
slug discharges, as defined by 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v). Unless
otherwise provided, all significant users shall complete,
implement, and submit such a plan within 30 days of
notification by the department.
(10) Notification requirements. Unless a different notice is provided by
this article or applicable law, within one hour of becoming aware of
a discharge into the POTW which exceeds or does not conform with
federal, state or Township laws, rules, regulations or permit
requirements, or which could cause problems to the POTW, or
which has the potential to cause the industrial user to implement
its plan prepared in accordance with Subsection B(9)(a) of this
section, the industrial user shall telephone the department at its
control center and notify the department of the discharge. The
notification shall include the name of the caller, the location and
time of discharge, the type of wastewater, the estimated
concentration of excessive or prohibited pollutants and estimated
volume, and the measures taken, or being taken, to abate the
discharge into the POTW. Within five calendar days after the
discharge, the industrial user shall submit a detailed written report
describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken
by the user to prevent similar future occurrences and, when
required by the department, the industrial user's wastewater
discharge permit may be modified to include additional measures
to prevent such future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the industrial user of any expense, cost of treatment, loss,
damages or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other environmental
impairment or any other damage to person or property.
§ 415-21 OAKLAND CODE § 415-21
1:474
(11) Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
industrial user's bulletin board, or other prominent place, advising
employees whom to contact in the department in the event of an
actual or excessive or prohibited discharge.
(12) Recovery of costs. Any user discharging in violation of any of the
provisions of this article, which produces a deposit or obstruction,
or causes damage to or impairs the department's POTW, or causes
the department to violate its NPDES permit, shall be liable to the
department for any expense, loss, damage, penalty or fine incurred
by the department because of said violation or discharge. Prior to
assessing such costs, the department shall notify the user of its
determination that the user's discharge was the proximate cause of
such damage, obstruction, impairment, or violation of the city's
NPDES permit and the department's intent to assess such costs to
the user. Any such notice shall include written documentation
which substantiates the determination of proximate cause and a
breakdown of cost estimates. Failure to pay the assessed costs shall
constitute a violation of this article. Such charge shall be in
addition to, and not in lieu of, any penalties or remedies provided
under this article, or this Code, or other statutes and regulations,
or at law or in equity.
(13) Hazardous waste notification. All industrial users, who discharge
into the Township collection system, shall notify the department in
writing of any discharge of a substance which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261.
Such notification must comply with the requirements of 40 CFR
403.12(p).
(14) Authorized representative. The authorized representative, as
defined in § 415-17, may designate a duly authorized
representative of the individual designated in Subsection A or B of
the definition of the "authorized representative of industrial user"
in § 415-17 where:
(a) The authorization is made in writing by the individual defined
in Subsection A or B of the definition of "authorized
representative of industrial user" in § 415-17;
(b) The authorization specifies either an individual or a position
having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility
where the industrial discharge originates, such as the position
of plant manager, operator of a well or well field
superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or
having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company; and
(c) The written authorization is submitted to the department.
(15) Pollution prevention. The department shall encourage and support
industrial users to develop and implement pollution prevention
§ 415-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-21
1:475
programs which eliminate or reduce pollutant contributions
beyond the levels required by this article. The department may
require an industrial user to implement pollution prevention
initiatives or BMPs as part of an enforcement response, or as
necessary to comply with its NPDES permit.
C. Fees.
(1) The purpose of this subsection is to provide for the recovery of
costs from users of the POTW. The applicable charges or fees
established by the Board shall be sufficient to meet the costs of the
operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the
system, or as provided by law or by Board action.
(2) The Board shall adopt charges and fees which shall include, but not
be limited to:
(a) Fees for reimbursement of costs of establishing, operating,
maintaining, or improving the department's industrial waste
control and pretreatment programs;
(b) User fees based upon volume of waste and concentration or
quantity of specific pollutants in the discharge, and treatment
costs including sludge handling and disposal;
(c) Reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs for hearings
including, but not limited to, expenses regarding hearings
officers, court reporters, and transcriptions; and
(d) Other fees, which the Board may deem necessary, to carry out
the requirements contained herein, or as may be required by
law.
D. Wastewater discharge permits.
(1) Required. It shall be unlawful for users to discharge into the POTW
any wastewater which will cause interference or pass-through, or
otherwise not comply with the discharge prohibitions of Subsection
B of this section. It shall be unlawful for a significant industrial user
to discharge into the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit
from the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department. Unless
otherwise expressly authorized by the department through permit,
order, rule or regulation, any discharge must be in accordance with
the provisions of this article.
(a) All significant industrial users, which are in existence on the
effective date of the ordinance from which this section is
derived, shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within
30 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this
section is derived. Significant industrial users who are
currently operating with a valid wastewater discharge permit
are not subject to this provision. These applications are to
§ 415-21 OAKLAND CODE § 415-21
1:476
include all information specified in Subsection D(3) of this
section and, where applicable, any additional information
which may be needed to satisfy the federal baseline monitoring
report requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b).
(b) All new significant users shall apply for a wastewater
discharge permit at least 90 days prior to commencement of
discharge. The application must include all information
specified in Subsection D(3) of this section and, where
applicable, any additional information that may be needed to
satisfy the federal BMR requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b).
Until a permit is issued and finalized by the department, no
discharge shall be made into the POTW.
(c) Any user, who proposes to discharge any wastewater other
than sanitary or noncontact cooling water into the POTW, shall
request approval from the department for the discharge(s) at
least 30 days prior to the commencement of the
discharge(s).112
(2) Permit application or reapplication. The department may require
any user to complete a questionnaire and/or a permit application
and to submit the same to the department for determining whether
the industrial user is a significant user, or to determine changes in
the wastewater discharges from a user's facility. Within 30 days of
being so notified, a user shall comply with the department's request
in the manner and form prescribed by the department. Failure of
the department to so notify a user shall not relieve the user of the
duty to obtain a permit as required by this article.
(a) A user, which becomes subject to a new or revised national
categorical pretreatment standard, shall apply for a
wastewater discharge permit within 90 days after the
promulgation of the applicable national categorical
pretreatment standard, unless an earlier date is specified or
required by 40 CFR 403.12(b). The existing user shall provide
a permit application which includes all the information
specified in Subsection D(3) and (7) of this section.
(b) A separate permit application shall be required for each
separate facility.
(c) Existing permittees shall apply for permit reissuance a
minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of existing permits
on a form prescribed by the department.
(3) Application or reapplication information. In support of an
application or reapplication for a wastewater discharge permit, the
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-21
1:477
industrial user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for
evaluation, the following information:
(a) Corporate or individual name, any assumed name(s), federal
employer identification number, address, and location of the
discharging facility;113
(b) Name and title of the authorized representative of the
industrial user who shall have the authority to bind the
industrial user financially and legally;
(c) All SIC numbers of all processes at this location according to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and
Budget, 1987, as amended;
(d) Actual or proposed wastewater constituents and
characteristics for each parameter listed in the permit
application form. Such parameters shall include those
applicable pollutants having numeric limitations as
enumerated in Subsection B(1) and (2) of this section, those
pollutants limited by national categorical pretreatment
standards regulations for applicable industries and any toxic
pollutants known or suspected to be present in the discharge,
regulated in the previous permit, or specifically requested by
the Detroit Water and Sewage Department. For each
parameter, the expected or experienced maximum and average
concentrations during a one-year period shall be provided. For
industries subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards or requirements, the data requested herein shall be
separately shown for each categorical process waste stream.
Combined waste streams proposed to be regulated by the
combined waste-stream formula shall also be identified.
Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
procedures established by the EPA pursuant to 33 U.S.C.
§ 1314(g) and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended. Where 40
CFR 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for
the pollutants in question, sampling and analysis shall be
performed using validated analytical methods approved by the
administrator;
(e) A listing and description of activities, facilities and plant
processes on the premises. Those processes, which are subject
to national categorical pretreatment standards or
requirements, shall be so designated. As pertains to
Subsection D(3)(d) of this section, identify which pollutants are
associated with each process;
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-21 OAKLAND CODE § 415-21
1:478
(f) Restricted to only those pollutants referred to in Subsection
D(3)(d) of this section, a listing of raw materials and chemicals
which are either used in the manufacturing process or could
yield the pollutants referred to in Subsection D(3)(d) of this
section. Any user claiming immunity from having to provide
such information for reasons of national security shall furnish
acceptable proof of such immunity;
(g) A description of typical daily and weekly operating cycles for
each process in terms of starting and ending times for each of
the seven days of the week;
(h) Denote:
[1] The average and maximum twenty-four-hour wastewater
flow rates including, if any, daily, monthly and seasonal
variations;
[2] Each national categorical process waste-stream flow rate
and the cooling water, sanitary water and stormwater flow
rates separately for each connection to the POTW; and
[3] Each combined waste stream;
(i) A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling
manholes by the size, location, elevation and points or places of
discharges into the POTW; also a flow schematic showing
which connections receive each national categorical process
waste stream and which connections receive stormwater,
sanitary water or cooling water; also show which lines handle
each combined waste stream. This schematic shall be cross
referenced to the information furnished in Subsection D(3)(h)
of this section;
(j) Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes
and rate of production as pertains to processes subject to
production based limits under the national categorical
pretreatment standards or requirements only;
(k) A statement regarding whether or not the requirements of this
article and of the national categorical pretreatment standards
and requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if
not, what additional operation and maintenance work and/or
additional construction is required for the industrial user to
meet the applicable standards and requirements. This
statement shall be reviewed and signed by the authorized
representative and, as appropriate, certified by a qualified
professional;
(l) Basic information on the program for the prevention of
accidental discharges in accordance with the requirements of
Subsection B(9) of this section;
§ 415-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-21
1:479
(m) Proposed or actual hours of operation of each pretreatment
system for each production process;
(n) A schematic and description of each pretreatment facility
which identifies whether each pretreatment facility is of the
batch type or continuous process type;
(o) If other than Detroit Water and Sewerage Department potable
water, the industrial user's source of intake water together
with the types of usage and disposal method of each water
source, and the estimated wastewater volumes from each
source;
(p) If additional construction and/or operation and maintenance
procedures will be required to meet the requirements of this
article and the national categorical pretreatment standards,
the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such
additional construction and/or implement the required
operation and maintenance procedures;
(q) Identify whether the user has conducted a waste minimization
assessment or audit of its operations in order to identify all
feasible source reduction and recycling practices that may be
employed to reduce or eliminate the generation of pollutants
and other waste at the facility; and
(r) Any other information as may reasonably be required to
prepare and process a wastewater discharge permit.
(4) Permit issuance. Upon receipt of an application, the department
shall review the application, determine, and so notify the industrial
user in writing regarding any of the following:
(a) The industrial user does not meet the definition of a significant
industrial user and is not required to have a wastewater
discharge permit;
(b) The industrial user does meet the definition of a significant
industrial user but is found by the department to have no
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement, and is not required to have a wastewater
discharge permit. The department shall make such
determination in accordance with the requirements of 40 CFR
403.8(f)(6);
(c) The application is incomplete or the information only partially
satisfies the information and data required by 40 CFR 403.12
or by the department, and that additional information and data
are required which shall be promptly furnished. Where
appropriate, the industrial user is notified regarding specific
§ 415-21 OAKLAND CODE § 415-21
1:480
information that is missing, or that the application is
unacceptable;
(d) The industrial user is required to have a wastewater discharge
permit. The department shall notify the industrial user of its
determination and the basis of the determination. The
department may withhold issuance of a permit to a significant
user, which has not submitted an adequate or timely report, or
permit application, to the department as the control authority
in accordance with the reporting requirements of 40 CFR
403.12, or whose discharge is in violation of this article. If the
department determines that an industrial user is required to
have a wastewater discharge permit and has evaluated and
accepted the data furnished, the industrial user will be notified
accordingly by certified mail. The notification shall contain a
copy of the draft permit, so marked, for the industrial user's
review. An industrial user has 30 days from the date of mailing
to file a response to the draft permit and, in accordance with
the procedures contained in Subsection J of this section, 20
days from the date of mailing to file an appeal regarding a
permit issued as final. Upon disposition by the department of
any contested terms or conditions, a permit shall be issued as
final. Only one facility location shall be included in each
permit.
(5) Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall contain all
requirements of 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(iii) and shall be deemed to
incorporate all provisions of this article, other applicable laws,
rules, regulations, and user charges and fees established by the
City of Detroit or Township without repetition therein. In addition,
permits may contain the following:
(a) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents
or characteristics which are equivalent, more restrictive than,
or supplemental to the numeric limits enumerated in
Subsection B of this section, or the applicable national
categorical pretreatment standards;
(b) Limits on average, and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
(c) Requirements for installation, operation, and maintenance of
discharge sampling manholes and monitoring facilities by the
industrial user;
(d) Restrictions on which of the user's discharge waste streams
are to be allowed to be discharged at each point of connection
to the POTW;
(e) Specifications for industrial user monitoring programs which
may include sampling locations, frequency and type of
§ 415-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-21
1:481
sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting
schedules;
(f) Requirements for the prevention of accidental discharges and
the containment of spills or slug discharges;
(g) Restrictions based on the information furnished in the
application; and
(h) Additional reporting requirements:
[1] All permittees shall submit a report on the form prescribed
by the department, or on an alternative form approved by
the department, indicating the status of compliance with
all conditions enumerated or referred to in the wastewater
discharge permit, or made applicable to the permit by this
article. Unless required more frequently, the reports shall
be submitted at six-month intervals on a schedule to be
established by the department. Analytical data generated
by the department may not be submitted in lieu of the
facility's own monitoring data as required by the
wastewater discharge permit.
[2] Permittees not subject to national categorical
pretreatment standards or requirements shall submit a
report in accordance with the requirements of Subsection
D(5)(h)[4] and [5] of this section. The report shall show the
concentration of each substance for which there is a
specific limitation in the permit, or which may be identified
by the department in accordance with Subsection D(5)(i)
and (k) of this section.
[3] Permittees subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards or requirements shall submit compliance
reports at the times and intervals specified by federal
regulations and by the department. A compliance report
shall be submitted to the department no later than 90 days
following the final compliance date for a standard, or in
the case of a new source, no later than 90 days, following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the
POTW, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(d). A report
on continued compliance shall be submitted at six-month
intervals thereafter on the schedule established by the
department and incorporated into the industrial users
discharge permit and in accordance with Subsection
D(5)(h)[4] and [5] of this section. The reports shall be
either on a form prescribed by the department or on an
alternate form approved by the department, and shall
indicate the nature and concentration of all pollutants in
the discharge from each regulated process which are
limited by national categorical pretreatment standards, or
§ 415-21 OAKLAND CODE § 415-21
1:482
for which there is a specific limitation in the permit, or
which may be identified by the department in accordance
with Subsection D(5)(i) and (k) of this section. The report
shall include a record of measured or estimated average
and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the
discharges regulated by the permit. The combined wastestream
formula may be used for reporting purposes after
the initial information has been furnished to the
department, provided there have been no changes to the
elements composing the combined waste stream.
[4] Reports shall contain the results of representative
sampling performed during the period covered by the
report and of the discharge and analysis of pollutants
contained therein, and, for significant industrial users
subject to production based standards, shall be crossreferenced
to the related flow or production and mass as
required to determine compliance with the applicable
pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall
be as prescribed in the applicable general pretreatment
regulations, being 40 CFR 403, or by the department, but
no less than is necessary to assess and assure compliance
by the industrial user with the most stringent applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements. All sampling
and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
applicable regulations contained in 40 CFR 136 and
amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR 136 does not include
sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in
question, sampling and analysis shall be performed using
validated analytical methods approved by the
administrator.
If an industrial user monitors any pollutant more
frequently than required by the Department using the
procedures as prescribed in this section, the results of this
monitoring shall be included in such report. The report
shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards
are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional operation and maintenance practices and/or
pretreatment system improvements or changes are
necessary to bring the industrial user into compliance with
the applicable pretreatment standards.
[5] This report, and those required under Subsection B(3)(e)
and Subsection D(5)(h)(2) and (3) of this section, shall
include the following certification statement: "I certify
under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction, or
supervision, in accordance with a system designed to
assure that qualified personnel properly gather and
§ 415-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-21
1:483
evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry
of the person or persons who manage the system, or those
persons directly responsible for gathering the information,
the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge
and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that
there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the possibility of a fine and/or
imprisonment for knowing violations." Said certification
shall be signed by the facility's authorized representative,
as defined in § 415-17. If an authorization is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has
responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements
of the authorized representative definition must be
submitted to the department prior to, or together with, any
reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
[6] If sampling performed by a permittee indicates a violation,
the user shall notify the department within 24 hours of the
time said user becomes, or should have become, aware of
the violation. In addition, the user shall repeat the
sampling and analysis, and submit the results of the repeat
analysis to the department within 30 days after said user
becomes, or should have become, aware of the violation.
(i) In the event the director determines that an industrial user is
discharging substances in quality, quantity or at locations
which may cause problems to the POTW, or the receiving
stream, the department has the authority to develop and
enforce effluent limits applicable to the user. To the extent the
department seeks to impose restrictions in a permit which are
more restrictive than established in this article, the
department shall provide written documentation to explain the
greater restriction for protection against pass-through,
interference, or violation of the NPDES permit;
(j) Requirement for pollution prevention initiatives; and
(k) Other requirements reasonably necessary to ensure
compliance with this article.
(6) Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period.
Except as deemed necessary by the department, or as otherwise
provided for under this article, permits shall be issued for a
specified period of not more than five years nor less than one year.
The existing permit for significant industrial users, who timely
submit an application for permit reissuance to the department,
shall be automatically extended until a permit is issued as final.
(7) Permit modification.
§ 415-21 OAKLAND CODE § 415-21
1:484
(a) The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to
modification by the department during the term of the permit
as limitations or pretreatment standards and requirements
identified in Subsection B of this section are amended, or other
just cause exists. Just cause for a permit modification includes,
but shall not be limited to, the following:
[1] Material or substantial changes to an industrial user's
facility or operation, or changes in the characteristics of
the industrial user's effluent. It shall be the industrial
user's duty to request an application form and apply for a
modification of the permit within 30 calendar days of the
change;
[2] Change(s) in the Department's NPDES permit;114
[3] Embodiment of the provisions of a legal settlement or of a
court order;
[4] Any changes necessary to fulfill the department's role as
control authority;
[5] An industrial user's noncompliance with portions of an
existing permit;
[6] A change of conditions within the POTW;
[7] A finding of interference or pass-through attributable to
the industrial user;
[8] Amendments to, or promulgation of, national categorical
pretreatment standards or requirements including 40 CFR
403 and those delineated in Appendix A to this section.115
Permittees shall request an application form and apply to
the department for a modified permit within 90 days after
the promulgation of a new or revised national categorical
pretreatment standard to which the industrial user shall
be subject. Information submitted pursuant to this
subsection shall be confined to that information related to
the newly promulgated or amended national categorical
pretreatment standard or requirement. However,
information previously submitted need not be duplicated,
insofar as the previously submitted information continues
to be current and applicable. In addition, the department
may initiate this action;
[9] Changes in the monitoring location. (See Subsection E of
this section.);
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
115. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 415-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-21
1:485
[10] Typographical errors or omissions in permits;
[11] The department may modify the permit on its own
initiative based on its findings or reasonable belief of the
above; or
[12] The user may request a modification of the permit.
(b) When initiated by the department, the industrial user shall be
informed of any proposed change in its permit. The department
will issue a draft permit and an industrial user has 30 days to
file a response to the draft modified permit. Thereafter, the
department will issue a final permit and, unless appealed in
accordance with the procedures contained in Subsection J of
this section, the permit will become effective 20 days after
issuance.
(8) Permit custody and transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are
issued to a specific person as defined herein for a specific
discharge. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned
or transferred or sold to a different person, new owner, new
industrial user, different premises, or a new or changed operation
without notice to and written approval of the department, and
providing a copy of the existing permit to the new owner or
operator. It shall be the permit holder's duty to notify the
department of any such change at least 30 days before the date of
the change. Wastewater discharge permits, which do not receive
the written approval of the department prior to the change, shall be
null and void regardless of reassignment, or transfer, or sale. If it
has occurred, the department may revoke a permit. If a change
takes place, the department may require the application for a new
or modified permit. Any succeeding person shall comply with the
terms and conditions of any existing permit which the department
allows to be retained.
(9) Permit notification requirements. All industrial users shall
promptly notify the department in advance of any substantial
change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge,
including the listed or characteristic hazardous waste for which
initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p) has been made, request
a permit application form, and apply for a modification of the
permit at least 30 calendar days prior to the change. Failure of the
industrial user to so apply shall be considered a violation of this
article.
E. Monitoring facilities.
(1) Significant industrial users shall provide, operate and maintain at
their own expense a sampling manhole or special structure to
facilitate monitoring, inspection, sampling, and flow measurement
of their discharge by the department and the industrial user, and to
enable the department to conduct such other monitoring and
§ 415-21 OAKLAND CODE § 415-21
1:486
sampling as required for determining compliance with discharge
requirements, limits and standards as provided for in this article.
In the event the department determines that the monitoring facility
identified in the permit application is inadequate, a new monitoring
facility must be identified, or provided, which shall allow for
collection of a representative sample of the wastewater discharged
from the facility. Unless otherwise determined at the discretion of
the department, said facility shall be provided within 90 days of
receipt of notification by the department. The industrial user shall
provide the department with:
(a) A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling
manholes by the size, location, elevation, and points or places
of discharges into the POTW;
(b) A flow schematic showing i) which connections receive each
national categorical process waste stream, ii) which
connections receive stormwater, sanitary water or cooling
water, and iii) which lines handle each combined waste stream.
This report shall be certified by a professional engineer. If a
significant industrial user fails to install the monitoring
facilities within the prescribed time limits, then the
department may install such structure or device and the
significant user shall reimburse the department for any costs
incurred therein.
(2) The sampling manhole should be situated on the industrial user's
premises in a location readily accessible to the department. When
such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to
the industrial user, the department may allow the facility to be
constructed in the public street or sidewalk area when there is
room and the location will not be obstructed by landscaping or
parked vehicles. It shall be the responsibility of the industrial user
to obtain any necessary approvals which may be required from
other government agencies for the location and construction of
monitoring facilities. There shall be ample room in or near such
sampling or monitoring manhole or facility to allow accurate
sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility and
any permanently installed sampling and measuring equipment
shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition at the expense of the industrial user. Whether
constructed upon public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
department's requirements and all applicable local construction
standards and specifications. [See Subsection D(7) of this section.]
F. Inspection, sampling and recordkeeping.
(1) For purposes of administering and enforcing this article, any other
applicable provisions of this Code or applicable state or federal
laws and regulations, the department may inspect the
§ 415-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-21
1:487
establishment, facility or other premises of the industrial user. The
department's employees or authorized representative shall have
access to the industrial user's premises for purposes of inspection,
sampling, compliance monitoring and/or metering activities.
(2) Each such inspection or sampling activity shall be commenced and
completed at reasonable times, and in a reasonable manner. Upon
arrival at the industrial user's premises, the department shall
inform the industrial user, or the industrial user's employees, that
sampling and/or inspection is commencing, and that the facility's
authorized representative has the right to observe the inspection
and/or sampling. The department shall neither refrain from, nor be
prevented or delayed from, carrying out its inspection or sampling
duties due to the unavailability of the authorized representative of
the facility to observe or participate in the inspection or sampling
activity.
(3) While performing work on private property, employees or
authorized representatives of the department shall observe all
reasonable safety, security and other reasonable rules applicable to
the premises as established by the industrial user. Duly authorized
employees or representatives of the department shall bear proper
credentials and identification, and at the industrial user's option
may be accompanied by a duly authorized representative of the
industrial user. Duly authorized department representatives shall
not be restricted from viewing any of the facility site. Department
employees or representatives may take photographs of facilities
subject to this article, which shall be maintained by the department
as confidential in accordance with Subsection G of this section.
(4) Where an industrial user has security measures in force, the
industrial user shall make prompt and necessary arrangements
with the security personnel so that, upon presentation of
appropriate credentials, personnel from the department will be
permitted to enter for the purposes of performing their specific
responsibilities.
(5) Significant industrial users shall sample and analyze their
discharge in accordance with the provisions of their permit. The
department may require such samples to be split with the
department for the department's independent analysis.
(6) Industrial users shall maintain records of all information from
monitoring activities required by this article, or by 40 CFR
403.12(n). Industrial users shall maintain the records for no less
than three years. This period of record retention shall be extended
during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the
discharge of pollutants by the industrial user, or the operation of
the City of Detroit's Industrial Waste Program, or when requested
by the department, by the state, or by the EPA.
§ 415-21 OAKLAND CODE § 415-21
1:488
(7) Upon the request of the department, industrial users shall furnish
information and records relating to discharges into the POTW.
Industrial users shall make such records readily accessible to the
department at all reasonable times, and allow the department to
copy such records.
(8) In the event the department obtains samples, and analyses are
made of such samples, a copy of the results of such analyses shall
be promptly furnished upon written request by the industrial user's
authorized representative. When requested by the industrial user,
the department employee or representative shall leave with the
user, a portion of any sample of the user's discharge taken from any
sampling point on or adjacent to the premises for the user's
independent analysis. In cases of disputes arising over shared
samples, the portion taken and analyzed by the department shall be
controlling unless proven invalid.
(9) In addition to any other violation caused by the discharge
described herein, in the event a single grab sample of the industrial
user's discharge is obtained by the department, and then analyzed
in accordance with 40 CFR 136, and found to contain
concentrations of pollutants which are two or more times greater
than the numeric limitations as listed in Subsection B(2) of this
section, or as contained in the facility's wastewater discharge
permit, the industrial user shall implement its slug control plan,
and shall provide a written report to the department within 14
days, which describes the cause of greater concentration and
provides a description of the means by which future discharge
concentrations will be held to values of less than two times the
limitation in the future.
G. Confidential information.
(1) Information and data on an industrial user obtained from written
reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and
monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the
public or other governmental agencies without restriction unless
the industrial user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the department that the release of such
information would divulge information, processes or methods of
production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the industrial
user. When submitted to the department, all information claimed to
be confidential must be clearly marked "confidential." When
requested by the person furnishing the report, the portions of a
report determined by the department to disclose trade secrets or
trade secret processes, and which are clearly labeled as
confidential, shall not be made available for inspection by the
public, but shall be made available upon request to governmental
agencies for uses related to this article, to the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, and to the state
disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs,
§ 415-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-21
1:489
provided, however that information shall be treated as confidential
by the governmental agency, until such time as the information
has been determined to be nonconfidential by the governmental
agency. Confidential information on industrial users, which the
department releases pursuant to a request of another
governmental agency, should be handled by the other
governmental agency pursuant to its own confidentiality
procedures. The department cannot control how another
governmental agency handles such confidential information, and
assumes no responsibility for the disposition of the information
released to the governmental agency. The department will use
sufficient care to inform the other governmental agency of the
existence of the industrial user's confidentiality claim. The
department shall determine whether the information requested
to be treated as confidential, in fact, satisfies the requirements
of confidential information as defined herein. The decision of the
department shall be made in writing. Wastewater constituents and
characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information.
(2) Except as otherwise determined by the department or provide for
by applicable law, all information with respect to an industrial user
on file with the Township shall be made available upon request by
such user or the user's authorized representative during normal
business hours.
H. Statutes, laws and regulations. The national categorical pretreatment
standards defined in 40 CFR 405 through 471 shall be and are
incorporated by reference herein and made a part hereof. Unless
otherwise provided, any reference in this article to a code, standard,
rule, regulation, or law enacted, adopted, established, or promulgated
by any private organization, or by any element or organization of
government other than the Township shall be construed to apply to
such code, standard, rule, regulation, or law in effect or as amended or
promulgated, from the date of enactment of this article.
I. Enforcement.
(1) Violations. It shall be a violation of this article for any user to:
(a) Fail to completely and/or accurately report the wastewater
constituents and/or characteristics of the industrial user's
discharge;
(b) Fail to report significant changes in the industrial user's
operations or wastewater constituents and/or characteristics
within the time frames provided in Subsection D(7)(a) of this
section;
(c) Refuse reasonable access to the industrial user's premises,
waste discharge, or sample location for the purpose of
inspection or monitoring;
§ 415-21 OAKLAND CODE § 415-21
1:490
(d) Restrict, lockout or prevent, directly or indirectly, access to any
monitoring facilities constructed on public or private property.
The locking or securing of the monitoring facility shall not
constitute a violation pursuant to this subsection, provided,
that upon request reasonable access to the facility is promptly
provided to the department;
(e) Restrict, interfere, tamper with, or render inaccurate any of
the department's monitoring devices including, but not limited
to, samplers;
(f) Fail to comply with any condition or requirement of the
industrial user's wastewater discharge permit; or
(g) Fail to comply with any limitation, prohibition, or requirement
of this article including any rule, regulation, or order issued
hereunder. Industrial users acting in full compliance with
wastewater discharge permits issued prior to the effective date
of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall be
deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this
article, and such permits shall remain in effect and be
enforceable under this article until a superseding permit is
effective. Industrial users shall comply with applicable national
categorical pretreatment standards and requirements on the
date specified in the federal regulations, regardless of
compliance schedules.
(2) Upsets. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an
action brought for noncompliance with national categorical
pretreatment standards where the requirements of Subsection
I(2)(a) of this section are met.
(a) An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative
defense shall demonstrate, through properly signed,
contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence,
that:
[1] An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the
cause(s) of the upset;116
[2] At the time, the facility was being operated in a prudent
and workmanlike manner and in compliance with
applicable operation and maintenance procedures;
[3] The industrial user has submitted the following
information to the department, orally or in writing, within
24 hours of becoming aware of the upset and where this
information is provided orally, a written submission must
be provided within five days:
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-21
1:491
[a] A description of the discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
[b] The period of noncompliance including exact dates
and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the
noncompliance is expected to continue; and
[c] Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate
and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
(b) In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to
establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of
proof.
(c) The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to
the extent necessary to maintain compliance with this article
upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the
facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is
provided. This requirement applies in the situation where,
among other things, the primary source of power of the
treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
(3) Bypass. Bypasses are prohibited unless the bypass does not cause a
violation of pretreatment standards or requirements, but only if it is
for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the
treatment system. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions
of Subsection I(3)(a) and (b) of this section.
(a) Notice of anticipated bypass. Industrial users anticipating a
bypass shall submit notice to the department at least 10 days in
advance.
(b) Notice of unanticipated bypass. An industrial user shall submit
oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable
pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time the
industrial user becomes or should have become aware of the
bypass. A written submission shall be provided within five days
of the time the industrial user becomes or should have become
aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a
description of the bypass including exact dates and times, and
if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue, and steps taken or planned to reduce,
eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
(c) Prohibition of bypass and enforcement. Bypass is prohibited,
and the department may take enforcement action against a
user for a bypass, unless:
[1] The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life,
personal injury, or severe property damage;
§ 415-21 OAKLAND CODE § 415-21
1:492
[2] There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as
the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of
untreated waste, or maintenance during normal periods of
equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if
adequate backup equipment should have been installed in
the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to
prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of
equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and
[3] The industrial user properly notified the department as
described in Subsection I(3)(b) of this section.
(d) Bypass approval. Where it meets all conditions in Subsection
I(3)(c) of this section, the department may approve an
anticipated bypass.
(4) Pollution prevention initiatives. Where one or more of the
measurements taken for any pollutant defined in Subsection B(2) of
this section during a six-month period exceed by any magnitude the
daily maximum nondetect limit for the same parameter, the
industrial user may develop and implement pollution prevention
initiatives, or a BMP, as part of its response. The department may,
as part of an administrative order, also require development of a
BMP as a part of the department's enforcement response. Upon
approval of the department, these pollution prevention initiatives,
or BMPs shall be made an enforceable part of the wastewater
discharge permit. Industrial users shall provide, at six-month
intervals, analytical results and certifications in support of its
implementation of an approved pollution prevention initiative or
BMP. Upon demonstration of compliance, the industrial user may
request to be relieved of this implementation requirement.
(5) Emergency suspensions and orders. The department may order
suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or a
wastewater discharge permit where, in the opinion of the
department, such suspension is necessary to stop any actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent
or significant hazard to the health or welfare of persons or to the
environment, interferes or may interfere with the POTW, or causes
or may cause the City of Detroit to violate any condition of its
NPDES permit. Any person notified of a suspension of the sewer or
wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge
permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the
event the department provides informal notification under this
section, written confirmation and an order shall be provided within
24 hours. In the event of a failure of the person to comply
voluntarily with any suspension or revocation order, the
department shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including
immediate severance of the sewer connection or services, to
prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or danger to any
individual or the environment. In the event such steps are taken,
§ 415-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-21
1:493
the director shall notify the industrial user within 24 hours in
writing of such action and order, and the specific recourse
available. In any event, the department shall provide the industrial
user with an opportunity for a hearing before the director, or
his designated representative, within 10 days of such action. The
industrial user shall submit a detailed written statement to the
department within 15 days of the occurrence describing the causes
of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any
future occurrence. Upon proof of elimination of the noncomplying
discharge, the department shall reinstate the wastewater
discharge permit and/or the sewer or wastewater treatment
service.
(6) Notice of violation. Except in the case of an actual or threatened
discharge as specified in Subsection I(5) of this section whenever
the department has reason to believe that any industrial user has
violated or is violating this article, the department shall serve a
written notice stating the nature of the violation upon such
industrial user. Where applicable, the department shall pursue
appropriate escalating enforcement action as defined within its
approved enforcement response plan. The failure of the
department to issue a notice of violation shall not preclude the
department from escalating its enforcement response.
(7) Administrative actions. Whenever the department has reasonable
grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a
provision of its wastewater discharge permit, or a pretreatment
standard or requirement or any prohibition of this article, the
department, except in the case of emergency or flagrant violation,
may initiate appropriate administrative enforcement action in
order to compel the industrial user to eliminate or to remedy such
violation as soon as possible.
(a) [1] Conferences. The department may order any person, who
violates this article, to attend a conference wherein the
department may endeavor to cause the user to eliminate
or remedy the violation by establishing an enforceable
compliance schedule. The notice of violation shall be
served at least 10 days before the scheduled conference
and shall set forth the date, time, and place thereof. The
conference shall be conducted by a representative of the
department. The industrial user shall present a plan and
schedule for achieving compliance with this article.
Nothing contained herein shall require the department to
accept or agree to any proposed plan or schedule, or to
prevent the department from proceeding with a show
cause hearing as set forth in Subsection I(7)(b) of this
section. If the attendees agree upon a compliance
schedule, the user and the department's duly authorized
representative may enter, by consent, into a compliance
§ 415-21 OAKLAND CODE § 415-21
1:494
agreement or an administrative order setting forth the
terms of such agreement. An industrial user must exhibit
good faith and expeditious efforts to comply with this
article and any procedures, requirements, and agreements
hereunder.
[2] Compliance schedules. The user and the department may
agree upon a schedule which sets forth the terms and
conditions, and time periods or schedules for completion
of actions to remedy or to eliminate the causes of violation.
These schedules may be developed as part of a compliance
agreement, or an administrative consent order. Schedules
developed under this subsection shall adhere to the
following conditions:
[a] The schedule shall contain increments of progress in
the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of upgraded or additional pretreatment
facilities, or to the implementation of additional
operation and maintenance procedures required for
the industrial user to meet the applicable
pretreatment requirements and standards including,
but not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing
preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing
contracts for major components, commencing
construction, and completing construction; or
[b] No single increment referred to in this Subsection I
shall exceed nine months;
[c] Not later than 14 days following each date in the
schedule and the final date for compliance, the
industrial user shall submit a progress report to the
department including, at a minimum, whether it
complied with the increment of progress to be met on
such date and, if not, the date which it expects to
comply with this increment of progress, the reason(s)
for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial
user to return to the established schedule; and117
[d] Any deviations from the compliance schedule may
result in the industrial user being found in violation of
this article.
[3] Administrative orders. The department may order any
industrial user, who violates or continues to violate this
article or a duly issued permit, to install and to properly
operate devices, treatment facilities, or other related
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-21
1:495
appurtenances. In addition, orders may contain such other
requirements as might reasonably be necessary and
appropriate to address the violation including the
installation of pretreatment technology, additional selfmonitoring
and management practices, implementation of
a waste minimization assessment to identify and
implement feasible source reduction, and recycling
practices to reduce the generation or release of pollutants
at the facility. An order may be either an administrative
consent order, which is the result of an agreement, or a
unilateral administrative order.
(b) Show cause hearing. The department may order any industrial
user, who violates this article or allows such violation to occur,
to show cause before the department why a proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be
served upon the industrial user specifying the time and place
of a hearing before the department regarding the violation, the
reason(s) why the action is to be taken, the proposed
enforcement action, and directing the industrial user to show
cause before the department why any proposed enforcement
action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be
served personally, or by registered or certified mail with return
receipt requested, at least 10 days before the hearing. Service
may be made upon any agent or officer of a corporation, or its
authorized representative.118
[1] Hearing proceeding. The hearing shall be conducted in
accordance with the procedures adopted by the Board. A
hearings officer shall conduct the show cause hearing and
take the evidence, and may:
[a] In the name of the Board, issue notices of hearing
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses
and the production of evidence relevant to any matter
involved in such hearing; or
[b] Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing,
including transcripts and other evidence, together
with recommendations to the director for action
thereon.
[2] Transcript. At any show cause hearing held pursuant to
this article, testimony shall be recorded by a court
reporter.
(c) Actions. After a show cause hearing has been conducted, the
hearings officer shall issue an order to the industrial user
directing any of the following actions:
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-21 OAKLAND CODE § 415-21
1:496
[1] Immediate compliance with the industrial user's
wastewater discharge permit or with any applicable
limitation, condition, restriction or requirement of this
article, or applicable local, state or federal law or
regulation;
[2] Pretreatment of waste by installation of adequate
treatment equipment or proper operation and
maintenance of existing treatment equipment be
accomplished within a specified time period;
[3] Submission of compliance reports on effluent quality and
quantity as determined by self-monitoring and analysis
during a specified time period;
[4] Submission of periodic reports on effluent quality and
quantity determined by self-monitoring analysis
throughout the final period set by a compliance date;
[5] Control of discharge quantities;
[6] Payment of costs for reasonable and necessary inspection,
monitoring, and administration of the industrial user's
activities by the department during compliance efforts;
[7] Any such other orders as are appropriate including, but
not limited to, immediate termination of sewer or
wastewater treatment services, or revocation of a
wastewater discharge permit, or orders directing that
following a specified time period sewer or wastewater
treatment service will be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices, or operation and
maintenance practices have been employed; and/or
[8] A finding the user has demonstrated by a preponderance
of the evidence that a violation either of this article or of a
duly issued permit did not occur.
(d) Public notification of significant noncompliance. The
department shall publish in the largest daily newspaper
published in the City of Detroit and the Township a list of all
industrial users which were in significant noncompliance with
applicable pretreatment requirements at any time during the
previous 12 months. All industrial users identified in a
proposed publication shall be provided with a copy of the
proposed notice at least 30 days before publication and
allowed an opportunity to comment as to its accuracy.
(8) Legal actions.
(a) Criminal action. Any user, who violates any provision of this
article including the failure to pay any fees, fines, charges or
§ 415-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-21
1:497
surcharges imposed hereby, or any condition or limitation of
a permit issued pursuant thereto, or who knowingly makes
any false statements, representations or certification in any
application, record, report, plan or other document filed or
required to be maintained pursuant to this article or
wastewater discharge permit, or who tampers with or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device required
under this article, is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 for
each violation per day, or by imprisonment for not more than
90 days, or by both. The department, consistent with the terms
and conditions of the delegation agreement entered into with
Township, is hereby authorized, through its counsel, to seek
prosecution of criminal charges against any person violating
any provision of this article.
(b) Civil action. Whenever the department has reasonable grounds
to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a provision of
its wastewater discharge permit, a pretreatment standard or
requirement or any requirement of this article, the director
may commence a civil action to compel compliance in a court
of competent jurisdiction to enjoin the user from discharging,
and/or to obtain appropriate relief to remedy the violations.
The department or board may also seek additional legal and/or
equitable relief. The commencement of suit does not constitute
an exclusive election of remedies and does not prohibit the
department, director, board, City of Detroit or the Township
from commencing action in federal court for discharges
believed to be in violation of this article, state and federal
requirements contained in the Clean Water Act, the City of
Detroit's NPDES permit, or other applicable laws or
requirements. In addition, the City of Detroit and/or the
Township may recover the reasonable attorney fees, court
costs, court reporters' fees, and other unusual expenses
related to enforcement activities or litigation against the
person found to have violated this article, or the orders, rules,
regulations and permits issued hereunder.
(c) All fines, costs, and penalties which are imposed by any court
of competent jurisdiction shall be payable to the City of Detroit
Water and Sewerage department and the Township where
applicable.
J. Reconsideration and appeal. Through the procedures of
reconsideration and appeal, a user may contest actions,
determinations, or decisions of the department which result from its
construction, application and enforcement of this article. The
procedures contained within this section govern reconsideration and
appeal with respect to construction, application, and enforcement of
this article.
§ 415-21 OAKLAND CODE § 415-21
1:498
(1) Selection of reconsideration or of appeal.
(a) Except for those actions, determinations, or decisions which
are expressly identified as subject only to appeal,
reconsideration may be requested by any permit applicant,
permittee, authorized industrial wastewater discharger or
other discharger, who is adversely affected by any action,
determination, or decision that is made by, or on behalf of, the
department by the director, or an authorized representative,
and that interprets, implements or enforces the provisions of
this article.
(b) An appeal may be requested by any permit applicant,
permittee, authorized industrial wastewater discharger or
other discharger, who is adversely affected by a permit issued
as final by the department, or by an administrative order
entered after a show cause order and hearing, or after a
hearing for reconsideration.
(c) Unless otherwise expressly provided for by this article, a
request for reconsideration or appeal must be signed by an
authorized representative, and received at the department's
general offices within 20 days from the date of the occurrence
of the action, determination, or decision in dispute. A request
for reconsideration shall contain the requester's name and
address, a brief statement of the reason(s), and the factual
basis underlying the request.119
(d) A request for reconsideration shall be filed in triplicate either
by hand delivery or by certified mail to the general offices of
the department. Where a request for reconsideration or appeal
either is not filed within the time period provided for in this
subsection or is improperly made, the action, determination or
decision of the director, or the department's authorized
representative, is final and any right to reconsideration or
appeal may be deemed waived.
(2) Reconsideration. Within 15 days after receipt of a timely and
proper request for reconsideration, the department shall notify the
applicant of the time and place for a hearing.
(a) A hearing for reconsideration shall be conducted by a hearings
officer who is designated by the director and may be an
employee of the department. The decision of the hearings
officer shall be in the form of a recommendation to the director
and embodied in an administrative order. Except for an
administrative consent order that was negotiated and agreed
to by both parties, an administrative order is appealable in
accordance with Subsection J(3) of this section.
119. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-21
1:499
(b) Where improperly or untimely submitted, the department may
reject a request for reconsideration. The department shall
notify the requester in writing that the request has been
rejected.
(c) Unless the date is mutually extended by both parties, the
hearing shall be conducted neither less than 10 days nor more
than 30 days after mailing of the notice. For cause and at the
discretion of the hearings officer, the hearing may be continued
for a reasonable time.
(d) The hearing for reconsideration shall be an informal
consultation and conference where the requester in person, or
by counsel, shall present their argument, evidence, data, and
proof in connection with the issue(s) being reconsidered. The
parties shall not be bound by the Michigan Rules of Evidence.
The hearing shall be transcribed and the requester may obtain
a copy of the hearing transcript, as appropriate, from the
department or from the court reporter.120
(e) Within 30 days after the close of the hearing, the hearings
officer shall issue a final decision which shall contain a
recommendation to the director. The hearings officer shall
send such decision to the requester by certified mail.
(f) Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass-through,
interference or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the
waters of this state, the filing of a request for reconsideration
in accordance with this section shall stay the action by the
department that is the subject of the hearing for
reconsideration.
(3) Appeal. Within 30 days after receipt of a timely and proper request
for an appeal, the department shall notify the applicant in writing
regarding the time and place for a hearing. The hearing shall be
conducted in accordance with procedures set by the Board until
rules are promulgated pursuant to section 2-111 of the 2012 City of
Detroit Charter. In addition:121
(a) Any request for an appeal must be made within 20 days of the
department's action, determination or decision regarding the
request for reconsideration or any permit issued in accordance
with this article.
(b) Where a request either is not filed within the time period
contained in this subsection or is improperly made, the action,
determination or decision of the director, or the department's
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
121. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-21 OAKLAND CODE § 415-21
1:500
authorized representative, is final and any right to appeal may
be deemed waived. Where untimely or improperly submitted,
the department may reject the request for an appeal, and shall
notify the requester in writing that such request has been
rejected.
(c) The department shall appoint a hearings officer. The hearings
officer shall review the evidence, and within 15 days after the
close of the hearing shall issue a written recommendation to
uphold, modify or reverse the action, determination, or
decision of the department.
(d) The written recommendation of the hearings officer shall be
submitted to the Board which shall render a final decision
within 30 days of its next regularly scheduled meeting.
(e) In accordance with applicable law, the user or the department
may appeal any final decision of the Board to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(f) Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass-through,
interference, or other harm to the POTW, to the public or to the
waters of this state, the filing of a request for appeal in
accordance with this section shall stay the action by the
department that is the subject of the appeal.
§ 415-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-21
1:501

ARTICLE IV
Water Supply Emergencies
[Adopted 6-23-1998 by Ord. No. 18-1A (Ch. 32, Art. III, Div. 3, of the
2007 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 415-22. Declaration; public notification.
A water supply emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever the Township
Supervisor finds on the basis of drought conditions, depletion of water
supply, reduction in water pressure or other reasons, that there is a threat
of loss of water supply to the community or any portion of the community,
and the Township Supervisor causes a declaration of such water supply
emergency to be publicly posted and announced, published or mailed in the
manner set forth in § 415-24. A water supply emergency may be declared
when the Supervisor receives notification from the office of the County
Water Resources Commissioner or the State Department of Environmental
Quality that the supply or pressure demand for water cannot be
satisfactorily accommodated and general welfare is likely to be endangered
in the community or in any portion of the community.
§ 415-23. Actions or prohibitions.
A declaration of water supply emergency shall designate the particular
areas of the Township affected by the water supply emergency, and as to
such areas, may, among other related actions or prohibitions:
§ 415-24. Posting of declaration.
The Township Supervisor shall cause a declaration of water supply
emergency to be posted at the Township Hall. Additionally, the Township
Supervisor shall, to the extent feasible, cause such declaration to be
publicly announced by broadcast from a radio or television station with a
normal operating range covering the Township, published in a newspaper
of general circulation throughout the Township or mailed by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to all property owners within the area identified
in the declaration as being affected by the water supply emergency at the
address listed on the Township tax rolls for such properties.
A. Prohibit the watering of lawns and landscaping and all outdoor water
use, except on an alternate-day basis permitting such use on evennumbered
days solely for properties with even-numbered addresses
and on odd-numbered days solely for properties with odd-numbered
addresses; or
B. Prohibit all watering of lawns and landscaping and all outdoor water
use, when a prohibition under Subsection A of this section is deemed
not sufficient.
§ 415-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-25
1:503
§ 415-25. Records.
The Township Supervisor shall make or cause to be made a record of
each time and date when any declaration of water supply emergency is
announced to the public in accordance with this article.
§ 415-26. Emergency deemed to exist irrespective of notification.
A water supply emergency shall be deemed to exist irrespective of whether
notification is provided under § 415-24, as to persons otherwise provided
with direct notice of such a water supply emergency.
§ 415-27. Prohibition on use of water; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize water from the Township water
supply system for any type of outdoor use, in contravention of a declared
water supply emergency, other than responding to a fire emergency. The
prohibition shall remain in effect 24 hours per day, seven days per week
until the water supply emergency is declared ended by the Township
Supervisor. The Township Supervisor may, if requested in advance, provide
exceptions to the restrictions of this section in cases of new lawn or
landscaping installations, or where necessary to prevent imminent financial
loss to the water user.
§ 415-28. Violations and penalties.122
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and upon a determination of
responsibility shall be subject to a civil fine as set forth in Chapter 1, Article
I, Definitions, General Penalty, of the Code of the Charter Township of
Oakland. In addition to ordering a person determined to be responsible for
a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses,
the Judge or Magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or
order necessary to enforce or enjoin violation of this article.
§ 415-29. Nuisance remedies.123
In addition to, but separate from, the penalties provided for in § 415-28, any
violation of this section is presumed and hereby declared to be a nuisance
per se, and the Township may commence an appropriate civil action in any
court of competent jurisdiction for an injunctive order abating or enjoining
the violation, and for any other appropriate relief.
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
II).
§ 415-25 OAKLAND CODE § 415-29
1:504
Chapter 430
(RESERVED)
§ 415-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 415-29
1:505

Charter Township of Oakland i Zoning Ordinance
CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF OAKLAND
ZONING ORDINANCE
Adopted
January 23, 2018
Charter Township of Oakland ii Zoning Ordinance
STATE OF MICHIGAN, COUNTY OF OAKLAND ...................................... 1
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF OAKLAND ZONING ORDINANCE ........ 1
ORDINANCE NO. ________ ...................................................................... 1
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS ........................................................ 1
16-100 SHORT TITLE ........................................................................................... 1
16-101 PURPOSE AND INTENT ........................................................................... 1
16-102 AMENDMENT OF ORDINANCE OR MAP ................................................ 2
16-103 PUBLICATION AND DELIVERY OF NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING. ..... 5
16-104 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS ................................................................ 6
16-105 PLANNING COMMISSION .................................................................... 111
16-106 RESERVED ............................................................................................. 13
16-107 PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE DECLARED TO BE MINIMUM STANDARDS ........................................................................................... 13
16-108 NONCONFORMANCE ............................................................................ 13
16-109 ADMINISTRATION, ZONING COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT..... 17
16-110 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS ............................................ 19
16-111 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION ................................................................ 19
ARTICLE II: DEFINITIONS......................................................................... 1
16-200 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION ................................................................... 1
16-201 DEFINED TERMS ..................................................................................... 1
16-202 “A” .............................................................................................................. 1
16-203 “B” .............................................................................................................. 5
16-204 “C” .............................................................................................................. 6
16-205 “D” .............................................................................................................. 9
16-206 “E” ............................................................................................................ 11
16-207 “F” ............................................................................................................ 12
16-208 “G”............................................................................................................ 13
16-209 “H” ............................................................................................................ 14
16-210 “I” ............................................................................................................. 15
16-211 “J” ............................................................................................................ 15
16-212 “K” ............................................................................................................ 15
16-213 “L” ............................................................................................................ 15
16-214 “M” ........................................................................................................... 17
16-215 “N” ............................................................................................................ 18
16-216 “O”............................................................................................................ 19
16-217 “P” ............................................................................................................ 20
16-218 “Q”............................................................................................................ 22
16-219 “R” ............................................................................................................ 22
16-220 “S” ............................................................................................................ 23
16-221 “T” ............................................................................................................ 26
16-222 “U” ............................................................................................................ 27
16-223 “V” ............................................................................................................ 27
16-224 “W” ........................................................................................................... 28
Charter Township of Oakland iii Zoning Ordinance
16-225 “X” ............................................................................................................ 29
16-226 “Y” ............................................................................................................ 29
16-227 “Z” ............................................................................................................ 30
ARTICLE III: GENERAL REGULATIONS .................................................. 1
16-300 APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE ................................................................... 1
16-301 USES, SPATIAL AND PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS ............................... 1
16-302 ACCESS REQUIRED ................................................................................ 3
16-303 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS ........................................................................ 3
16-304 ACCESSORY USES.................................................................................. 4
16-305 RESERVED ............................................................................................... 5
16-306 ANIMALS ................................................................................................... 5
16-307 BUILDING HEIGHT ................................................................................... 7
16-308 CLEAR VISION CORNERS ....................................................................... 7
16-309 CARETAKER RESIDENCE ....................................................................... 8
16-310 COMMON OPEN SPACE .......................................................................... 8
16-311 CROSS DISTRICT AVERAGING .............................................................. 9
16-312 DWELLINGS STANDARDS ....................................................................... 9
16-313 RESERVED ............................................................................................. 10
16-314 EASEMENTS ........................................................................................... 10
16-315 ERECTION OF MORE THAN ONE PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE ON A LOT10
16-316 RESERVED ............................................................................................. 10
16-317 ESSENTIAL SERVICES/PUBLIC AND QUASI-PUBLIC USES/UTILITY AND PUBLIC SERVICE BUILDINGS ...................................................... 11
16-318 RESERVED ............................................................................................. 11
16-319 RESERVED ............................................................................................. 11
16-320 RESERVED ............................................................................................. 11
16-321 GRADING PLANS REQUIRED ............................................................... 11
16-322 RESERVED ............................................................................................. 11
16-323 HOME OCCUPATIONS ........................................................................... 11
16-324 RESERVED ............................................................................................. 13
16-325 LIGHTING ................................................................................................ 13
16-326 LOT DIMENSIONS .................................................................................. 14
16-327 RESERVED ............................................................................................. 14
16-328 RESERVED ........................................................................................... 145
16-329 RESERVED ............................................................................................. 15
16-330 OPEN SPACE OPTION ........................................................................... 15
16-331 OUTDOOR STORAGE AND PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND OTHER MATERIALS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS ...................... 18
16-332 OUTDOOR STORAGE AND PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND OTHER MATERIALS IN NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS ............ 18
16-333 OUTDOOR STORAGE ............................................................................ 19
16-334 RESERVED ............................................................................................. 19
16-335 RIGHT TO FARM ACT ............................................................................ 19
16-336 SCREENING OF MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT ....................................... 19
16-337 SCENIC EASEMENTS ............................................................................ 19
Charter Township of Oakland iv Zoning Ordinance
16-338 SIDEWALKS/SAFETY PATH AND TRAIL CONNECTIONS ................... 20
16-339 SITE PREPARATION AND EXCAVATION .............................................. 20
16-340 TEMPORARY LIVING QUARTERS (ON-SITE) ....................................... 20
16-341 TEMPORARY SALES AND CONSTRUCTION TRAILERS WITHIN DEVELOPMENTS ................................................................................... 21
16-342 RESERVED ............................................................................................. 24
16-343 TEST PLANS ........................................................................................... 24
16-344 UNCLASSIFIED USES ............................................................................ 25
16-345 RESERVED ............................................................................................. 26
16-346 RESERVED ............................................................................................. 26
16-347 RESERVED ............................................................................................. 26
16-348 NATURAL FEATURE SETBACK ............................................................. 26
16-349 WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM .............................................. 28
ARTICLE IV: ZONING DISTRICTS ............................................................ 1
16-400 ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP ................................................................ 1
16-401 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP ........................................................................... 1
16-402 SUMMARY TABLES .................................................................................. 2
16-403 VLRD. VERY LOW RESIDENTIAL DENSITY DISTRICT ......................... 9
16-404 LRD. LOW RESIDENTIAL DENSITY DISTRICT .................................... 12
16-405 LMRD. LOW-MEDIUM RESIDENTIAL DENSITY DISTRICT ................. 14
16-406 MRD. MEDIUM RESIDENTIAL DENSITY DISTRICT ............................. 16
16-407 MHRD. MEDIUM HIGH RESIDENTIAL DENSITY DISTRICT ................ 18
16-408 RM. MULTIPLE-FAMILY DISTRICT ....................................................... 20
16-409 MH-MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT ......................................... 22
16-410 RC. RECREATION CONSERVATION DISTRICT .................................. 23
16-411 OS. OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICT ......................................................... 25
16-412 RESERVED ............................................................................................. 26
16-413 C. COMMERCIAL DISTRICT ................................................................. 27
16-414 RD. RESEARCH-DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT ....................................... 28
16-415 RESERVED ............................................................................................. 29
16-416 WCF, WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES OVERLAY .............. 29
ARTICLE V: SPECIAL LAND USES .......................................................... 1
16-500 SPECIAL USES GENERALLY .................................................................. 1
16-501 SPECIAL USE PROCEDURES ................................................................. 1
16-502 SPECIAL USE REVIEW STANDARDS ..................................................... 5
16-503 ACCESSORY USES RELATED TO PERMITTED SPECIAL LAND USES 6
16-504 ANIMAL GROOMING ................................................................................ 7
16-505 BED AND BREAKFAST ............................................................................. 7
16-506 CAMPS AND CAMP GROUNDS ............................................................... 8
16-507 CEMETERY, PRIVATE .............................................................................. 9
16-508 DAY CARE, COMMERCIAL ...................................................................... 9
16-509 DAY CARE, GROUP ............................................................................... 10
16-510 DRIVE-THROUGH BUSINESS ............................................................... 11
16-511 DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY ............................................................. 11
Charter Township of Oakland v Zoning Ordinance
16-512 EDUCATIONAL FACILITY ....................................................................... 12
16-513 FUNERAL HOME .................................................................................... 12
16-514 GOLF COURSE ....................................................................................... 13
16-515 RESERVED ........................................................................................... 134
16-516 RESERVED ............................................................................................. 14
16-517 KENNEL/ANIMAL DAY CARE ................................................................. 14
16-518 MANUFACTURING FACILITIES ............................................................. 14
16-519 MINING, GRAVEL AND MINERAL .......................................................... 15
16-520 RESERVED ............................................................................................. 15
16-521 MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT ................................................................. 16
16-522 CONVALESCENT CENTER/HOMES FOR THE AGED .......................... 16
16-523 PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY ............................................................. 17
16-524 PUD. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ................................................ 17
16-525 OIL AND GAS STRUCTURES ................................................................ 34
16-526 RECREATION FACILITY, COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR ........................... 35
16-527 STABLE AND RIDING ACADEMY .......................................................... 36
16-528 VETERINARY HOSPITAL ....................................................................... 36
16-529 SENIOR HOUSING ............................................................................... 367
ARTICLE VI: SITE PLAN REVIEW ............................................................ 1
16-600 INTENT ...................................................................................................... 1
16-601 APPLICABILITY ......................................................................................... 1
16-602 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE......................................................... 1
16-603 REQUIRED INFORMATION AND FEES ................................................... 1
16-604 PROCEDURES FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW ............................................. 10
16-605 CRITERIA FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL ................................................ 11
16-606 POSTING OF FINANCIAL GUARANTEE ................................................ 12
16-607 TERM OF APPROVAL OF THE SITE PLAN ........................................... 12
16-608 AMENDMENT TO THE SITE PLAN ........................................................ 13
16-609 CONFORMITY TO APPROVED SITE PLANS ........................................ 13
16-610 APPEALS ................................................................................................ 13
ARTICLE VII: SIGNS .................................................................................. 1
16-700 PURPOSE AND SCOPE ........................................................................... 1
16-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL SIGNS .............................................. 1
16-702 EXEMPT SIGNS ........................................................................................ 2
16-703 PROHIBITED SIGNS ................................................................................. 4
16-704 PERMITTED SIGNS .................................................................................. 5
16-705 TEMPORARY SIGNS ................................................................................ 6
16-706 SIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR A LAND USE CHANGE ............................. 7
ARTICLE VIII: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS .................................... 1
16-800 SCOPE AND INTENT ................................................................................ 1
16-801 APPLICATION ........................................................................................... 1
16-802 LANDSCAPING PLAN ............................................................................... 1
16-803 MODIFICATIONS ...................................................................................... 2
Charter Township of Oakland vi Zoning Ordinance
16-804 PLANT MATERIALS .................................................................................. 3
16-805 ESTABLISHMENT PERIOD ...................................................................... 4
16-806 GREENBELTS, BUFFERS AND SCREENING ......................................... 5
16-807 BERMS ...................................................................................................... 5
16-808 PARKING LOTS ........................................................................................ 6
16-809 PROTECTION OF EXISTING TREES ....................................................... 8
ARTICLE IX: PARKING ............................................................................. 1
16-900 GENERAL PROVISIONS .......................................................................... 1
16-901 RESERVED ............................................................................................... 1
16-902 NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED ......................................... 1
16-903 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PARKING ................................... 5
ARTICLE X: SITE CONDOMINIUMS ......................................................... 1
16-1000 INTENT ...................................................................................................... 1
16-1001 APPROVAL REQUIRED ............................................................................ 1
16-1002 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS .................................................................... 1
16-1003 SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS ................................................................... 1
16-1004 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS .................................................................. 3
16-1005 INFORMATION REQUIRED PRIOR TO OCCUPANCY ............................ 4
16-1006 REVISION OF CONDOMINUM SUBDIVISION PLAN ............................... 4
16-1007 AMENDMENT OF CONDOMINIUM DOCUMENTS .................................. 4
16-1008 RELOCATION OF BOUNDARIES ............................................................. 4
16-1009 SUBDIVISION OF CONDOMINIUM LOT .................................................. 4
ARTICLE XI: ADMINISTRATIVE ............................................................... 1
16-1100 GENERAL INTERPRETATION, SAVINGS AND SEVERABILITY ............. 1
16-1101 PRIOR APPROVALS ................................................................................. 2
16-1102 EFFECTIVE DATE .................................................................................... 3
16-1103 RECORD OF ADOPTION .......................................................................... 4
Charter Township of Oakland vii Zoning Ordinance
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-1 Zoning Ordinance
STATE OF MICHIGAN, COUNTY OF OAKLAND
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF OAKLAND ZONING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. ________
An ordinance to comprehensively update and amend Ordinance 16, the Charter Township of Oakland Zoning Ordinance text and map, in its entirety, in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006, as amended.
The Charter Township of Oakland Ordains:
The Charter Township of Oakland Zoning Ordinance, including text and zoning map, being Ordinance No. 16, as adopted on July 13, 1976, and as subsequently amended, is hereby amended in its entirety, with the text to read and the zoning map to be adopted and incorporated, as follows:
ARTICLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
16-100 SHORT TITLE
This ordinance, of which the Official Zoning Map is part, shall be known as the “Charter Township of Oakland Zoning Ordinance” and will be referred to hereinafter as “this ordinance.”
16-101 PURPOSE AND INTENT
The fundamental purposes of this ordinance are:
A. To promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare;
B. To encourage the use of lands and natural resources in accordance with their character and adaptability;
C. To implement the goals, objectives, and future land use recommendations of the Community Master Plan and to regulate the intensity of land use and parcel areas in a manner compatible with said Plan;
D. To determine the area of open spaces surrounding buildings and structures necessary to provide adequate light, scenic views and air and to protect the public health;
E. To protect the character and stability of the recreational, residential, commercial and industrial areas within the Charter Township of Oakland and promote the orderly and beneficial development of the Township;
F. To lessen and avoid congestion on the public highways and streets;
G. To provide for the needs of recreation, residence, commerce, and industry in future growth;
H. To promote healthful surroundings for family life in residential areas;
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-2 Zoning Ordinance
I. To set reasonable standards to which buildings and structures shall conform;
J. To provide for reasonable uses and forms, buildings, and structures which are compatible with the character of development or the uses, buildings, or structures permitted within specified Districts and to provide for sanitary, safety and protective measures that shall be required for such structures;
K. To prevent additions, alterations and/or remodeling of existing structures occurring in such a way as to avoid the regulations and limitations imposed hereunder;
L. To reduce the risk of fire, explosion, noxious fumes and odors, heat, dust, smoke, glare, noise, vibration, radioactivity, and other nuisances and hazards to life and property;
M. To prevent improper uses of land, the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of buildings and structures so far as is possible and appropriate in each District;
N. To provide for the completion, restoration, reconstruction, and compliance of nonconforming uses;
O. To create a Zoning Board of Appeals and to define the powers and duties thereof;
P. To designate and define the power and duties of the official or officials in charge of the administration and enforcement of this ordinance;
Q. To provide for the payment of fees for zoning permits and escrow accounts to support the expense of administration and proper review of applications for zoning permits;
R. To provide penalties for the violation of this ordinance;
S. To provide safety in traffic and vehicular parking;
T. To accomplish any other purposes contained in the Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006, as amended and to fulfill other legitimate objectives allowed by law.
16-102 AMENDMENT OF ORDINANCE OR MAP
16-102.01 REZONING PROCESS
A. Any interested person may request, and the Township may approve or disapprove, an amendment to this ordinance and/or zoning map.
B. Application Procedure.
1. An amendment to the text of the ordinance shall be submitted to the Oakland Township Building Department for consideration by the Planning Commission and Township Board in accordance with the Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006, as amended. A description of the request, reference to the text proposed for amendment, proposed new text, as well as justification for the request shall be included in the petition.
2. An amendment to the zoning map shall be submitted in writing to the Oakland Township Building Department for consideration by the Planning Commission and Township Board in accordance with the Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006, as amended. A description of the request, map of the location of the subject property or properties, description of existing and proposed zoning, as well as justification for the request shall be included in the petition.
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-3 Zoning Ordinance
C. Applicable Factors.
When reviewing an amendment request, the Township may consider, but shall not be limited to:
1. Whether the proposed change is in accordance with the Township’s Master Plan.
2. Whether the proposed change is a reasonable alternative to the Master Plan because it will promote land use policies of the Master Plan and will not conflict with present policies.
3. Although representing a change in the Master Plan for Future Land Use, whether the proposed district:
a. Would be compatible with existing or future uses in the area.
b. Would not have a negative impact on the policies of the Master Plan.
c. Would further the objectives, goals or policies of the Master Plan.
d. Would preserve an existing, unique natural area.
4. Whether the proposed district conforms to the Master Plan for future land use and would be in conflict therewith.
5. Whether the proposed change represents a form of spot zoning.
6. Whether the proposed use would be incompatible with existing (and/or future) uses in the area.
7. Whether the proposed change would negatively affect the Township’s ability to implement or follow the Master Plan for the area.
8. Whether the proposed use would add more acreage than can be justified, thereby detracting from the Township’s ability to develop according to the Master Plan.
9. Other factors set forth in the Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006, as amended.
D. Notice. Public notice of an amendment to this ordinance shall follow the process set forth in Section 16-103.
16-102.02 CONDITIONAL REZONING
As an alternative to a rezoning amendment as described in Section 16-102.01, the Township may allow conditional rezoning to help ensure the proper use of land and natural resources and to allow for a more flexible approach to the rezoning process in accordance with Public Act No. 110 of 2006, as amended (MCL 125.3101 et seq.). It is recognized that, in certain instances, it would be an advantage to both the Township and petitioners seeking rezoning of land if a site plan, along with conditions and limitations that may be relied upon by the Township, could be proposed as part of a petition for rezoning. Conditional rezoning of land must follow the standards and procedures as noted below.
A. The amendment procedure for a conditional rezoning shall follow the same procedure as a traditional rezoning amendment pursuant to this Article.
B. In addition to the procedures as noted in Section 16-102.01, the following specific procedures, standards, and requirements apply to all proposed conditional rezoning requests:
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-4 Zoning Ordinance
1. A conditional rezoning request must be voluntarily offered by an owner of land within the Township. All offers must be made in writing and must provide specific conditions to be considered by the Township as part of the rezoning request. All offers shall be in the form of a written agreement approvable by the Township and property owner, incorporating the conditional rezoning site plan and setting forth any conditions and terms mutually agreed upon by the parties relative to the land for which the conditional rezoning is sought.
2. Conditional rezoning shall not allow a use or activity that would not otherwise be allowed in the proposed zoning district.
3. Conditional rezoning shall not alter any of the various zoning requirements for the uses in questions, i.e., parking, landscaping, lot area, lot width, building, height, setbacks, lot area coverage, etc. Conditional rezoning shall not grant zoning variances of any kind. Any zoning variance must follow the provisions of Section 16-104.
4. Conditional rezoning shall not grant special land use approval. The process for review and approval of special land uses must follow the provisions of Article V.
5. All conditions offered by a land owner in relation to a rezoning request must have a direct relationship to the rezoning itself. The provisions to allow conditional rezoning shall not be construed to allow rezoning by exaction.
C. In addition to the informational requirements provided for in Section 16-102.01, the applicant must provide a conditional rezoning site plan prepared by a licensed professional allowed to prepare such plans under this Ordinance, that shall show the location, size, height or other measures for and/or of buildings, structures, improvements and features, including natural features on, and in some cases adjacent to, the property that is the subject of the conditional rezoning of land. The details to be offered for inclusion in the conditional rezoning site plan shall be determined by the applicant, subject to approval of the Township. A conditional rezoning site plan shall not replace the requirement for site plan review and approval, site condominium approval, or subdivision approval, as the case may be.
Time limits and reversion of land to previous district.
1. If the proposed conditions of rezoning are acceptable to the Township, the Township may establish a time period during which the conditions apply to the property and must be met. If the conditions are not satisfied within the time specified under this section, the property shall revert to its former zoning classification unless an extension is granted as noted below. Reversion of a property back to its former classification must follow the rezoning amendment provisions as provided in Section 16-102.01 B.
2. Unless a reversion of the zoning takes place as described in the section above, the approved conditional rezoning shall be binding upon the subject property owner, his heirs, successors, assigns, and transferees.
3. Upon approval of a conditional rezoning, a copy of the written agreement between the property owner and Township shall be filed with the County Register of Deeds, which shall act to provide notice to all subsequent owners of the property of the conditions approved and agreed to by the Township.
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-5 Zoning Ordinance
4. The Township may not add to or alter any conditions approved as part of a rezoning during the time period specified above.
5. The time limits specified and approved by the Township may be extended upon the application of the landowner and approval of the Township.
16-103 PUBLICATION AND DELIVERY OF NOTICE OF PUBLIC HEARING
Except as stated otherwise in this ordinance, whenever a public hearing on a zoning application is required by this ordinance or by the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, as amended, notice of the public hearing shall be published and delivered in accordance with the requirements of this section.
A. The notice shall be published once, at least 15 days before the date of public hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township.
B. For applications involving the rezoning of ten or fewer adjacent properties, for applications to the Zoning Board of Appeals involving a specific parcel of land, for all planned unit development and special land use applications, and for other applications as to which a public hearing is required under this ordinance or the Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006, as amended, a notice of public hearing shall be given in the manner set forth in Section 103 (MCL 125.3103) of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, as amended. Notice shall be sent to the following:
1. The applicant and the owner of the subject property, if different from the applicant;
2. All persons to whom real property is assessed for property taxes within 300 feet of the property that is the subject of the application regardless of whether the property or structure is in the Township;
3. One occupant of each dwelling unit or spatial area in each building that contains four or fewer dwelling units and is located within 300 feet of the subject property regardless of whether the property or structure is in the Township; and
4. The owner or manager of a building containing more than four dwelling units, who shall be requested in writing to post the notices at the primary entrance of the building, but failure of such posting, shall not constitute a lack of notice to the owners or occupants of such dwelling units.
5. If the above-described 300-foot radius extends outside the Township’s boundaries, the notice shall nevertheless be provided outside of the Township’s boundaries, within the 300-foot radius, to all persons stated above in this subsection.
C. The notice of public hearing shall include the following information:
1. A description of the application or request.
2. An identification of the property that is the subject of the application or request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property; provided, however, that street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-6 Zoning Ordinance
currently exist within the property; and provided further that street addresses do not need to be listed if eleven or more adjacent properties are being proposed for rezoning.
3. The date and time when the application or request will be considered; the location of the public hearing.
4. The location or address where written comments concerning the application or request will be received; the period of time within which such written comments may be submitted.
5. Any other information required under the Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006, as amended.
16-104 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
16.104.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
The zoning board of appeals is established and shall have the authority and responsibilities conferred by law and this ordinance.
16.104.02 MEMBERSHIP
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five members. The members shall be appointed by affirmative majority vote of the members of the Township Board serving.
A. One member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be a member of the Township Planning Commission.
B. One regular or alternate member of a zoning board of appeals may be a member of the Township Board. Such a member shall not serve as chairperson of the zoning board of appeals.
C. The remaining members of the Zoning Board of Appeals and alternate members shall be electors of the Township residing within its zoning jurisdiction and shall be representative of the population distribution and of the various interests present in the local unit of government.
D. There may be not more than two alternate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals, appointed in the same manner as regular members.
16-104.03 TERMS OF OFFICE
The appointed members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have a term of office of three years from the effective date of the appointment. Appointments for new members may be less than 3 years to provide for staggered terms. A successor shall be appointed or a member re-appointed not more than one month after the term of a member has expired.
A. The term of the Zoning Board of Appeals members who are a Township Board member and a Planning Commission member shall coincide with their respective terms as members of the Township Board and the Planning Commission.
B. A vacancy on the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment.
16-104.04 JURISDICTION
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-7 Zoning Ordinance
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall act upon all questions arising in the administration of this ordinance, including interpretation of the zoning map and the ordinance.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide all appeals from and review any administrative order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning Administrator, other administrative official or body charged with enforcement of this ordinance.
C. As may be further conditioned by provisions of law or this ordinance, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide all petitions for nonuse variances.
D. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide all matters assigned to it for decisions under the terms of this ordinance.
E. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have no jurisdiction or authority over or with regard to the following:
1. Any aspect or part of an application for approval of a special land use, planned unit development.
2. An appeal from any aspect or part of a determination or decision made with regard to a special land use, planned unit development.
F. An appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed. However, if the body or officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Zoning Board of Appeals, after the notices of appeal is filed, that by reason of facts stated in such certificate, a stay, in the opinion of the body or officer, will cause imminent peril to life or property, proceedings may be stayed only by a restraining order issued by the Zoning Board of Appeals or a circuit court.
16-104.05 RESERVED
16-104.06 VARIANCES
The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a nonuse variance based upon a written application demonstrating that practical difficulties exist in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this zoning ordinance relating to the construction, structural changes, or alteration of buildings or structures relating to dimensional requirements of this ordinance or to any other nonuse related standard in this ordinance, provided the applicant demonstrates and the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that the claimed practical difficulties, conform to the standards as set forth below:
A. Strict compliance with the restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk, density and other similar items unreasonably prevents the owner from using the property for a permitted purpose or would render conformity with said restrictions excessively burdensome;
B. The variance would do substantial justice to the applicant as well as to other property owners in the zoning district as well as nearby owners in other districts; The relaxation of restrictions would not exceed what is needed to provide relief to the applicant and continue justice for others;
C. The practical difficulty of the property owner is due to unique circumstances of the property in that special conditions exist which are peculiar to the land, structures, or buildings involved and which are not generally applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-8 Zoning Ordinance
same zoning district; and
D. The practical difficulty is not self-created.
The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose conditions upon the granting of a variance as may be permitted by law and ordinance.
No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or building s in the same district, and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance.
16-104.07 TIME LIMITATIONS ON VARIANCES
Unless the Zoning Board of Appeals has established other time limits as a condition of granting a variance, a variance expires and becomes null and void if within twelve months after it was granted, the applicant has not obtained all required permits and commenced the project authorized by the variance or if the project has not been completed within one year after it was commenced. The Zoning Board of Appeals may grant one or more extensions of up to one additional year each, upon request by the applicant. Any request for an extension shall be considered at a public meeting of the Zoning Board of Appeals, but public notice and a public hearing shall not be required.
16-104.08 APPEALS AND OTHER APPLICATIONS FOR RELIEF
A. An appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals may be taken by a person aggrieved or by an officer, department, or board of this state or Charter Township of Oakland. In addition, a variance in this ordinance may be applied for and granted under Section 4 of the uniform condemnation procedures act, 1980 PA 87, MCL 213.54, and as provided under the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, as amended. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall state the grounds of any determination made by the board.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and decide a written request seeking an interpretation of the zoning ordinance.
C. An appeal under this section shall be taken within such time as prescribed by the Zoning Board of Appeals by general rule, by filing with the body or officer from whom the appeal is taken and with the Zoning Board of Appeals a notice of appeal specifying the grounds for the appeal. The body or officer from whom the appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
D. An appeal shall be filed not later than 30 days after the order, decision, or determination as to which the application or appeal is taken.
E. An applicant seeking relief within the jurisdiction of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall apply for such relief by means of application form provided by the Township and shall pay a required application fee and deposit any required sum into a Township escrow account for the purpose of any required reimbursement of Township expenses incurred in the consideration of the application.
16-104.09 DECISIONS OF THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide all applications and appeals within a reasonable time.
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-9 Zoning Ordinance
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify, the order, requirement, decision, or determination that is being appealed and may issue or direct the issuance of relevant Township permits.
C. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals is necessary to reverse an order, requirements, decision, or determination of the administrative official or body, to decide in favor of the applicant on a matter upon which the Zoning Board of Appeals is required to pass under this zoning ordinance, or to grant a variance in the zoning ordinance.
D. The Township building official shall incorporate the terms and conditions of the Zoning Board of Appeal’s decision in any permit issued to the applicant pursuant to the decision.
E. A decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be final. A party aggrieved by the decision may appeal to the circuit court, within the time, to the extent and in the manner permitted by law.
F. A member of the Zoning Board of Appeals who is also a member of the Township Board or the Planning Commission shall not participate in a public hearing on or vote on the same matter that the member voted on as a member of the Township Board or the Planning Commission. However, the member may consider and vote on other unrelated matters involving the same property.
16-104.10 OFFICERS
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall elect from its members a chairperson, vice chairperson and secretary.
B. The chairperson or, in his or her absence, the acting chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
C. A Zoning Board of Appeals member who is a Township Board member shall not serve as chairperson of the Board of Appeals.
D. An officer of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have a term of one year and until the officer is re-elected, or a successor is elected and qualifies. The election of officers shall be undertaken at the first regular meeting of each year or at a special meeting if placed on the agenda.
E. An alternate member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall not be eligible for election as an officer of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
16-104.11 MEETINGS AND PROCEDURES
A. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt bylaws and rules to govern its procedures sitting as a Zoning Board of Appeals and for the conduct of its meetings and related purposes subject to Board of Trustee approval.
B. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall not conduct business unless a majority of the regular members are present, including any alternate members serving in the absence of a regular member in accordance with Section 16 104.12. Three members shall constitute a quorum.
C. At the first regular meeting of each calendar year, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall adopt and provide public notice of a schedule of its regular meetings in accordance with the Open
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-10 Zoning Ordinance
Meeting Act, as amended provided however, that a meeting need not be held if pending matters do not warrant a meeting.
D. The Zoning Board of Appeals may convene special meetings at such times as it shall determine, subject to compliance with the Open Meetings Act, as amended.
E. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a public hearing on an appeal or interpretation request and decide the matter within a reasonable time. At a hearing, the party making the appeal or interpretation request may appear personally or by agent or attorney. Notice of a public hearing for an interpretation request which does not involve a specific parcel of property need only conform to Section 16-103 of this ordinance and given to the person making the request.
F. All meetings subject to this ordinance shall be conducted in compliance with the open meetings act, 1976 PA 267, MCL 15.261 to 15.275. Meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at other times as the Zoning Board of Appeals in its rules of procedure may specify or as may be required by law.
G. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall maintain a record of its proceedings which shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the legislative body.
16-104.12 ALTERNATE MEMBERS
A. The Township Board may appoint not more than two alternate members of the Zoning Board of Appeals, in the same manner as regular members are appointed.
B. An alternate member may serve as a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals in the absence of a regular member if the regular member will be unable to attend one or more meetings
C. An alternate member may also serve as a member of the Zoning Board of Appeals for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which a regular member has abstained because of a conflict of interest.
D. An alternate member who is called to serve in a matter before the Zoning Board of Appeals shall serve in that specific matter until a decision is made, whether at one or more meetings.
E. An alternate member of the Zoning Board of Appeals has the same voting rights as a regular member of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
16-104.13 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS; CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
A. A member of the Zoning Board of Appeals may be removed by the Township Board for misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office, upon a written charge specifying the reasons or grounds for the proposed removal and after a public hearing by the Township Board. At the public hearing, the member who is proposed to be removed shall be given an opportunity to address the Township Board. Pursuant to Section 8(a) of the Open Meetings Act, as a public officer, an Appeals Board member who is subject to dismissal, suspension or discipline may request a closed hearing.
B. A member of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall disqualify himself or herself from voting on a matter in which the member has a conflict of interest. Failure of a member to disqualify himself or herself from voting in a matter in which the member has a conflict of interest constitutes malfeasance in office. A member who is concerned that circumstances related to a matter maybe the source of a conflict of interest, may disclose the circumstances to the Board
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-11 Zoning Ordinance
of Appeals. The Zoning Board of Appeals may then disqualify the member if it finds that a conflict of interest may exist which would impair the ability of the member to render a fair and impartial decision.
16-104.14 APPEALS FROM DECISIONS OF THE BOARD OF APPEALS
A. Any party aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals may appeal to the circuit court as provided by law
B. An appeal from a decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be filed within 30 days after the Zoning Board of Appeals issues its decision in writing signed by the chairperson if there is then a chairperson, or signed by another member of the Zoning Board of Appeals, if there is then no chairperson, or within 21 days after the Zoning Board of Appeals approves the minutes of the meeting at which its decision was taken.
16-105 PLANNING COMMISSION
16-105.01 CREATION OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION
Charter Township of Oakland has created a Planning Commission in accordance with the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Act 33 of 2008, as amended.
16-105.02 MEMBERSHIP OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION
A. The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members. Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the Township Supervisor subject to approval by majority vote of the members of the Township Board elected and serving.
B. The term of each member shall be three years, and until a successor is appointed and qualified, except that any Township Board member appointed as a member of the Planning Commission shall have a term corresponding with that person’s term as a member of the Township Board. The duration of the terms of members first appointed to the Commission shall vary, though not exceeding three years, so that terms will expire in different years. Vacancies in office shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term.
C. The membership of the Planning Commission shall be representative of important segments of the community, such as the economic, governmental, educational, and social development of the local unit of government, in accordance with the major interests, as they exist in the local unit of government, such as agriculture, natural resources, recreation, education, public health, government, transportation, industry, and commerce. The membership shall also be representative of the entire geography of the local unit of government to the extent practicable.
D. Members of the Planning Commission shall be qualified electors of the local unit of government, except that one Planning Commission member may be an individual who is not a qualified elector of the local unit of government.
E. The Township Board may remove a member of the Planning Commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing. Before casting a vote on a matter on which a member may reasonably be considered to have a conflict of interest, the member shall disclose the potential conflict of interest to the Planning Commission. The member is disqualified from voting on the matter if so provided
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-12 Zoning Ordinance
by the bylaws or by a majority vote of the remaining members of the Planning Commission. Failure of a member to disclose a potential conflict of interest as required by this subsection constitutes malfeasance in office. Unless the Township Board, by ordinance, defines conflict of interest for the purposes of this subsection, the Planning Commission shall do so in its bylaws.
16-105.03 OFFICERS OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION
A. The Planning Commission shall elect a chairperson and secretary from its members and create and fill other offices, as it considers advisable. The Township Board member of the Planning Commission is not eligible to serve as chairperson. The term of each officer shall be 1 year, with opportunity for reelection as specified in bylaws adopted under Section 16-105.04.
B. The Planning Commission may appoint advisory committees whose members are not members of the Planning Commission.
16-105.04 PROCEDURES OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION
A. The Planning Commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business, subject to Board of Trustees approval, and shall keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations.
B. The Planning Commission shall make an annual written report to the Township Board concerning its operations and the status of planning activities, including recommendations regarding actions by the Township Board related to planning and development.
16-105.05 MEETINGS OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION
A. The Planning Commission shall hold not less than two regular meetings each year. At its first meeting of each calendar year, the Planning Commission shall adopt and provide public notice of its regular meetings for the ensuing year in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, as amended; provided, however, that a meeting need not be held if pending matters do not warrant a meeting. Unless the bylaws provide otherwise, the secretary shall send written notice of a special meeting to Planning Commission members not less than 48 hours before the meeting.
B. The business that the Planning Commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting of the Planning Commission held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, 1976 PA 267, as amended. Public notice of the time, date, and place of a regular or special meeting shall be given in the manner required by that act.
C. The Township Board, by resolution, has transferred all powers and duties of a Zoning Board to the Planning Commission, as outlined in the Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006, as amended, and as permitted in Section 11 of the Township Planning Act, Act 168 of 1959, as amended.
16-105.06 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
The members of the Planning Commission shall have the following principal duties and responsibilities, among others:
A. To consider and recommend the adoption of this ordinance and amendments to this ordinance.
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-13 Zoning Ordinance
B. To prepare, consider and recommend approval of the Township Master Plan, in accordance with the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, as amended.
C. In accordance with the Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006, as amended, to consider, no less frequently than every five years, whether a revision of the Master Plan or updated amendments in the Master Plan are needed and to prepare, consider and approve any such revisions or amendments.
D. To consider, recommend and/or approve zoning applications and requests assigned to the Commission under the terms of this ordinance, including special land uses and other types of land use approval.
E. To make an annual written report to the Township Board concerning its zoning and planning activities during the previous year and including, if desired, recommendations on zoning and planning changes and amendments.
F. To review and make recommendations on proposed platted subdivisions, condominiums and site condominiums.
G. To carry out other duties and responsibilities provided by law.
16-106 RESERVED
16-107 PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE DECLARED TO BE MINIMUM STANDARDS
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. Wherever the requirements of this ordinance are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.
16-108 NONCONFORMANCE
16-108.01 SCOPE AND INTENT
A. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, constructed, altered or maintained, and no new use or change of use shall be made or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit legal nonconforming lots, structures, or uses to continue until they are brought into conformity, removed, extinguished or forfeited.
B. It is recognized that there exist within the districts established by this ordinance and subsequent amendments, lots, structures, buildings and uses of land which were lawful before this ordinance was passed or amended which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this ordinance or future amendments. Such lots, uses, structures and buildings are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this ordinance that nonconforming lots, structures, uses, and buildings shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other buildings, structures or uses
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-14 Zoning Ordinance
prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
C. To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any lot, building, or structure on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption of this ordinance and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on and is completed to the point of receiving a Certificate of Occupancy within one year of the effective date of this ordinance. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction.
16-108.02 NONCONFORMING LOTS
A. Lots. In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance relating to or affecting the property, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other sections of this ordinance; provided, however, if such lot is below 14,000 square feet in area and is of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership, the owner shall provide additional area so that the lot is at least 14,000 square feet in area. This provision shall apply even though such nonconforming lot of record fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than those applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located, except as may be prescribed by law and this ordinance.
B. Combining Non-Conforming Lots. If two (2) or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage and in single ownership are of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance relating to or affecting the property and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by this ordinance, the lands involved shall be combined to create a conforming lot or a lot with a lesser degree or extent of non-conformity.
16-108.03 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND
Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, a lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this ordinance as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment as applicable, of this ordinance.
B. No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment as applicable, of this ordinance, unless so doing shall make the use less nonconforming.
C. No nonconforming use shall be resumed, where the nonconforming use has been abandoned in accordance with Section 16-108.08.
D. Any use which is approved by the Township Board after the effective date of this ordinance as a Special Land Use in a district under the terms of this ordinance shall not be deemed a
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-15 Zoning Ordinance
nonconforming use in such district, but shall without further action be considered a conforming use.
E. The Township Board may approve as a Special Land Use a use existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance, subject to the limitations and conditions of this ordinance as though such existing use were a newly initiated use, in which case the use would thereafter have the status of a conforming use as provided for above.
16-108.04 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, building height, yards, parking, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, including restrictions on site and building placement, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. A nonconforming structure shall not be enlarged or altered in a way that increases the degree of its nonconformity. However, a structure may be enlarged in a way that does not increase the degree of its nonconformity with regard to its side and rear setbacks or building form, provided that structures shall be a minimum of 3 feet from property lines. For the purposes of this section, the degree of the nonconformity refers to:
1. Any portion of the existing structure which is located in a required yard in the direction of the adjoining property line, and/or
2. The height of any portion of a structure that exceeds the height limits of the district.
B. Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved.
C. Should a nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, provided however that historic structures listed with the local, state, or national register of historic places or districts may be rebuilt on the existing building footprint and to the prior building height, if reconstructed to replicate the original structure destroyed.
16-108.05 NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES AND LAND
If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that would not be permitted in the district under the terms of this ordinance, the nonconforming use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
Existing Non-conforming Structure
A
B
Setback lines
Property lines
Alteration “A” does not increase the degree of nonconformity and would be permitted. Alteration “B increases the degree of nonconformity and is prohibited.
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-16 Zoning Ordinance
lawful, subject to the following provisions:
A. No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
B. The nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building.
C. If no structural alterations are made, the nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or a more restricted classification provided that the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that the proposed use is equally or less nonconforming than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the Zoning Board of Appeals may require conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of this ordinance. Where a nonconforming use of a structure, land, or structure and land in combination is hereafter changed to a more conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to a less conforming use.
D. Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is succeeded or replaced by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
E. No nonconforming use of a structure and land in combination shall be resumed, where the nonconforming use of the principal building or structure has been abandoned in accordance with Section 16-108.08.
F. Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.
16-108.06 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE OF NONCONFORMING USES
On any building or lot devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, provided that the size of the building as it existed on the effective date or amendment of this ordinance shall not be increased. Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any building or part thereof, or parcel declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official.
16-108.07 CHANGE OF TENANCY OR OWNERSHIP
A change of tenancy, ownership or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, of structures, or of structures and land in combination, shall be permitted.
16-108.08 ABANDONMENT
Any nonconforming use, or nonconforming use of structure and land in combination, shall be considered abandoned and such use shall not be resumed thereafter if any of the following conditions apply:
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-17 Zoning Ordinance
A. When the owner declares or otherwise makes evident his intent to discontinue such use as existed at the time of adoption of this ordinance or an amendment to this ordinance.
B. When the nonconforming use, or nonconforming use of structure and land in combination, has been replaced by a conforming structure or use.
C. The cessation of the nonconforming use, or nonconforming use of structure and land in combination, for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months shall result in a rebuttable presumption of the owner's and any lawful occupant's intent to permanently discontinue and abandon the nonconforming use, or nonconforming use of structure and land in combination. At any time after said twelve (12) consecutive month period, the Zoning Administrator may notify the owner and any occupants in writing of said presumption and such writing shall provide the owner and any occupants at least thirty (30) days to rebut the presumption in a writing addressed and delivered to the Zoning Administrator by certified mail with a return receipt. If the owner and occupants fail to provide written evidence rebutting the presumption within said thirty (30) day period, the owner’s and occupant's intent to discontinue and abandon the nonconforming use, or nonconforming use of structure and land in combination, shall thereby be established. The notice from the Zoning Administrator shall be sent by certified mail, with a return receipt, to the owner and any occupants at the mailing address of the owner listed on the Township tax rolls and at the street address of the property in question if a building with an address exists at said location.
16-109 ADMINISTRATION, ZONING COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
Zoning Administrator: For purposes of administering and enforcing this ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the Township. The Zoning Administrator may appoint one or more individuals as his designee or designees to perform all or some of his duties under, and enforce the terms of, this ordinance. Such designee or designees shall have the same powers and authority as the Zoning Administrator to the extent necessary to carry out the designated duties and enforcement.
A. If the Zoning Administrator or his designees finds that any of the provisions of this ordinance are being violated, they shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Except when determined by the Zoning Administrator, Building Director or their designee that an imminent danger or risk to the health or safety of the public exists, prior to issuing a violation under Section 16-109 or 16-111 the Township shall provide in writing to the person responsible the nature of the violation and a reasonable opportunity to correct.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall order discontinuance of an illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations, or structural changes; and discontinuance of any illegal work being done. The Zoning Administrator shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
C. The Zoning Administrator and his designees are authorized to issue notice of violations of this ordinance and to commence such legal proceedings as may be necessary to enforce this ordinance.
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-18 Zoning Ordinance
D. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to grant certificates of zoning compliance, and to make inspections of buildings, structures or premises necessary to carry out their duties and the enforcement of this ordinance.
E. It shall be unlawful for the Zoning Administrator to approve any plans or issue any permits until such plans have been inspected in detail and found to be in compliance with this ordinance and all other applicable ordinances, codes and laws. To this end, the Zoning Administrator shall require that every application for a permit for construction, moving, alteration, or change of use of any structure or building shall be accompanied by a written statement in sufficient detail to enable the Zoning Administrator to ascertain whether the proposed work is in conformance with this ordinance and all other applicable ordinances, codes and laws, as well as:
1. The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot. If the lot is not recorded with the County Registrar of Deeds, a recorded survey and legal description must be provided, and a parcel identification number must be obtained.
2. The shape, size, and location of all buildings and other structures to be erected, altered, or moved, and of any other buildings or other structures already on the lot.
3. The existing and intended use of the lot and of all structures and buildings upon it.
4. Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots or other matters so as to determine whether the provisions of this ordinance are being observed.
5. Any other information required by other sections of this ordinance or by otherwise applicable ordinances, codes or laws, if the applicant is seeking a building permit from the Zoning Administrator.
F. If the proposed construction, moving, alteration, or change of use set forth in the application is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a zoning compliance permit. If an application for such zoning compliance permit is not approved, the Zoning Administrator shall state in writing on an appropriate denial form the cause for such disapproval.
G. The Zoning Administrator may accept a preliminary application and a lesser number of submitted documents in situations where a basic clarification is desired prior to proceeding with further technical work; and the Zoning Administrator may on such preliminary submittal take the formal action of tentative denial or tentative approval.
H. Issuance of a zoning compliance permit shall in no case be construed as waiving any provisions of this ordinance.
I. The Zoning Administrator is under no circumstance permitted to grant exceptions to the actual meaning of any clause, order, or regulation contained in this ordinance to any person making application to construct, move, alter, or use either buildings, structures, or land. The Zoning Administrator is under no circumstances permitted to make changes to this ordinance or to vary the terms of this ordinance in carrying out his duties.
J. The Zoning Administrator shall not refuse to issue a zoning compliance permit when the applicant complies with conditions imposed by this ordinance. Violations of contracts between private parties such as covenants or private agreements, which may result upon the
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-19 Zoning Ordinance
granting of said zoning compliance permit, are not cause for refusal to issue a zoning compliance permit.
K. Where the Zoning Administrator has designated the Building Official as his designee under this section, for purposes of buildings and structures that are otherwise required under this ordinance or other ordinances or statutes to obtain a building permit, the building permit is deemed to include and serve for all purposes as a zoning compliance permit for such structure or building, and no additional application or review fee shall be required beyond the fees charged for the building permit. For all other buildings and structures regulated under this ordinance, including, without limitation, accessory structures, all of the following shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Zoning Administrator in the manner set forth in this section for purposes of obtaining the required zoning compliance permit:
1. An application for issuance of a zoning compliance permit on a form provided by the Zoning Administrator;
2. The materials required under Section 16-109 E; and
3. The payment of application and review fees in amounts to be determined by resolution of the Township Board of Trustees.
16-110 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS
Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written compliant. Such complaint stating fully the cause and basis thereof shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall record properly such complaint, investigate with all due dispatch, and take action thereon as provided by this ordinance.
16-111 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION
Except as stated below, violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances or special land uses) shall constitute a municipal civil infraction and enforcement shall provide notice, when applicable, as set forth in Section 16-109 and thereafter follow the procedures set forth in Ordinance No. 80 of Charter Township of Oakland, as amended.
1) Based on the criteria set forth below and after consultation with the Township Building Director, the Township reserves the right to charge the following violations as a misdemeanor:A second or more alleged violation(s) of a same or similar violation which is charged within one year of the conclusion of the previously charged or ticketed violation, regardless of whether the first charged or ticketed violation has been voluntarily resolved, deferred or dismissed by the Township. Only in the case of a Court finding of no responsibility or guilt as to the first charge will the Township be prohibited from charging a misdemeanor for the second or more violation within 1 year of a same or similar violation(s); or
2) Based upon a reasonable estimate of the Township Building Director, if the cost to correct the alleged violation or the impact of the alleged violation on neighboring property owners or the community is expected to exceed $5,000.00, the Township
General Provisions
Charter Township of Oakland I-20 Zoning Ordinance
Building Director or his/her designee may authorize a misdemeanor charge, regardless of whether or not a prior violation has been issued; or
3) Based on the Township Building Director’s determination that the alleged violation represents an imminent peril or safety concern, the Township Building Director may authorize misdemeanor charges to provide for the immediate safety and health of Township citizens; or
4) In cases where the circumstances of the alleged violation show a clear premeditated intent or willfulness to deceive or misrepresent known facts for the purposes of gaining an advantage under the Zoning Ordinance or the alleged violator is in the process of completing the alleged improper action and has ignored the Township’s directive to cease and desist, the Township Building Director may authorize misdemeanor charges to effectuate immediate corrective action and/or avoid further damage or continued violations of this or any other ordinance or law.
The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the municipality from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation including, but not limited to, further enforcement action and circuit court proceedings.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-1 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE II: DEFINITIONS
16-200 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms and words used herein shall be used, interpreted and defined as set forth in this section. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary:
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense;
B. Words used in the singular number include the plural; and words used in the plural number include the singular;
C. The word "herein" means this ordinance;
D. The word "regulation" means the regulations of this ordinance; and
E. The words "this ordinance" shall mean "the ordinance illustrations, text, tables, maps and schedules included herein, as enacted or subsequently amended."
F. The term "shall" is always mandatory.
G. Lists of examples prefaced by "including the following, "such as," or other similar preface shall not be construed as exclusive and shall not preclude an interpretation of the list including other similar examples which are not expressly mentioned.
H. The term "building", "structure," "premises" or any similar term, shall be interpreted to include any part of the building, structure, premises or other similar term unless otherwise stated.
I. The "Township" is Charter Township of Oakland in the County of Oakland, State of Michigan; and "Zoning Board of Appeals”, “Township Board" and "Planning Commission" are respectively the Zoning Board of Appeals, Township Board of Trustees, and Planning Commission of Charter Township of Oakland.
16-201 DEFINED TERMS
For the purpose of this ordinance, the terms set forth in Sections 16-202 through 16-227 shall take the meaning set forth in this Article. Terms not expressly defined shall be given their customary meaning from common parlance.
16-202 “A”
Access: A way or means of approach to provide vehicular or pedestrian physical entrance to a property or place.
Accessory or Accessory Use: A use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and (except in the case of accessory off-street parking spaces, or loading) located on the same lot as the principal use to which it is related. When "accessory" is used
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-2 Zoning Ordinance
in this text, it shall have the same meaning as accessory use. An accessory use includes, but is not limited to, the following:
A. Residential accommodations for servants and/or caretakers and garages for private vehicles;
B. Swimming pools and tennis courts for the use of the occupants of a residence, or their guests in connection with a residential use;
C. Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, tool room, or similar accessory building or other structure;
D. A newspaper box primarily for the convenience of the occupants of a non-residential building;
E. Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in connection with a business or industrial use, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations;
F. Storage of goods used in or produced by industrial uses or related activities, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations;
G. Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, subject to the accessory off-street parking regulations for the district in which the lot is located;
H. Uses clearly incidental to a main use such as but not limited to: offices of an industrial or commercial complex located on the site of the commercial or industrial complex;
I. Accessory off-street loading, subject to the off-street loading regulations for the district in which the lot is located;
J. Accessory signs, subject to the sign regulations for the district in which the lot is located.
Accessory Building: A building, as defined herein, which is a supplementary building on the same parcel as the principal building, or part of the principal building, occupied by or devoted exclusively to an accessory use.
Accessory Dwelling: A residential dwelling unit, but not a mobile home, located on the same lot as a single-family dwelling unit, either within the same building as the single-family dwelling unit or in a detached building. Secondary dwelling units shall be developed in accordance with the standards set forth in the construction and fire codes and only in those zoning districts where the use is listed as a special land use.
Accessory Structure: A structure which is clearly subordinate or incidental to a principal building or principal use.
Adaptive Reuse: The development of a new use for a building or for a building originally designed for a special or specific purpose. Adaptive reuse may be the redevelopment, including expansion, of a building into apartments or condominiums, which may include some or all of the ground floor, on-street frontage committed to retail, office and service uses.
Adult Family Day Care Home: A state licensed private home in which six (6) or less adults eighteen (18) years of age or older, receive care for periods of less than twenty-four (24)
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-3 Zoning Ordinance
hours a day. It includes facilities for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped that require supervision on an ongoing basis. An adult family day care home does not include alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation centers, residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities which do not meet the definition of adult family day care home.
Adult Foster Care Family Home: A state licensed dwelling with the approved capacity to receive one (1) but not more than six (6) adults who are provided supervision, personal care and protection in addition to room and board, for twenty-four (24) hours a day, five (5) or more days a week, and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks. The adult foster care family home licensee must be a member of the household and an occupant of the dwelling.
Adult Foster Care: A governmental or non-governmental establishment having as its principal function the receiving of adults for foster care. It includes facilities and foster care family homes for adults, who are aged; emotionally disturbed, developmentally disabled, and/or physically handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing basis but who do not require continuous nursing care. Adult foster care does not include any of the following:
A. Hospitals for the mentally ill or a facility for the developmentally disabled operated by the department of mental health under Act 258 of the Public Acts of 1974, as amended;
B. County infirmary operated by a county department of social services under section 55 of Act 280 of the Public Acts of 1939, as amended;
C. A child caring institution, children’s camp, foster family home, or foster family group home licensed or approved under Act 116 of the Public Acts of 1973, as amended;
D. An establishment commonly described as an alcohol or a substance abuse rehabilitation center, a residential facility for persons released from or assigned to adult correctional institutions, a maternity home, or a hotel or rooming house which does not provide or offer to provide foster care; and
E. A veteran’s facility created by Act 152 of the Public Acts of 1885, as amended.
Adult Foster Care Group Center: A state licensed dwelling with the approved capacity to receive more than twelve (12) adults who are provided supervision, personal care and protection in addition to room and board, for twenty-four (24) hours a day, five (5) or more days a week, and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks.
Adult Foster Care Medium Group Home: A state licensed single family dwelling with the approved capacity to receive more than six (6) but not more than twelve (12) adults who are provided supervision, personal care and protection in addition to room and board, for twenty-four (24) hours a day, five (5) or more days a week, and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks.
Adult Foster Care Small Group Home: A state licensed dwelling with the approved capacity to receive one (1) but not more than six (6) adults who are provided supervision, personal care and protection in addition to room and board, for twenty-four (24) hours a day, five (5) or more days a week, and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks.
Adult Group Day Care Home (7-12 clients): A private home in which more than six (6) but not more than twelve (12) adults are given care and supervision for periods of less than
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-4 Zoning Ordinance
twenty-four (24) hours per day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except adults related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Group day care includes a home that gives care to an unrelated adult for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year.
Agriculture: The production, keeping, or maintenance for sale or lease, of plants, including but not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; fruits and vegetables; and ornamental products; and unless expressly prohibited, the keeping of livestock, including but not limited to: dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; cattle and cattle products; or horses. Agriculture does not include forest management and timber harvesting activities.
Alterations: Any change, addition or modification in construction or type of use, or in the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to therein as "altered" or "reconstructed."
Altered: Any change in the location or use of a building, or any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, posts, girders, and similar components, or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls.
Animal: means a nonhuman zoological species, classified for purposes of this chapter as follows:
1. Class I Animal. Domesticated household pets.
2. Class II Animal. An animal which is normally part of the livestock maintained on a farm, including:
a. Bovine and like animals, such as cows (large).
b. Equine and like animals, such as horses (large).
c. Swine and like animals, such as pigs and hogs (large).
d. Ovis (ovine) and like animals, such as sheep and goats (small).
e. Other animals, similar to those listed in Subsection (2) a-d of this definition, weighing in excess of 75 pounds, and not otherwise specifically classified herein.
3. Class III Animal. Rabbits (which are not maintained or kept as domesticated household pets); animals considered as poultry, animals considered as waterfowl, such as pheasant, quail, geese or grouse, and other animals weighing less than 75 pounds not specifically classified herein.
Animal Day Care: A Township approved site with an approved capacity to receive household pets who are provided supervision, personal care and protection for less than eighteen (18) hours a day, five (5) or more days a week, and for two (2) or more consecutive weeks.
Animal Grooming: Any property, structure, building, or premise in or on which pets and other domesticated animals are bathed and/or groomed for commercial gain, but excluding any veterinary or clinical services.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-5 Zoning Ordinance
Apartment: One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities comprising an independent self-contained dwelling unit not owned in fee simple and within a building containing one or more other dwelling units.
Apartment, Efficiency: An apartment consisting of not more than one room in addition to a kitchen and necessary sanitary facilities.
Assisted Living for the Elderly: A building or group of buildings intended to be occupied by older persons as defined by the Fair Housing Act. Assisted Living for the Elderly is housing that provides twenty-four (24) hour supervision and is designed and operated for elderly people who require some level of support for daily living. Residents may receive support services for daily living based on individual needs. Such support shall include daily personal care, meals, transportation, security and housekeeping, individual dwellings may contain kitchen facilities. Assisted Living for the Elderly shall not include convalescent centers/homes or homes for the aged regulated by the State.
Attic: That part of a building that is immediately below and wholly or partly within the roof framing.
Automobile Repair Facility, General: An establishment engaged in the general mechanical repair, including overhaul and reconditioning of motor vehicles, engines, transmissions and other motor vehicle parts, but not including collision repair services, such as body, frame, or fender straightening and repair, and overall painting and undercoating.
Automobile Wash: Any building or premises or portions thereof used for washing and/or detailing automobiles.
Awning or Canopy: Any covered structure made of cloth, metal or other material with supporting frames attached to a building which projects beyond the building wall and/or is carried by a frame supported by the building, ground or sidewalk below it.
16-203 “B”
Basement: That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story.
Bed and Breakfast: A building at which overnight accommodations and a morning meal are provided to transients for compensation, for periods no longer than seven (7) days.
Berm (or earth berm): A landscaped mound of earth which blends with the surrounding terrain.
Boat: A vessel used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water.
Buffer: A landscaped area composed of living material, wall, berm, or combination thereof, established and/or maintained to provide visual screening, noise reduction, and/or transition between conflicting types of land uses.
Buffer Area: An area which does not have any structures, which is designed to buffer noise, light, visual and/or other impacts by use of distance or setback greater than otherwise
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-6 Zoning Ordinance
required, berm, walls, fences, and/or vegetation between incompatible land uses. (See also Vegetation Belt, Greenbelt.)
Building: Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, use, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind.
Building Area: The minimum area of a lot, excluding required setback areas, that is capable of being improved with such items as buildings, structures and lawn area, and does not contain any wetlands, floodplain, or under water.
Building Department: The Building Department of the Charter Township of Oakland, Michigan.
Building Envelope: The three-dimensional space on a lot within which a structure is permitted to be built, which is defined by maximum building height regulations and minimum yard setbacks under this ordinance.
Building Footprint: The total area contained within the exterior foundation or framing area taken on a horizontal plane at the largest floor level of a building or an accessory building exclusive of unroofed porches, terraces, patios, decks, and steps, and of awnings and nonpermanent canopies.
Building Height: The vertical distance measured from the finished grade at the principal entrance to the average height of the highest roof surface. Average height shall be determined using the lowest point of the eave to the highest point of the roof.
Building Official: The person(s) designated by the Township Board to administer, implement and enforce the Michigan Residential Code.
Build-to Zone: That area between a line a certain distance from the right-of-way line and a line parallel thereto, within which the front of the building shall be built.
16-204 “C”
Camps or Campgrounds: A parcel or tract of land under the control of a person in which sites are offered for the use of the public or members of an organization, either free of charge or for a fee, for the establishment of temporary living quarters for 5 or more recreational units as defined in Public Act 386 of 1978, as amended.
Caretaker Residence: A permanent residence secondary and accessory to an existing dwelling for persons employed principally on-site for purposes of care and protection of persons, property, plants, animals, equipment, or other circumstances on site or on contiguous lots under the same ownership.
Carport: A roofed structure providing space for the parking of one or more vehicles and enclosed on not more than three sides.
Cemetery: Grounds and facilities including any one (1) or a combination of more than one (1) of the following (as per MCL 456.522): a burial ground for earth interment; a mausoleum for crypt entombment; a crematory for the cremation of human remains; and a columbarium for the deposit of cremated remains.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-7 Zoning Ordinance
Cemetery, Private: A cemetery as defined above but owned and operated by a party other that Charter Township of Oakland.
Child Foster Family Home: A state licensed dwelling used as a full time foster family home for one (1) but not more than four (4) children who are unrelated to the other occupants thereof.
Church: see Place of Public Assembly
Cider Mill: Any building used for the grinding of apples into cider or juice as well as for the storage of apples.
Clinic: A facility for the medical or dental care, diagnosis, or treatment of sick, ailing, infirm and injured persons and those who are in need of medical, dental, or minor surgical care attention, but who are not kept on the premises for more than eight (8) hours.
Club: An organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics, or the like, but not operated for profit.
Column: An architectural support of definite proportions, usually cylindrical in shape, with shaft, capital, and sometimes a base. May be free-standing or attached to a wall.
Commercial: Any activity conducted with the desire, intent or reasonable expectation of realizing a profit from the sale of goods or services to others.
Commercial Vehicle: Any motor vehicle for hire, which is used for the transportation of passengers, or any motor vehicle which is constructed or used in the course of a commercial business for the transportation of people, goods, wares, merchandise, equipment or supplies, or which is designed and used for the purpose of transporting other vehicles.
Communication Antennas, Private: A privately-owned apparatus installed out-of-doors which is capable of receiving or transmitting communications for radio and/or television, including satellite dish reception antennas, amateur radio transmitting and receiving antennas but excluding such antennas as commercial radio and television and microwave communication towers. Excluded are such other facilities as have been preempted from Township regulation by applicable State or Federal laws and regulations.
Condominium: A building or group of buildings in which individual portions thereof are designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed, regardless of whether it is intended for residential, office, industrial, business, recreational, use as a time-share unit, or any other type of use as prescribed in Act 59 of the Michigan Acts of 1978, as amended. The following condominium terms shall apply in the application of this Ordinance:
Condominium Act: Means Public Act No. 49 or 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.).
Condominium Documents: The master deed, recorded pursuant to the Condominium Act, and any other instrument referred to in the master deed or bylaws which affects the rights and obligations of a co-owner in the condominium.
Condominium Lot: The land in a condominium unit, together with the land in the adjacent and appurtenant limited common element, if there is such a limited common element.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-8 Zoning Ordinance
Condominium Structure or Building Envelope: The principle building or structure for or constructed upon a lot or condominium unit, together with any attached accessory structures, e.g., in a residential development, the condominium structure or building envelope would refer to the house and any accessory buildings.
Condominium Subdivision Plan: The drawings and information prepared in accordance with Section 66 of the Condominium Act.
Condominium Unit: The portion of a condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed.
Consolidating Master Deed: The final amended master deed for a contractible or expandable condominium project or a condominium project containing convertible land or convertible space, which final amended master deed fully describes the condominium project as completed.
Contractible Condominium: A condominium project containing condominium units some or all of which were occupied before the filing of a notice of taking reservations under Section 7 of the Condominium Act.
Expandable Condominium: A condominium project to which additional land may be added in accordance with this Ordinance and the Condominium Act.
General Common Elements: A portion of the common elements reserved in the master deed for the use of all of the co-owners.
Limited Common Elements: A portion of the common elements reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all of the co-owners.
Master Deed: The condominium document recording the condominium project to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference bylaws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan for the project, and all other information required by Section 8 of the Condominium Act.
Notice of Proposed Action: the notice required by Section 71 of the Condominium Act, to be filed with Oakland Township and other agencies.
Site Condominium: A condominium development containing residential, commercial, office, industrial, or other structures or improvements for uses permitted in the zoning district in which the condominium development is located, in which each co-owner owns the exclusive right to a volume of space within which each co-owner my construct a structure or structures.
Conference or Convention Center: See Place of Public Assembly
Conflicting Non-Residential Land Use: Any non-residential use, such as office, commercial, industrial, research, parking or public road right-of-way land use which abuts a residential land use.
Conflicting Residential Land Use: Any residential land use developed at a higher density which abuts a residential land use developed at a lower density.
Conservation Easement: A non-possessory interest in real property imposing limitations or affirmative obligations, the purposes of which include retaining or protecting natural, scenic,
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-9 Zoning Ordinance
and/or open space values of real property; assuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational, or open space use; protecting natural resources; or maintaining air or water quality.
Convalescent Center: A state licensed medical-care institution providing 24 hour medical services for patients recovering from acute or postoperative conditions.
Convenience Store: Any retail establishment offering for sale prepackaged food products, household items, newspapers and magazines, and sandwiches and other freshly prepared foods, such as salads, for off-site consumption. The sale of gasoline may or may not be included in the business.
Critical Root Zone: The area within a radius surrounding the tree trunk of one foot per one inch DBH of tree diameter. For example, a 20 inch DBH tree has a critical root zone with a radius of 20 feet. If the drip line of a tree extends beyond the area determined by this formula, the drip line radius shall determine the critical root zone.
16-205 “D”
Damaged Tree: An injured tree that has lost more than 25% of its canopy, is no longer viable, and/or may cause harm. Condition determinations shall be made during the growing season from April through October.
Dark Skies: Night time environment in which excessive light pollution, glare, and light trespass are reduced.
Day Care, Commercial (13+ clients): A facility, other than a private residence, receiving one (1) or more preschool or school age children for care for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child. The commercial day care includes a facility that provides care for not less than two (2) consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per day. The facility is generally described as a child care center, day care center, day nursery, nursery school, parent cooperative preschool, play group, before- or after-school program, or drop-in center. Commercial day care center or day care center does not include any of the following:
A. A Sunday school, a vacation bible school, or a religious instructional class that is conducted by a religious organization where children are in attendance for not more than 3 hours per day for an indefinite period, or not more than 8 hours per day for a period not to exceed 4 weeks during a 12-month period.
B. A facility operated by a religious organization where children are cared for not more than 3 hours while persons responsible for the children are attending religious services.
C. A program that is primarily supervised, school-age-child-focused training in a specific subject, including, but not limited to, dancing, drama, music, or religion. This exclusion applies only to the time a child is involved in supervised, school-age-child-focused training.
D. A program this is primarily an incident of group athletic or social activities for school-age children sponsored by or under the supervision of an organized club or hobby group, including, but not limited to, youth clubs, scouting, and school-age
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-10 Zoning Ordinance
recreational or supplementary education programs. This exclusion applies only to the time the school-age child is engaged in the group athletic or social activities and if the school-age child can come and go at will.
Day Care Facility (6 clients): A private home in which one (1) but fewer than seven (7) minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. A day care facility includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year.
Day Care, Group (7-12 clients): A private home in which more than six (6) but not more than twelve (12) minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours per day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Group day care includes a home that gives care to an unrelated minor child for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year.
Dead Tree: A tree with no more than fifteen (15) percent of its canopy with leaves. Condition determinations shall be made during the growing season from April through October.
Deck: An exterior structure or platform supported by pillars or posts, either attached or unattached to a building, that is higher than seven (7) inches above grade at any portion of the structure or platform, and which does not contain walls.
Density: The number of dwellings per unit of land.
Development: The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure or building; any mining, excavation, landfills, or land disturbance; and any use or extension of the use of land.
Diameter at Breast Height (dbh): The diameter of a tree trunk, or, in the case of a multi-trunk tree, the total of the diameter of the largest trunk and one half (½) of the diameter of each additional trunk, measured at a height of 4 ½ feet above the ground.
Diseased Tree: A tree with a terminal disease or pest infestation, such as but not limited to, Dutch elm disease, oak wilt, or emerald ash borer. The said disease or pest infestation must be by confirmed a certified arborist or similar qualified professional.
District, Zoning: A part, zone, or geographic area within the Township within which certain zoning or development regulations apply.
Drip Line: An area delineated by projection of the periphery of the crown area of a tree down to the ground surface.
Drip Line radius: A radius equal to the horizontal distance from the trunk of the tree to the end of the longest branch.
Drive-through Business: A principal use or accessory use of an establishment that by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures encourages and/or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods, or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-11 Zoning Ordinance
Driveway: A private roadway providing access to a street.
Driveway, Shared and/or Common: A driveway serving two or more structures or off-street parking areas that are located on individual lots.
Dry Cleaning and/or Laundry Establishment: A commercial establishment providing dry cleaning and laundry services on-site for businesses and residents, but which does not include a dry cleaning plant.
Dry Cleaning and/or Laundry Establishment, On-Site: A commercial establishment providing dry cleaning and laundry services on-site for businesses and residents and which includes a dry cleaning plant.
Dumpster: An accessory use of a property where trash and/or recyclable material, and/or other type of waste or refuse, is stored temporarily, having a capacity of at least one cubic yard.
Dwelling Unit: One or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarter, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single family maintaining a household.
Dwelling, Manufactured: A single-family dwelling which is substantially or completely built, constructed, assembled or finished off the premises upon which it is intended to be located and which meets the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act and associated codes and regulations.
Dwelling, Multiple-Family: A building containing three (3) or more attached dwelling units and is surrounded by open space and/or yards.
Dwelling, Single-Family: A building containing one (1) dwelling unit and that is not attached to any other dwelling by any means and is surrounded by open space or yards.
Dwelling, Two-Family: A building containing two attached (2) dwelling units and is surrounded by open space and/or yards.
16-206 “E”
Easement: An interest in real property granted or conveyed by landowners to other landowners, public utilities, and/or persons, for a specific purpose such as but not limited to utilities, driveways, pipeline, and pedestrian ways.
Eave: The projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building.
Educational Facility: Any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed, or used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge.
Environmental Assessment: A summary review of environmental impacts of a project, activity or development.
Erect: To build, construct, alter, reconstruct, move upon, or any physical operation on the premises which are required for construction, excavation, fill, drainage, or the like.
Essential Services: The erection, construction, alteration, installation, placement, use, repair or maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental entities or agencies of
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-12 Zoning Ordinance
underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel, sewage, drainage or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, towers, antennae, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals and hydrants in connection therewith, but not including buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal or other governmental entities or agencies for the general health, safety or welfare. Essential services shall be exempt from this Ordinance.
Excavation: Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care.
Exception: Permission to depart from the use or design standards of this ordinance provided an “exception” is not a “variance.”
Exotic Animal: Any species of animal, reptile, or bird that is not indigenous to the environs of Michigan and which is not customarily classified as a farm animal or a pet and which may potentially be dangerous to humans, domestic animals or property if not properly managed.
16-207 “F”
Family: A single individual or individuals, domiciled together whose relationship is of a continuing, non-transient, domestic character and who are cooking and living together as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit, but not including any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie, organization, or group of students or other individuals whose relationship is of a transitory or seasonal nature, or for anticipated limited duration of school terms, or other similar determinable period of time.
Farm: A type of land use as defined in the Right to Farm Act, PA 93 of 1981, as amended.
Farm Animals (or Livestock): Animals customarily kept by humans for the purpose of providing food, clothing or work, and which are customarily raised for profit, including but not limited to, equine, bovine, ovine, caprice, porcine, fowl, fish, shell fish and bees. (Also see animal definition)
Fence: An artificially constructed outdoor barrier of any material and/or combination of materials erected to enclose, screen, and/or separate areas.
Financial Institution: Any building wherein the primary occupation is concerned with such federal or state-regulated businesses as banking, savings and loans, loan companies, and investment companies.
Flag: Any fabric or other flexible material attached to or designed to be flown from a flagpole or similar device.
Flood Insurance Study: The official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration. The report contains flood profiles, as well as Flood Hazard Boundary-Floodway Map and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
Floodplain: That portion of land adjacent to or connected to a water body or water course which is subject to periodic inundation in accordance with the one hundred (100) year flood cycle as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other applicable federal agency.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-13 Zoning Ordinance
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas designated in the Flood Insurance Study that must be preserved in order to discharge the base flood.
Floor Area, Gross: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of one or more floors of a building or structure, but excluding a basement, a garage, a breezeway, a porch or other similar area, from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings, but excluding any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six (6) feet.
Floor Area, Usable: The sum of the horizontal areas of one or more floors of the building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls; including those areas used for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients and/or customers; and not including those areas which are used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, hallways, or for utilities or sanitary facilities.
Footprint: see Building Footprint
Funeral Home: see Mortuary
16-208 “G”
Garage: A structure that is accessory to a residential building (attached or unattached) and that is or can be used for the parking and storage of vehicles owned and operated by the residents thereof and that is not a separate commercial enterprise available to the general public.
Gas Station: Any building, structure, or area of land used for the retail sale of vehicle fuels, oils, and accessories, where repair service, if any, is incidental. A convenience store may or may not be included with a gas station.
Genotype: Refers to the genetic origin and constitution of wild-type plant stock and its adaptation to a particular locality.
Golf Course: A tract of land laid out for at least nine holes for playing the game of golf and improved with tees, greens, and fairways and that may include a clubhouse, driving range, pro shop, shelter, and/or related accessory uses.
Grade, Average: The average finished grade elevation along the perimeter of the building.
Grade, Finished: The final elevation of the ground level after development.
Grade, Natural: The elevation of the ground level in its natural state, before construction, development, filling, or excavation.
Grasslands: Areas where the vegetation is dominated by grasses (poaceae) and other herbaceous (non-woody) plants (forbs).
Greenbelt: A landscape area or lawn panel in which live plantings are placed for aesthetic purposes and not for the purpose of screening and which may include an earth berm.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-14 Zoning Ordinance
Greenhouse: A building whose roof and/or sides are made largely of glass or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of delicate or out-of-season plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment.
Groundcover: Low-growing to prostrate shrubs, woody vegetation, wildflowers, and other small herbaceous plants.
Growing Season: Time of active plant growth from April through October in Michigan.
16-209 “H”
Hazardous Substances: One or more of the following:
A. A chemical or other material which is or may become injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare or to the environment.
B. “Hazardous substance” as defined in the Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, Public Law 96-510, 94 Stat. 2767.
C. “Hazardous waste” as defined in Article II Chapter 3 Part 111 of P.A. 451 of 1994, as amended, (being the Hazardous Waste Management part of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act. MCL 342.45101 et. seq.)
D. “Petroleum” as defined in Article II Chapter 8 Part 213 of P.A. 451 of 1994, as amended, (being the Leaking Underground Storage Tanks part of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, MCL 324.45101 et. seq.)
Historical Resource: A publicly or privately owned building, structure, site, object, feature, or open space that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture of this state or a community within this state, or of the United States.
Hobby: An activity, craft or course of study carried on by a person on a regular or repeated basis primarily for pleasure, entertainment or self-enrichment, but not as a business or vocation.
Home Occupation: Any occupation, profession or activity carried out for gain from a residential property that is clearly subordinate and incidental to the residential nature of the property.
Homes for the Aged: supervised personal care facility, other than a hotel, adult foster care facility, hospital, nursing home, or county medical care facility that provides room, board, and supervised personal care to twenty-one (21) or more unrelated non-transient individuals 60 years of age or older. Home for the aged includes a supervised personal care facility for 20 or fewer individuals 60 years of age of older if the facility is operated in conjunction with and as a distinct part of a licensed nursing home MCL 333.20106(3).
Hospital: A facility providing health services primarily for in-patient medical or surgical care of the sick or injured and including related facilities such as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service facilities and/or staff offices which are an integral part of the hospital facility.
Hotel: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the public with access from interior lobbies and which may provide additional services, such as restaurants, meeting rooms, entertainment, and/or recreational facilities.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-15 Zoning Ordinance
16-210 “I”
Independent Living for the Elderly: A building or group of buildings intended to be occupied by older persons as defined by the Fair Housing Act. Independent Living for the Elderly is housing that is designed and operated for elderly people in good health, aged 55 years and older, who desire and are capable of maintaining independent households, and do not require assistance to meet daily needs. Such housing may provide certain services such as meals, linkage to health care, transportation, security, housekeeping, and recreational and social activities. Project site shall be designed to accommodate an active and mobile resident population. Individual dwellings are designed to promote independent living and shall contain kitchen facilities. Independent Living for the Elderly shall not include convalescent centers/homes or homes for the aged regulated by the state.
Invasive Plants (Species): Includes all plant species identified as invasive within this ordinance; all plant species regulated by the Michigan Department of Agriculture as prohibited or restricted plant species or noxious weeds under the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (Act 451 of 1994), as amended); and all plant species listed in A Field Identification Guide to Invasive Plant Species in Michigan’s Natural Communities published by Michigan State University Extension and the Michigan Natural Features Inventory (September 2009, or most recent edition).
16-211 “J”
Junk: Scrap or waste material of whatsoever kind or nature collected or accumulated for resale, disposal, or storage.
Junkyard: Any area, lot, land, parcel, building, or structure, or part thereof, used for the storage, collection, processing, purchase, sale, salvage, or disposal of junk.
16-212 “K”
Kennel: Any place where four or more domestic animals over three months of age are kept, temporarily or permanently for the purposes of breeding, boarding or sale.
16-213 “L”
Land Division: A land division as defined in the Land Division Act of the State of Michigan, being Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended.
Landscaping: Any combination of deciduous and conifer trees, lawn, shrubbery, flowering plants, decorative grasses, ground cover or other vegetation, as well as land forms, walls, fencing, stone, timber or similar structures all intended to improve the aesthetics, security buffering or to otherwise enhance a developed site.
LEED: The LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) Green Building Rating System®, being a voluntary, consensus-based national standard for developing high-performance, sustainable buildings.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-16 Zoning Ordinance
THROUGH
LOT
CORNER
LOT
CORNER
LOT
FLAG
LOT
Street Right-of-Way
CORNER
LOT
CORNER
LOT
Light Pollution: Any adverse effect of artificial light including sky glow, glare, light trespass, light clutter, decreased visibility at night and energy waste.
Light Trespass: Any direct beam of light from an artificial light source which is visible from a property other than that which hosts said source of light.
Livestock: See “Farm Animals”
Loading Space: An off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials.
Lot: A parcel, lot of record, platted subdivision lot, site condominium lot, and a parcel described by metes and bounds of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal uses and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions of this ordinance. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records.
Lot Area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any portion of the right-of-way of any public or private street or easement of access.
Lot, Corner: A lot where the interior angle of two (2) adjacent sides at the intersection of two (2) streets is less than one hundred and thirty-five (135) degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this ordinance if the arc is of less radius than one hundred fifty (150) feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two (2) points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
Lot Coverage: That part or percentage of the lot occupied by buildings, including accessory buildings.
Lot Depth: The horizontal distance from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line or to the rear most point of the lot where there is no rear lot line. For irregularly-shaped lots, lot depth shall be considered to be the distance between the mid-points of straight lines connecting the end points of the side lot lines at the front and the rear.
Lot, Flag: Flag lot means a lot, the major portion of which has access to a street by means of a comparatively narrow strip of land.
Lot Frontage: The distance between side lot lines at the street right-of-way. If the side lot lines do not intersect the street right-of-way, the lot frontage shall be only that portion of the lot line abutting the street that coincides with the street right-of-way. For an arc-shaped lot line, the lot frontage shall be the tangent or chord dimension toward the interior of the lot.
Lot, Interior: Any lot other than a corner lot.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-17 Zoning Ordinance
Lot Lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined herein:
A. Front Lot Line: In the case of an interior lot, the front lot line is that line separating the lot from the street. In the case of a through lot, the front lot lines are the lines separating the lot from both abutting streets. In the case of a corner lot, the shorter street line may be considered the front lot line; except where both street lines are equal where the choice may be made at the discretion of the property owner. However, once declared, the designated front lot line shall remain as such. In the case of a waterfront lot, the front lot line is that line abutting the body of water.
B. Rear Lot Line: That lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten (10) feet long lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot.
C. Side Lot Line: Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line.
Lot of Record: A parcel of land shown on a document or map on file with the Oakland County Register of Deeds or in common use by Township or county officials, and which actually exist as so shown, or any part of such parcel held in a record ownership separate from that of the remainder thereof. A lot of record is not necessarily in compliance with this ordinance (i.e., it may be non-conforming lot).
Lot, Through: A lot that fronts upon two more or less parallel streets or that fronts upon two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
Lot Width: The horizontal straight-line distance between the side lot lines, measured between the two (2) points where the front setback line intersects the side lot lines.
16-214 “M”
Manufactured Home: A dwelling which is transportable in one or more sections, that is built on a permanent chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and is installed by a Michigan Licensed Manufactured Home dealer or Michigan Licensed Mobile Home installer as required by Michigan statute, and administrative rules promulgated hereunder.
Manufactured Housing Community: A use which is a parcel of land under the control of a person upon which three or more manufactured homes are located on a continual, non-recreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose regardless of whether a charge is made therefore, together with any building, structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended for use incidental to the occupancy of a manufactured home and which is not intended for use as a temporary manufactured home or trailer.
Manufacturing, Compounding, or Processing Facility: An enclosed establishment engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the assembling of component parts, the creation of products, and the blending of materials, usually in a continuous and regular action or succession of actions.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-18 Zoning Ordinance
Manufacturing Facilities: The manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales, and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing and custom manufacturing. Further, industrial shall mean uses such as the manufacture of electronic instruments, preparation of food products, pharmaceutical manufacturing, research and scientific laboratories, or the like. Manufacturing shall not include uses such as mining and extracting industries, petrochemical industries, rubber refining, primary metal, or related industries.
Master Deed: A legal instrument under which title to real estate is conveyed and by which a condominium is created and established.
Master Plan: The comprehensive, long-range master plan intended to guide growth and development in Charter Township of Oakland which includes recommendations on future land use, economic development, housing, recreation, transportation, open space, and community facilities.
Medical Office: A facility in which medical, health and related providers maintain offices and provide services to patients on an outpatient basis.
Mezzanine: An intermediate floor in any story occupying one-third (1/3) or less of the floor area of such story.
Mini/Self Storage Facility: A structure or group of structures for the storage of customer’s goods and wares where individual stalls or lockers, each having an exterior door, are rented out to different tenants for storage accessible by the owner or tenant on an unlimited basis and where each stall or locker has less than five hundred (500) square feet of floor space.
Mixed-Use Development: A development of a tract of land, building, or structure with a variety of complementary and integrated uses, such as, but not limited to, residential, office, manufacturing, retail, public, or entertainment, in a compact urban form.
Mortuary or Funeral Home: A facility used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and for visitation and for the conduct of memorial and funeral services.
Motel: An establishment providing sleeping accommodations with a majority of all rooms having direct access to the outside without the necessity of passing through the main lobby of the building.
Multi-tenant Commercial Establishment: A building housing more than one business operated under common management, or a unified grouping of individual businesses, served by a common circulation and parking system.
16-215 “N”
Native Plants: A native plant is one that is indigenous to a specified area. For the purposes of this ordinance, nativity refers to being indigenous to Michigan. These plants can be trees, flowers, grasses, or any other plant. Refer to the Floristic Quality Assessment with Wetland Categories and Examples of Computer Applications for the State of Michigan, Appendix C, Michigan Plants Database (Revised, 2nd Edition, October 2001, or most recent version) by
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-19 Zoning Ordinance
the Michigan Department of Natural Resources, Wildlife Division, Natural Heritage to determine if individual plant species are native or adventive to Michigan.
Natural Feature: A natural feature shall mean a wetland, as defined in the Township Wetlands Ordinance, as amended and shall mean a water -course, including a lake, pond, river or stream, and which may also include a creek which may or may not be serving as a drain as defined by Act 40 of the Public Acts of 1956, as amended, or any other body of water which has definite banks, a bed and visible evidence of a continued flow or continued occurrence of water.
Nonconforming Lot: A lot, the area, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the applicable zoning district or other zoning regulations.
Nonconforming Structure or Building: A structure, building or portion thereof lawfully existing before the effective date of this ordinance, or the effective date of amendments hereto, which thereafter does not conform to the provisions in the district in which it is located relative to building height, bulk, area or setbacks.
Nonconforming Use: A use, which lawfully occupied a building or land before the effective date of this ordinance, or the effective date of amendments thereafter, which does not contain a use of land permitted in the district in which it is located.
Nursery: Premises, including land and structures, or combination thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants and products used for gardening or landscaping offered for retail sale on the premises. The definition of nursery does not include any space, building or structure used for the sale of fruit, vegetables or Christmas trees.
Nursing Home/Assisted Living Facility: see Adult Foster Care, A residential care facility providing long-term care for elderly, infirm, terminally-ill, physically, emotionally and/or developmentally disabled persons, licensed in accord with Article 17 of Act 368 of 1978, as amended.
16-216 “O”
Office Building: A building used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, or government, or like activity, and may include ancillary services for office workers, such as a coffee shop or child-care facilities.
Off-Street Parking Lot: A facility providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles, for maneuvering, so as to provide entrance and exit for the parking of more than three (3) vehicles.
Oil and Gas Structure: Any process facility or equipment, any building, machinery, equipment and/or other structure used for or in connection with the production, processing, or transmitting (but not off-premise vehicle transport) of natural gas, oil or allied products or substances, which includes but is not limited to any pipeline, flowline, sweetening plants, separators, central processing facilities, compression facilities, CO2 removal facilities, bulk storage plants, H2S removal facilities, dehydration facilities, compressor stations, pigging stations, metering facilities or any other facility, mud pits or brine disposal pits related to
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-20 Zoning Ordinance
exploring, drilling, production or operating an oil and gas well. Processing or related oil and gas facility may also be referred to as any type of on-site or off-site “separating facilities” or “sweetening facilities”. However, “oil and gas structure” does not include the exploration, drilling, completion, operation, or abandonment of any oil and gas well exempted by the Zoning Enabling Act, or any such facility which is under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Supervisor of Wells. For the purposes of this Ordinance, an oil and gas structure is not considered an “essential service”.
Open Air Business: A business including the sales and/or display of retail merchandise or services outside of a permanent structure.
Open Space, Common: An area within a development designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of all residents or occupants of the development or for the use and enjoyment of the public in general.
Ordinance: The Zoning Ordinance of Charter Township of Oakland as adopted.
Ordinary High Water Mark: The line between upland and bottomland that persists through successive changes in water levels, below which the presence and action of the water is so common or recurrent that the character of the land is marked distinctly from the upland and is apparent in the soil itself, the configuration of the surface of the soil and the vegetation.
16-217 “P”
Parapet: That portion of a wall that extends above the roof line.
Parcel: A continuous area or acreage of land in common ownership.
Park, Public: A parcel of land, designated, maintained and used by the public for active and/or passive recreation and which is owned and controlled by a public entity or unit of government.
Parking Space: An area of definite length and width intended and/or used for the parking of permitted vehicles, such area shall be exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto.
Parking Space, Off-street: A parking space located on premises other than on a street.
Parkway: A lawn panel customarily located between the curb line, or pavement edge of a street or road, and the street or road right-of-way line.
Patio: A level, landscaped, and/or surfaced area directly adjacent to a principal building at or within seven (7) inches of the finished grade and not covered by a permanent roof.
Permitted Use: Any use allowed by right in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district.
Personal Service Business: An establishment primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his or her goods or apparel.
Pet: Any animal that has been bred or raised to live in or about the habitation of humans and is dependent on people for food and shelter.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-21 Zoning Ordinance
Place of Public Assembly: Buildings, structures and grounds, including theaters, churches, synagogues, mosques, temples, and other places of religious worship, auditoriums, sports arenas, assembly halls, halls for civic clubs and organizations, conference and convention centers, concert halls, lecture halls, community centers and other similar facilities intended for commercial or non-commercial entertainment, instruction, worship or similar activities involving assembled groups of people numbering thirty (30) or more.
Plant Material: A collection of living evergreen and/or deciduous, woody-stemmed trees, shrubs, vines and/or ground cover.
Pond, Detention: A pond designed to temporarily detain storm water runoff for a short period of time, gradually releasing it to the natural watercourse immediately after the peak volume of storm water has dissipated.
Pond, Retention: A pond designed and intended to hold water for a considerable length of time for aesthetic or consumptive purposes as well as for the collection and holding of storm water runoff, the volume of which may never be totally discharged to a natural watercourse.
Porch: A patio or deck that is either fully or partially enclosed with screening, glazing or other means of enclosure, whether or not it is heated or cooled by mechanical means.
Portico: A porch or covered walk consisting of a roof supported by columns.
Power Generating Facility: A facility designed and used for the production of electrical energy primarily for the purpose of commercial sale to wholesale and retail customers connected to electrical transmission grid. Such facilities may include coal, diesel, fuel oil, nuclear, natural gas combustion as well as solid waste incinerators.
Principal Building: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is located.
Principal Use: The main use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist.
Professional Service Establishment: An establishment engaged in providing assistance, as opposed to products, to individuals, businesses, industries, governments, and other enterprises, including printing, legal, engineering, consulting, accounting, and other similar services.
Public and Quasi-Public Uses: Any publicly owned parks, playgrounds, cemetery, trails, paths, and other recreational areas and open space, scenic and historic sites, and other buildings and structures, and other places where the public is directly or indirectly invited to visit or permitted to congregate excluding Township buildings and uses subject to the Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006, as amended.
Public Service Building: A building belonging to or used by the public for the transaction of public or quasi-public business excluding Township buildings and uses subject to the Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006, as amended.
Public Utilities: Any facility, including but not limited to buildings, property, and roads, which are leased or otherwise operated or funded by a governmental body or public entity.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-22 Zoning Ordinance
16-218 “Q”
16-219 “R”
Recreation Facility: A place designed and equipped for the conduct of sports and leisure-time activities.
Recreation Facility, Indoor: A permanent building containing facilities for recreational activities, such as tennis, bowling, billiards, platform games, swimming, exercise rooms, handball and similar activities.
Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle designed or constructed for the transportation of people, primarily for recreational purposes including, but not limited to off-road vehicles, boats and utility trailers and such other vehicles which may permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place such as motor homes, campers, camper trailers.
Research and Development Facility/Establishment: An establishment for carrying on investigation in the natural, physical, or social sciences, which may include engineering and product development, but which does not involve the mass manufacture, fabrication, processing, or sale of products or services.
Residential Above Retail: A mixture of land uses in which one or more dwelling units are located on floors or stories above retail businesses.
Restaurant. A restaurant is any establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose method of operation is characteristic of a carry-out, drive-in, drive-through, fast food, standard sit-down restaurant, or bar/lounge, or combination thereof, as defined below.
A. Restaurant, Carry-Out. A carry-out restaurant is a restaurant whose method of operation involves sale of food, beverages, and/or frozen desserts in disposable or edible containers or wrappers in a ready-to-consume state for consumption primarily off of the premises.
B. Restaurant, Drive-In or Drive-Through. Drive-in or drive-through restaurants shall be deemed to be any restaurant designed to permit or facilitate the serving of meals, sandwiches, ice cream, beverages, or other food served directly to or permitted to be consumed by patrons in cars or other vehicles parked on the premises, or permitted to be consumed by patrons elsewhere on the site outside the main building or off the premises.
C. Restaurant, Fast-Food. A fast-food restaurant is a restaurant whose method of operation involves minimum waiting for delivery of ready-to-consume food to the customer at a counter or cafeteria line for consumption at the counter where it is served, or at tables, booths, or stands inside or outside of the structure, or for consumption off the premises, but not in a motor vehicle at the site.
D. Restaurant, Sit Down. A sit-down restaurant is a restaurant whose method of operation involves either the delivery of prepared food by waiters and waitresses to customers seated at tables within a completely enclosed building, or the prepared
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-23 Zoning Ordinance
food is acquired by customers at a cafeteria line and is subsequently consumed by the customers at tables within a completely enclosed building.
Retail Sales: An establishment engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.
Riding Academy: An establishment where horses are boarded and cared for, and may be hired for instruction in riding, jumping, and/or showing.
Right-of-way: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, statute, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, sidewalk, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, and/or other similar uses.
Right to Farm Act: A State law, PA 93 of 1981 as amended, designed to protect farmers from nuisance lawsuits.
Roadside Stand: A structure erected for the display and sale of agricultural products primarily produced on the premises and may sell up to five products not of an agricultural nature.
Roof: The cover of any building, including the eaves and similar projections.
Roof Pitch: The amount of slope of the roofline in terms of angle or other numerical measure; for example one unit of vertical rise for three units of horizontal shelter is expressed as “1:3” or “one on three.”
Rubbish: Waste, rejected material, trash or debris.
16-220 “S”
Safety Path: An asphalt, concrete or boardwalk path between 8 and 10 feet wide open to the public and is intended for joint pedestrian and bicycle use.
Satellite Dish: See Dish Antenna.
Screen: To conceal from view; or a structure or landscape materials providing enclosure and a visual barrier between the area enclosed and adjacent properties and rights-of-way.
Screening: A method of visually shielding or obscuring an abutting or nearby use or structure from another by fencing, walls, berms, or densely planted vegetation.
Service Drive: A minor public or private street or driveway which may be parallel to and adjacent to a major street, and which provides access to abutting properties and restricts access to the major street.
Service or Retail Establishment Accessory to a Principal Use: An establishment whose primary activity is the provision of assistance or products, to individuals, business, industry, government, and other enterprises, and which is located interior to or inside an office building or other principal use.
Setback: The distance required to obtain minimum front, side or rear yard open space provisions of this ordinance.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-24 Zoning Ordinance
Showroom: An indoor arrangement of objects, items, products, or other materials, typically not in a fixed position and capable of rearrangement, designed and used for the purpose of advertising a business, product or service.
Sidewalk: A paved or surfaced area, paralleling and usually separated from the street, used as a pedestrian walkway, less than 8 feet in width.
Sidewalk Café: An area adjacent to and directly in front of a street-level sit-down restaurant or a fast food sit-down restaurant located within the sidewalk area or pedestrian plaza area of the street right-of-way and used exclusively for dining, drinking, and pedestrian circulation.
Sign: Any object, device, display, or structure, or part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct, or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images; including the following sign types:
A. Sign, Animated or Moving: Any sign or part of a sign that changes physical position or light intensity by any movement or rotation or that gives the visual impression of such movement or rotation, including electronic message boards.
C. Sign, Awning or Canopy: A sign that is mounted, painted, or attached to an awning, canopy, or marquee that is otherwise permitted by this ordinance.
D. Sign, Construction: A temporary sign erected on the premises on which construction is taking place, during the period of such construction, indicating the names of the architects, engineers, landscape architects, contractors or similar artisans, and the owners, financial supporters, sponsors, and similar individuals or firms having a role or interest with respect to the structure or project.
E. Sign, Directional: Signs limited to directional messages, principally for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, such as “one-way,” “entrance,” and “exit.”
F. Sign, Election: A temporary sign relating to an election to be voted upon by the general public.
E. Sign, Ground: Any sign, other than a pole sign, in which the entire bottom is in contact with or close to the ground and is independent of any other structure and which is up to six (6) feet in height.
F. Sign, Identification: A sign giving the nature, logo, trademark, or other identifying symbol; address; or any combination of the name, symbol, and address of a building, business, development, or establishment on the premises where it is located.
G. Sign, Pole: A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or other support so that the bottom edge of the sign face is six feet or more above grade.
H. Sign, Portable: A sign that is not permanent, affixed to a building, structure, or the ground.
I. Sign, Projecting: A sign that is wholly of partly dependent upon a building for support and that projects more than twelve (12) inches from such building.
J. Sign, Real Estate: See Sign, Yard.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-25 Zoning Ordinance
K. Sign, Roof: A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or that is wholly dependent upon a building for support and that projects above the top walk or edge of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with a gambrel, gable, or hip roof, or the deck line of a building with a mansard roof.
L. Sign, Suspended: A sign hanging down from a marquee, awning, or porch that would exist without the sign.
M. Sign, Temporary: The display surface of which is primarily constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, paper board, or other light material intended or suitable for only a temporary period of display.
N. Sign, Wall: A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of, the sign and that does not project more than twelve (12) inches from such building or structure, and the exposed face of which shall be on a plane parallel to the building wall to which it is attached.
O. Sign, Window: A sign permanently or temporarily painted, placed or affixed on, or to, a glass window or other transparent surface so as to be visible through the surface to which it is attached, from outside the premises.
P. Sign, Yard: A temporary sign of relatively impermanent construction manually placed in a yard for purposes of identifying or advertising an infrequent event, such as but not limited to, a garage sale, yard sale, or estate sale; or the sale or rental of property.
Sign Area: The entire face of a sign, including the advertising surface and any framing, trim, or molding but not including the supporting structure.
Slope: The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degrees.
Slope, steep: A grade of 25 percent or more over a distance of 50 feet or more.
Social Service Center: A facility operated by an organization which provides services such as training, counseling, health education, or the distribution of food or clothing. This term includes but is not limited to a facility offering life skills training, substance abuse counseling, housing services, or a neighborhood recovery center. This term does not include an emergency residential shelter.
Stable, commercial: A building where horses and ponies are sheltered, fed, or kept for hire.
Stable, Private: A building in which horses and/or other livestock are sheltered and is not intended for commercial use or profit; may be accessory to a residential or other use or a freestanding principal use.
Storage, Outdoor: The outdoor standing or placement of usable and/or potentially usable goods or equipment other than for display and not including waste or scrap materials, other than in junk yards.
Story: That part of a building, except a mezzanine as defined herein, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above then the ceiling next above. A basement shall not be counted as a story.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-26 Zoning Ordinance
Street: A dedicated right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
Street, Local: A street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting residential properties.
Street, Major: A street which is intended to serve as a large volume traffic-way for both the immediate municipal area and the region beyond, and is designated as a major thoroughfare, roadway, parkway, freeway, expressway or equivalent term in the Charter Township of Oakland Master Plan.
Street, Private: A street which is part of a recorded subdivision and shown as a private street or road on the plat, or a road which is not public which services more than one dwelling and business. Private Street shall not include driveways to a dwelling or business or accessory buildings thereto when the driveway is located on the same parcel of land as the serviced structure; a Township street as shown on maps certifying the same to the Michigan Department of Transportation; two-track trails which have been in common use for fifteen (15) or more years and which provide the only access to a parcel of property.
Street, Public: A dedicated public right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground.
Swimming Pool, Private: Any artificially constructed non-portable structure, erected in connection with or appurtenant to one or more private residences, either above or below or partly above or partly below grade, located either in part or wholly outside of a permanently enclosed and roofed building, which is designed to hold water to a depth any place in said structure greater than twenty-four (24) inches when filled to capacity, and intended to be used for recreational purposes.
16-221 “T”
Telecommunications: Any origination, creation, transmission, emission, storage-retrieval, or reception of signs, signals, writing, images, sounds, or intelligence of any nature, by wire, radio, television, optical, or other means.
Telecommunications Antennae: Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs, or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of electromagnetic waves when such system is either external to or attached to the exterior of a structure.
Temporary Structures: A structure that lacks a permanent foundation and is affixed to the earth and/or an existing structure with non-permanent fasteners.
Test Plan: A site plan used to illustrate a base density or the number of dwelling units which are feasible on a particular site under standard zoning restrictions and applicable Township regulations.
Theater: A structure used for dramatic, operatic, motion pictures, or other performance, for admission to which entrance money is received and no audience participation or meal service allowed.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-27 Zoning Ordinance
Toxic Substances: Those poisonous substances which, by physical contact, ingestion or inhalation, could cause damage to humans, animals or aquatic life. A current listing of substances included under this heading can be found on the Toxic Substance Listing, as maintained by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and listed on the Critical Materials Register, as created pursuant to the Michigan Water Resources Act, P.A. 245 of 1929, as amended.
Trailer, Recreational: A vehicle which can be drawn on a highway and is used for recreational or camping purposes. Includes the terms motor home, pole-trailer, trailer coach, trailer, mobile home as defined in the Public Act 300 of 1949, as amended, being the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1, and including camping units, tents, or any other temporary dwellings.
Trails: A public way that is designed for and used by equestrians, pedestrians, and/or cyclists using non-motorized bicycles and generally runs cross-country through property.
Trellises and Arbors: Frames of latticework used as screens or as supports for climbing plants; or shelters of vines or branches or of latticework covered or intended to be covered with climbing plants.
16-222 “U”
Upland: Upland is any area not located within a wetland or water course.
Use: The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied.
16-223 “V”
Vehicle: Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devises exclusively moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks and excepting a mobile home as defined in section 2 of the Mobile Home Commission Act, Act 96 of the Public Acts of 1987, being section 125.2302 of the Michigan Complied Laws.
Veterinary Clinic. An enclosed building wherein animals including domestic household pets and farm animals are given medical or surgical treatment and use as a boarding place for such animals limited to short time boarding incidental to clinic or hospital use. Such clinics include only those under direction of a licensed veterinarian registered in the State of Michigan. Such animal clinics shall be constructed in such a manner that noise and odor are not discernible beyond the property upon which it is located. A place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment with kennel use limited to short-time boarding which is incidental to the medical use, and only within the walls of the structure.
Veterinary Hospital: A facility where animals are given medical care and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the clinic use, which may or may not include boarding or kennel facilities.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-28 Zoning Ordinance
View shed: An area needed to retain Township character and aesthetics by virtue of location in relation to views, including; natural landscapes, topography, tree canopies, farm views, and historic sites.
16-224 “W”
Wall, Obscuring: A structure of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this ordinance.
Warehouse: A building used for storage and repackaging of goods, wares, raw materials, equipment, parts and other materials by and for the owner or operator of the facility, or as a commercial service on behalf of the owner of such items.
Waterfront Lot: A lot that has frontage on a water body.
Wetland: A wetland means both a State regulated wetland and any swamp, bog or fen of at least one half acre in area and any other land that is regularly inundated by water and is of at least one-half acre in area.
Wholesale Facility: An establishment or place of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users; to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies.
Wind Energy Conversion Systems: A wind energy conversion system shall mean a mill or machine operated by wind acting on oblique vanes or sails that radiate from a shaft that has all of the following components:
A. A surface area, either variable or fixed, for utilizing the wind for electrical or mechanical power;
B. A shaft, gearing, belt, or coupling utilized to convey the rotation of the surface areas into a form suitable for driving a generator, alternator, or other mechanical or electricity producing device;
C. A generator, alternator, or other device to convert the mechanical energy of the surface area into electrical energy; and
D. A tower, pylon, or other structure upon which any, all, or some combination of the above are mounted.
Wireless Communication Facilities: The following four definitions, related primarily to Section 16-416, shall apply in the interpretation of this ordinance.
A. Wireless Communications Facilities shall mean and include all structures and accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may include, but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone devices and exchanges, microwave relay facilities, telephone transmission equipment building and private and commercial mobile radio service facilities. Not included within this definition are: citizen band radio facilities; short wave receiving facilities; radio and television broadcast reception facilities; federally licensed amateur (ham) radio facilities; satellite dishes, and government facilities which are subject to state or federal law or regulations which preempt municipal regulatory authority.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-29 Zoning Ordinance
B. Attached Wireless Communications Facilities shall mean Wireless Communication Facilities that are affixed to existing structures, such as existing buildings, towers, water tanks, utility poles, and the like. A wireless communication support structure proposed to be newly established shall not be included within this definition.
C. Wireless Communication Support Structures shall mean structures erected or modified to support wireless communication antennas. Support structures within this definition include, but shall not be limited to, monopoles, lattice towers, light poles, wood poles and guyed towers, or other structures which appear to be something other than a mere support structure.
D. Co-location shall mean the location by two or more wireless communication providers of Wireless Communication Facilities on a common structure, tower, or building, with the view toward reducing the overall number of structures required to support wireless communication antennas within the community.
16-225 “X”
16-226 “Y”
Yard: The open spaces on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this ordinance.
A. Yard, Front: An open space extending the full width of a lot across the front of a lot adjoining a public street or a private street approved by the Township Board.
The depth of a front yard shall be the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest line of the principal building. The front and rear lines of front yards shall be parallel.
In the case of through lots, unless the prevailing front yard pattern on adjoining lots indicates otherwise, front yards shall be provided on all frontages. Where one (1) of the front yards that would normally be required on a through lot is not in keeping with the prevailing yard pattern, the Administrative Official may waive the requirement for the normal front yard and substitute therefore a special yard requirement which shall not exceed the average of the yards provided on adjacent lots.
Every corner lot in a residential district shall have minimum setbacks from both streets equal to the minimum required front setback of the district in which it is located; provided, however, that this does not reduce the buildable width of any lot of record to less than twenty-five (25) feet. On corner lots where a rear lot line abuts a side lot line on the adjoining lot, accessory buildings on the corner lot shall have a rear yard setback from the rear lot line a distance equal to the smaller of the side yard setbacks required for the district.
B. Yard, Rear: An open space extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line of the principal building.
Definitions
Charter Township of Oakland II-30 Zoning Ordinance
C: Yard, Side: An open space between the principal building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard. In the case of through lots, side yards shall extend from the rear lines of front yards. Width of a required side yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest point of the side lot line to the nearest point of the principal building.
16-227 “Z”
Zoning Administrator: The Charter Township of Oakland Zoning Administrator as established in Section 16-109 of this ordinance.
Zoning Ordinance: The Zoning Ordinance of Charter Township of Oakland as adopted.
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-1 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE III: GENERAL REGULATIONS
16-300 APPLICABILITY AND SCOPE
It is the intent of this ordinance to specifically prohibit uses which are not listed in this ordinance as permitted uses or special land uses. Subject to the provisions of Section 16-108, uses that are being conducted upon land within the respective districts set forth in Article IV of this ordinance that are not listed as permitted uses or special approval uses within the district in which the land is located shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance. Uses that are contrary to or in violation of local, state, or federal law, ordinances, or other regulations are prohibited. The use of all land and structures and the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair and moving of all structures within Charter Township of Oakland shall conform to all applicable provisions of this ordinance unless a nonconforming situation is a matter of record on the effective date of this ordinance. The regulations set forth in this Article shall apply in all zoning districts to all permitted uses and special uses, unless otherwise specifically indicated. This Article provides detail on how the standards of this ordinance shall be applied.
16-301 USES, SPATIAL AND PHYSICAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Each lot in the Township shall be limited to not more than one (1) principal use; provided that multiple-tenant or multiple-occupant commercial, industrial or mixed-use developments may be regarded as single uses if approved pursuant to the standards of this ordinance.
B. The continuing maintenance of required spatial relationships and physical requirements of this ordinance for a use, structure, building, and/or lot shall be the obligation of the owner of the use, structure, building and parcel.
C. No lot shall be split, divided or created which does not meet the spatial requirements of this ordinance, except as may be permitted specifically elsewhere in this ordinance. No building, structure or use shall be constructed, expanded, renovated or established except in conformance with this ordinance and all other applicable ordinances of Charter Township of Oakland.
D. Required spatial relationships and physical requirements of this ordinance shall apply uniformly within each respective zoning district to all uses, structures, buildings and lots, except that the following may be located no closer than 3-feet to any lot line:
1. Those parts of a building which are unroofed porches and decks, including steps, which do not exceed seventy (70) square feet in area, handicapped ramps, terraces, patios and awnings and nonpermanent canopies. All roofed porches and decks and those unroofed porches and decks, including steps, which are larger than seventy (70) square feet, will be considered part of the structure and the building footprint and will be governed by the yard requirements of the Zoning District in which the parcel is located; provided, however, that on parcels with steep slopes exterior steps may be located within a required yard when the Zoning Administrator finds that such location is necessary for the practical
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-2 Zoning Ordinance
use of the property. The Natural Feature Setback requirements of Section 16-348 shall be applicable in all situations without exception.
2. Flag poles.
3. Play equipment.
E. Required setback distances shall be measured perpendicular to and from the property line or edge of right-of-way or high water mark toward the center of the lot. For non-platted lots, where the front lot line is the roadway centerline, setbacks shall be measured from the edge of the right-of-way. Building setback lines shall parallel the lot line from which they are measured.
F. Lot depth measurements shall be taken from the midpoints of straight lines, one connecting the front property corners and the second connecting the rear property corners. (See Figure 301a) For the purposes of this section, property corners shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator as the points at which the side parcel lines intersect the front and rear lines, regardless of the shape of the property.
G. Parcel width shall be measured at the front yard setback line; provided, however, that for irregularly shaped parcels, the Zoning Administrator may determine an average parcel width as the average width measured at right angles to its depth, with no fewer than five (5) equally spaced measurements. (See Figure 301b)
H. Land filling and other contour changes to create a buildable area in preparation of a development shall not be undertaken, except in conformance with the requirements of this ordinance and applicable state and federal requirements. No person shall undertake any activity such as grading, clearing, cutting and filling, excavating, or tree removal in preparation for a use or structure which requires approval of a basic or detailed site plan and approval until the proposed use or structure is authorized by a zoning compliance permit per Section 16-109.
Figure 301b
Figure 301a
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-3 Zoning Ordinance
16-302 ACCESS REQUIRED
Every building shall be on a lot adjacent to and having access to a public street or to an approved private road. All structures shall be so located on lots as to allow required off-street parking, safe and convenient ingress and egress for fire and police protection, and other services.
16-303 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS
A. General Requirements:
1. Accessory buildings shall be supplemental or subordinate to the principal building on a parcel of land, and shall be on the same parcel of land as the principal building, structure, or use they serve.
2. Construction, erection, installation, or placement of accessory buildings or structures shall be in accordance with the requirements of applicable Building Code. Permits shall be required for buildings greater than 50 square feet in size.
3. Accessory buildings, structures, and uses shall not be located within a dedicated easement or right-of-way.
B. Location of Accessory Building: Single Family Residential Use: A building, including a garage, which is accessory to a single family dwelling and which is not attached thereto shall not be located:
1. In the front yard or between the principal building and the street right-of-way; for parcels less than 10 acres.
2. In the front yard setback for parcels 10 acres or more.
3. Closer to a side lot line than is allowed for a principal building;
4. Closer than ten (10) feet to the rear lot line;
5. Closer than ten (10) feet to a principal building;
C. Location: Other Uses:
1. The location of an accessory building which is accessory to a principal building or use, other than a single family residential building or use, shall be determined by a site plan reviewed and approved by the Township in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
2. Other accessory structures shall utilize the locational and dimensional requirements set forth in Article IV per the applicable zoning district.
D. Accessory Building Height: The maximum building height of an accessory building, other than a stable, in a single family residential district shall be fifteen (15) feet. The maximum height of a stable shall be not more than
Property line
Setback lines
Garage
Garage located not less than 10’ from rear property line
10’
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-4 Zoning Ordinance
fifteen (15) feet. Maximum building height for accessory buildings may be greater provided the following is met:
1. For every additional one (1) foot of accessory building height, the rear and side yard setback must be increased ten (10) feet.
2. In no instance shall the building height exceed twenty-four (24) feet except as otherwise provided.
For a non-single family use the maximum building height of an accessory building shall not exceed twenty-four (24) feet.
E. Lot Coverage: In all zoning districts, the total lot coverage by accessory and principal building shall not exceed the lot coverage standards of the zoning district. See Table 16-402.02 for allowable lot coverage. F. Accessory Building Prohibited: No accessory building shall be constructed on a lot where a principal building does not exist.
F. In the VLRD, LRD, LMRD, MRD and RM districts, the parking of not more than two (2) commercial vehicles is permitted only within an enclosed building.
16-304 ACCESSORY USES
A. Accessory uses may be regarded as accessory to the principal use and may be carried on underneath the umbrella of the permit issued for the principal use. Uses may be considered accessory to the principal use regardless of whether the accessory use is separately identified in this ordinance as a permitted or special use.
B. Interpretation of Accessory Uses: For purposes of interpreting accessory uses:
1. When an activity or use is conducted in conjunction with principal use and the former use; (1) constitutes only an incidental or insubstantial part of the total activity that takes place on a lot, or (2) is commonly associated with the principal use and integrally related to it, then the former use may be regarded as accessory to the principal use.
2. A use may be regarded as incidental or insubstantial if the viability of the principal use is not dependent in any significant way on the accessory use.
3. To be "commonly associated" with a principal use it is not necessary for an accessory use to be connected with such principal use more times than not, but only that the association of such accessory use with such principal use takes place with sufficient frequency that there is common acceptance of their relatedness.
4. An accessory use shall not generate any effects on neighboring properties, including, but not limited to, noise, parking, traffic, glare, or dust, greater than or more burdensome than such impacts from the principal use on the property.
5. By way of example, and not to limit the application of this section, common accessory uses may include swimming pools or tennis courts associated with and integrally related to a residential subdivision or multi-family development, and an automated car wash associated with a gasoline station.
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-5 Zoning Ordinance
16-305 RESERVED
16-306 ANIMALS
A. Purpose: The purpose of this section is to promote the public health, safety, comfort, and general welfare of the community through proper control of animals by their owners and others. See Section 16-202 for animal class definitions. B. Class I animals may be maintained in any zoning classification district, subject to specific restrictions herein.
C. Where farm animals are maintained coincident with a farm or farm operation, then and in such event, such farm animals and/or any associated livestock production facility shall be exempt from the regulations therein where a livestock production facility and/or any associated manure storage facilities are regulated, operated, managed, and conducted in accordance with a GAAMP as adopted and published by the State Department of Agriculture, or its successor, and as amended from time to time. Where a farm or farm operation proposes new and/or expanding livestock production facilities at a capacity of fewer than 50 animal units, such farm or farm operation and/or livestock production facility shall request and received siting verification from the State Department of Agriculture. D. Where class II and class III animals are not maintained coincident with a farm or farm operation, then the following regulations shall apply: 1. Class II animals may be maintained in the VLRD, LRD, LMRD, MRD, and RC Districts, subject to the following conditions: a. The minimum lot area required to maintain class II animals (large) is two acres. One class II animal shall be permitted for the first two acres. Thereafter, one additional class II animal shall be permitted for each full one acre in excess of two acres. b. The minimum lot area required to maintain class II animals (small) is two acres. Four (4) goats and/or sheep shall be permitted for the first two acres. Thereafter, two (2) goats and/or sheep shall be permitted for each full one acre in excess of two acres. c. There shall be adequate fencing, or other restraining device, for the purpose of maintaining animals within the restricted areas provided for in this chapter. d. Structures housing class II animals shall be located no nearer than 200 feet to any dwelling which exists on an adjacent lot and no nearer than 100 feet to any adjacent lot line. Fenced areas shall be located no nearer than 50 feet from any dwelling which exists on an adjacent lot.
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-6 Zoning Ordinance
e. The refuse and wastes resulting from the maintenance of animals shall be controlled upon the premises, and shall be cared for or disposed of within a reasonable time so as to minimize hazards of health and offensive effects upon neighboring people and uses. f. All feed and other substances and materials on the premises for the maintenance of animals shall be stored so as to not attract rats, mice, or other vermin. 2. Class III animals may be maintained in the VLRD, LRD, LMRD, MRD, and RC Districts, subject to the following conditions: a. The minimum lot area required to maintain class III animals shall be 1.75 acres. Ten class III animals shall be permitted for the first 1.75 acres. Thereafter, one additional class III animal shall be permitted for each full one-quarter acre in excess of 1.75 acres. b. There shall be adequate fencing, or other restraining device, for the purpose of maintaining animals within the restricted areas provided for in this chapter. Fenced areas shall be located no nearer than 50 feet from any dwelling which exist on an adjacent lot. c. Structures housing class III animals shall be located no nearer than 100 feet to any dwelling which exists on an adjacent lot and no nearer than 50 feet to any adjacent lot line. d. The refuse and wastes resulting from the maintenance of animals shall be controlled upon the premises, and shall be cared for or disposed of within a reasonable time so as to minimize hazards of health and offensive effects upon neighboring people and uses. e. All feed and other substances and materials on the premises for the maintenance of animals shall be stored so as to not attract rats, mice or other vermin. E. Wild animals shall not be permitted to be maintained in the township, temporarily or permanently. For purposes of this section, the term "wild animal" shall mean an animal not otherwise defined as a class I, II, or III animal, and which is not customarily domesticated and customarily devoted to the service of mankind in the township. The term "wild animal" also means any animal which a person is
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-7 Zoning Ordinance
Figure 303 prohibited from possessing by law. The characterization of an animal as being wild shall not be altered by virtue of the fact that one or several generations of the animal in question have been maintained in captivity. F. Nuisance: The keeping of animals shall not be permitted to constitute a nuisance to persons living in the surrounding area. Upon receipt of a written complaint filed by an abutting property owner with the Township stating animals allowed under the provisions listed above constitute a nuisance, the Township Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the animals constitute a nuisance. If the nuisance claim is found to be for a farm operation protected under the Right to Farm Act, the Zoning Administrator shall file the complaint with the State Department of Agriculture to determine if such nuisance is present and appropriate action taken.
16-307 BUILDING HEIGHT
A. The vertical distance measured from the finished grade at the principal entrance to the average height of the highest roof surface. Average height shall be determined using the lowest point of the eave to the highest point of the roof.
B. The building height requirements of all zoning districts may be exceeded by accessory appurtenances not over five (5) feet in height including parapets, chimneys, roof mounted television antennas, roof mounted HVAC units, elevator housing units, cupolas, spires or other ornamental projections.
An amateur Radio Service station antenna structure may exceed the maximum building height in the district in which it is located by fifteen (15) feet. Additional height may be permitted by the Zoning Administrator if the applicant can demonstrate that the height is necessary to accommodate Amateur Radio communications in accordance with Public Act 110 of 2006.
16-308 CLEAR VISION CORNERS
A. No fence, wall, landscaping, shrubbery, sign, structure or other obstruction to vision above a height of three (3) feet from the average grade at the centerline of the adjacent road shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of the road right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of twenty-five (25) feet from their point of intersection; (see figure 303).
B. Wherever a lot line intersects a public right-of-way, private easement for a right-of-way, driveway or alley, no obscuring wall of any kind shall be permitted and no shrubbery, sign, or other obstruction to vision above a height of three (3) feet from the established grade at the
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-8 Zoning Ordinance
centerline of the adjacent road shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of a lot line and right-of-way line, a distance along each line of fifteen (15) feet from their point of intersection.
C. Entry structures, including but not limited to, walls, columns, and gates, marking entrances are permitted and may be located in a required yard; provided that the structure achieves the requirements of this Section; and provided further that such entry structures shall comply with all codes of the Township and shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator and a zoning compliance permit issued.
16-309 CARETAKER RESIDENCE
A caretaker residence is permitted in the VLRD, LRD, LMRD, MRD MHRD or RC zoning district when accessory to a principal dwelling provided the Zoning Administrator establishes the following prior to issuing a zoning compliance permit as required in Section 16-109.
A. The caretaker residence shall be part of the principal dwelling and shall not be part of a detached accessory building.
B. The caretaker residence shall have direct access to the principal dwelling and may have a secondary entrance to the exterior of the principal dwelling.
C. The owner of the property shall record a deed restriction on the property approved by the Township Attorney in terms of form and content which covers at a minimum the following items:
1. The caretaker residence shall only be used as defined in this ordinance.
2. The caretaker residence shall not be rented, leased, sold, subdivided, condominium or in any way converted into a separate dwelling or issued a separate tax parcel number.
3. Items A and B above shall be included in the deed restriction.
4. Other matters as deemed appropriate by the Township Attorney given the specific situation or circumstances of the property and situation.
16-310 COMMON OPEN SPACE
Where open space is provided in connection with any use or development under this ordinance, the following shall apply to common open space areas:
A. Common open space shall be a minimum of 50 feet in all horizontal dimensions.
B. Required setbacks shall not be considered as common open space.
C. The area of road rights-of-way or access easements shall not be considered common open space.
D. Storm water detention ponds designed to appear and function similar to natural wetlands or ponds may be considered as open space, provided at least 50% of the required upland common open space area is in the form of usable park area.
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-9 Zoning Ordinance
16-311 CROSS DISTRICT AVERAGING
When two or more different zoning districts are involved within the boundaries of one lot or multiple lots under single ownership which is under consideration for development of a single-family residential use pursuant to Act 288 of 1967, as amended, known as Land Division Act of 1967, or Act 59 of 1978, as amended, known as the Condominium Act, the Township Board upon recommendation of the Planning Commission, upon application from the proprietor may grant a variation from the minimum requirements of the several zoning districts so involved, so as to provide cross-district lot size and density averaging within the boundaries for such lot or lots, provided, in the determination of the Township Board:
A. The cross-district averaging results in the relocation of lot lines to minimize disturbing the existing topography, vegetation, and other natural features;
B. The total number of lots in any such development shall not exceed the sum of the total number of such lots that would be permitted in each separate zoning district which comprise the whole of the parcel of land involved as determined by preparation of a test plan pursuant to Section 16-343; and
C. That no individual lot in any such development comprising the whole of such lot or lots shall have an area or width which shall be less than the minimum required for the zoning district having the highest density of the several zoning districts involved.
16-312 DWELLINGS STANDARDS
A. A dwelling located within the basement of a building, structure or dwelling is prohibited.
B. All manufactured housing units shall meet the requirements of the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development Regulations, entitled Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards as amended, regulations established by the Manufactured Housing Commission created under Act 96 of 1987 also known as the Mobile Home Commission Act, and all other applicable state laws and regulations.
C. The minimum exterior dimensions of a single family dwelling measured along one wall face, including the sum of all wall segments with essentially the same general orientation (as illustrated at right) shall be twenty three (23) feet.
D. All additions to dwellings shall meet all the requirements of this ordinance.
E. Minimum gross floor area for dwellings shall be as follows:
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-10 Zoning Ordinance
District
VLRD
LRD
LMRD
MRD
MHRD
RC
RM
Total Dwelling
1200
1200
1200
1200
1200
1200
760 + 100 for each bedroom over 1st bedroom
Ground Floor Area
850
850
850
850
850
850
--
F. All dwellings shall be at least one story in height.
G. Dwellings other than manufactured homes shall be firmly and permanently attached to a solid continuous foundation under the exterior sidewalls. The foundation shall be constructed in accordance with the Michigan Residential Code.
H. Manufactured homes within the MHRD district shall be secured to the premises by an anchoring system or device complying with the rules and regulations of the Michigan Manufactured Housing Commission as permitted by Act 96 of 1987 also known as the Mobile Home Commission Act. Wheels, towing apparatus, exposed chassis, axles, and suspension system shall be removed prior to occupancy.
I. Roof pitch of dwellings shall be aesthetically comparable and compatible with the surrounding dwellings.
J. If the dwelling is a manufactured home, it shall contain a storage capability area in a basement located under the manufactured home, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure, which storage area shall be equal to ten percent (10%) of the square footage of the dwelling.
K. Standards in this Section 16-312 C-J shall not apply to a manufactured home located in a licensed manufactured home park approved under the provisions of Section 16-409 herein.
16-313 RESERVED
16-314 EASEMENTS
When a plan for the use of land is submitted to the Township for approval, such plan shall indicate dedicated or proposed easements for utilities and road rights-of-way, trails, safety paths, footpaths, bikeways, or bridle paths which exist or are proposed on said land. As a condition of final approval of such plan by the Township Board, Planning Commission, or Zoning Board of Appeals, the interest in the easements for utilities, road rights-of-way, trails, safety paths, footpaths, bikeways or bridle paths shall be conveyed to the Township or other public agency.
16-315 ERECTION OF MORE THAN ONE PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE ON A LOT
In a VLRD District and/or a RC District, a farm of more than ten (10) acres may contain a tenant dwelling on the same recorded lot as the principal dwelling.
16-316 RESERVED
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-11 Zoning Ordinance
16-317 ESSENTIAL SERVICES/PUBLIC AND QUASI-PUBLIC USES/UTILITY AND PUBLIC SERVICE BUILDINGS
Essential services, public and quasi-public uses, and utility and public service buildings as defined herein may be placed in any zoning district; provided, that the Zoning Administrator finds that there will be no adverse effect upon surrounding adjacent property. Significant structures associated with essential services, such as but not limited to electrical or telephone transmitters, water or sewer control panels, or water and sewer control buildings, and proposed within a residential district shall be reviewed to the extent provided in the Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006, as amended.
16-318 RESERVED
16-319 RESERVED
16-320 RESERVED
16-321 GRADING PLANS REQUIRED
The Township shall require a grading plan for all principal and accessory building and structures which shall be prepared by a registered engineer or landscape architect and shall be reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer and/or Environmental Consultant prior to issuance of a zoning permit considering standard engineering practices and the natural features identified in the Charter Township of Oakland Natural Features Assessment Map in the Master Plan.
16-322 RESERVED
16-323 HOME BASED BUSINESS
A. Home Based Business- Within Dwelling Unit.
A home based business may be conducted in a dwelling unit, provided that:
1. Two employees may be permitted on the premises or permitted in the dwelling unit, other than members of the immediate family who legally reside on the premises. The use of employees other than family members require approval of the Zoning Administrator through a Zoning Compliance Permit. A narrative shall be required as part of the Zoning Compliance permit specifying the total number of employees and how the standards of Section 16-323.A will be met.
2. The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation;
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-12 Zoning Ordinance
3. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation;
5. There shall be no sale of goods on the premises in connection with such home occupation;
6. No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard.
7. No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, or outside the dwelling unit if conducted in other than a single-family residence. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage off the premises.
B. Home Based Business – Within an Accessory Structure
1. Home-based business within an accessory structure provides an opportunity for individuals to utilize their owner-occupied residential property for their offices and operations related to uses that would not be considered as a home-based business within the dwelling unit. 2. Standards. Home-based businesses within an accessory structure, may be conducted on the premises subject to the following minimum standards: a. A Home-based business within an accessory structure must meet all of the applicable provisions of section 16-323.A, Home-based business within the dwelling unit, together with the following additions: i. A home-based business use within an accessory structure may include up to 1,000 square feet of space in a garage or accessory structure. ii. Two employees may be permitted on the premises or permitted in the accessory structure, other than members of the immediate family who legally reside on the premises. The use of employees other than family members within an accessory structure require approval of the Zoning Administrator through a Zoning Compliance Permit. A narrative shall be required as part of the Zoning Compliance permit specifying the total number of employees and how the standards of Section 16-323.A will be met. iii. A home-based business within an accessory structure use may include up to 200 square feet of outside storage space. Outside storage must be set
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-13 Zoning Ordinance
back at least 15 feet from neighboring property lines, located in rear yards only, and enclosed with a six-foot high opaque fence. Outside storage cannot be located in easements, drainage swales or intermittent stormwater flow areas. b. A Home-based business within an accessory structure use shall not advertise by listing its street address in a telephone directory, yellow pages, on-line advertising, or similar means, or instruct others to visit the site for any business-related services, other than delivery operations commonly occurring in residential areas except in conflict with state law.
16-324 RESERVED
16-325 LIGHTING
A. Intent and Purpose: To create and maintain safe nighttime environments for both pedestrians and drivers on public and/or private roadways and rights-of-way, by minimizing brightly lighted surfaces and lighting glare as well as extended areas along sidewalks safety paths and streets. To preserve the restful quality of nighttime, by eliminating intrusive, artificial light and lighting that unnecessarily contributes to “sky glow”, promote the concept of dark skies, and to reduce light pollution from lighting luminaries and light trespass onto adjacent properties. The following requirements shall be considered by the Township Board after recommendation by the Planning Commission and Zoning Administrator in the review of all site plans submitted for approval under the terms of this ordinance.
B. General Standards:
1. Exempted areas and types. The following types of outdoor lighting shall not be covered by this section:
a. Residential decorative lighting such as porch lights, low level lawn lights, and special seasonal light such as Christmas decorations, and residential yard lights whether building mounted or pole mounted.
b. Sign lighting as regulated by Article VII hereof.
c. Lighting associated with a single-family dwelling.
2. Regulated Lighting. The following types of lighting shall be regulated by this section:
a. Parking lot lighting and site lighting for commercial, industrial, residential and institutional developments.
b. Multiple Family developments parking lot lighting and site lighting.
c. Privately owned roadway lighting.
d. Building facade lighting (including lighting for building and structures).
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-14 Zoning Ordinance
e. Other forms of outdoor lighting which, in the judgment of the Township Board after recommendation of the Planning Commission, is similar in character, luminosity and/or glare to the foregoing.
f. All forms of neon lighting.
3. Standards: Lighting shall be designed and constructed in such a manner as to:
a. Insure that direct or directly reflected light is confined to the development site and pedestrian pathways.
b. Lamps and luminaries shall be shielded, hooded and/or louvered to prevent glare beyond the property line and beyond any public and/or private right-of-way, and the light source shall not be directly visible from beyond the boundary of the site.
c. The light from any illuminated source shall be designed so that the light intensity or brightness at any property line shall not exceed one-half (.5) of a foot-candle.
d. Lighting fixtures shall be dark sky compliant and have one hundred (100) percent cutoff above the horizontal plane at the lowest part of the point light source by utilizing full cut-off shielding or other design features. The light rays may not be emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the horizontal plane. (See figure 305)
e. Outdoor recreation area lighting may use standard color metal halide sources and standard sports lighting fixtures if they are mounted at a sufficient height and properly equipped with baffling, glare guards or lenses to meet the requirements of this section.
f. There shall be no lighting of a blinking, flashing, or fluttering nature, including changes in light intensity, brightness or color. Beacon, strobe and search lights are not permitted.
g. No colored lights shall be used at any location or in any manner so as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices.
16-326 LOT DIMENSIONS
All lots shall maintain a width to depth ratio not to exceed 1:4 unless over 10 acres in area.
16-327 RESERVED
Unacceptable
Acceptable
Figure 305
Full Cut-off Shielding
Horizontal
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-15 Zoning Ordinance
16-328 RESERVED
16-329 RESERVED
16-330 OPEN SPACE OPTION
A. Intent and Purpose. The intent of this section is to encourage the long-term preservation of open space and natural features and the provision of recreation and open space areas in accordance with the Zoning Enabling Act, 110, of 2006, as amended.
B. Eligibility Requirements. This section shall be applicable to residential properties zoned VLRD, LRD, and LMRD. The provisions in this section shall supplement the existing regulations applicable within the referenced zoning districts in the event a developer or owner of property elects to submit its proposed development under the open space option provided in this section.
C. Open Space Option. Property meeting the eligibility requirements of this Section may be developed, at the owner's option, with the same number of dwelling units on a portion of the land as specified herein that, as determined by the approving body, could have otherwise been developed on the same land under current ordinances, laws and rules, subject to and in accordance with the regulations of this section.
D. Density Calculation. The number of lots shall not exceed the number allowed for the zoning district in which the development is located as determined by a test plan in accordance with Section 16-343
E. Design and Application Requirements. The following design and application requirements shall apply to a proposed open space development under this Section. Such design requirements shall be incorporated into a preliminary plat, if the land is proposed to be developed as a subdivision under the Land Division Act, into a preliminary site condominium plan, and otherwise into a site plan in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance.
1. A minimum of 50% of the site area shall be preserved as permanent open space in an undeveloped state in the manner set forth in Section 16-330, F, below, however, in an open space development under this section, an "undeveloped state" shall not include a golf course, driving range, or other use involving development of land.
2. Permanent open space shall include the site's most significant natural, environmental, agricultural and/or cultural features, including, but not limited to the following:
i. Wetlands, floodplains, and natural watercourses;
ii. Woodlands;
iii. Scenic views;
iv. Historic resources;
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-16 Zoning Ordinance
v. Recreational pathways;
vi. Buffers from major street rights-of-way and more intense land uses; and
vii. Similar features acceptable to the approving body.
3. Open space areas shall be accessible to all lots in the development, either directly from the internal road network or, if approved in the discretion of the approving body, directly from another manner of access providing perpetually existing and maintained pedestrian accessibility to all lots.
4. Preserved open space shall be connected with adjacent open space, public land, and existing or planned trails and/or safety paths where possible, as determined by the approving body.
5. Approval of an open space option development does not constitute a change in the zoning of the property, and, except as specifically provided in this section, all other regulations applicable within the zoning district of the property and development shall apply.
6. Restrictions.
i. Nothing in this section shall allow the construction of multi-family, two-family or attached residential units in a single-family residential district.
ii. Nothing in this section shall allow a development to result in the creation of a nuisance or a danger or hazard to the health, safety and welfare of any person or property.
iii. The development shall not result in an unreasonable burden upon public services and/or facilities, taking into consideration the capacity and availability, considering the existing and anticipated future use of such services and facilities.
iv. The development shall be designed to avoid an unreasonable burden upon the subject and/or surrounding properties, taking into consideration economic, aesthetic, traffic, noise and other applicable and relevant planning and/or engineering considerations.
v. Any development proposed utilizing the open space option provided in this section shall comply with all zoning regulations and design standards applicable to the property.
F. Open Space Maintenance and Preservation
1. All open space shall remain perpetually in an undeveloped state by means of a conservation easement to be recorded with the Oakland County Register of Deeds. The conservation easement shall specify ownership, access/use rights, and perpetual maintenance and preservation of the open space, shall be approved by the approving body prior to final approval of the development, and shall be received and approved as to substance and form by the Township attorney prior to acceptance by the approving body.
2. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the property owner to convey fee title ownership of the open space to the public.
G. Review Process
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-17 Zoning Ordinance
1. All proposed open space option developments shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with the procedure applicable under this ordinance to the type of development being proposed (i.e., subdivision, condominium, site condominiums, etc.) and in accordance with the development standards in this section and other applicable ordinances. The "approving body", as referenced in this section, shall mean the body designated in this ordinance as having the authority to grant final plan approval to the proposed development.
2. In addition to all other submittals and information required under this ordinance, all open space option plans submitted to the Township shall include a resource inventory that contains the following:
i. All floodplains, wetlands, grasslands, and bodies of water;
ii. A woodlands analysis identifying all regulated woodlands;
iii. All wildlife habitat areas;
iv. An analysis of on-site soils and topography to identify limitations to development; and
v. An analysis of the cultural features of the site, including but not limited to, scenic views, historic resources, patterns of original farm fields, fences or stone walls, and recreational uses.
3. In addition to all other review considerations applicable under other sections of this ordinance to the type of development being proposed (i.e., subdivision plat, condominium, site condominiums, etc.), as part of its review and decision to approve or deny approval of the plans or subdivision plat in which the developer seeks to utilize the open space option under this section, the approving body shall determine that the plans and materials satisfy the intent and requirements of Sections 16-330, A through F of this section as part of the overall review process applicable to the particular development and the following:
MINIMUM SETBACKS AND LOT WIDTH PER DWELLING UNIT (IN FEET)
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL OPEN SPACE OPTION
Setbacks/Districts
VLRD
LRD
LMRD
Front and Rear
Front
40
40
35
Rear
40
40
25
Total Front and Rear
80
80
60
Side
Least
15
15
10
Total of same lot
40
40
25
Distance between adjacent buildings
40
40
25
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-18 Zoning Ordinance
16-331 OUTDOOR STORAGE AND PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND OTHER MATERIALS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
A. Within the VLRD, LRD, LMRD, MRD, MHRD, and RM districts, the outdoor storage or parking of recreational vehicles, boats, and trailers of any kind shall be permitted as an accessory use if such storage conforms to the provisions of this section and all otherwise applicable ordinances and laws. The storage or parking of trucks of more than one and one-half (1½) tons capacity, trailers, recreational vehicles and boats on the street or in any front yard is prohibited, except for the following circumstances and periods of time: (1) The sale of used recreational equipment as defined and permitted under this Ordinance, as amended; and (2) the parking of recreational vehicles, campers, motor homes, and similar types of temporary living quarters on the street or in a driveway within a front yard for a period of no more than forty-eight (48) hours for the loading and unloading of the unit is permitted, provided that each occurrence of such parking shall be separated by at least four (4) days. Such outdoor storage shall be permitted within the rear yard or in one (1) side yard, provided: (1) All stored material is placed no closer than three (3) feet from a side lot line or five (5) feet from a rear lot line; (2) Such storage does not prevent clear access between the front and rear yards of the lot for a person on foot; (3) All stored material is owned by a person residing in a home on such property; and (4) No recreational vehicle, trailer, camper or boat and trailer shall be parked or stored on any roadway or road right-of-way, except as provided in subsection B below.
B. The open storage of disassembled or component parts for any vehicle of any type shall be deemed a nuisance and shall be prohibited at all times.
C. No person shall use or permit the use of recreational vehicles, campers, motor homes, or any temporary living quarters as a principal or seasonal dwelling on any site, lot, field, parcel or tract of land, except as part of a campground licensed by the Michigan Department of Public Health and/or County Department of Public Health.
16-332 OUTDOOR STORAGE AND PARKING OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND OTHER MATERIALS IN NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Where permitted in non-residential districts, yards for storage of heavy machinery, supplies and materials generally used by road builders, earth movers, and construction contractors, or unused motor vehicles, trailers or boats, or parts thereof, and raw materials or scraps which may or may not be wholly owned by the property owner, shall be only located in areas approved as part of a site plan or special land use. Such storage yards shall be entirely enclosed with a obscuring wall, evergreen plantings or other year-round screening eight (8) feet high and shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with this ordinance. In approving or disapproving such a fence to screen outdoor storage, the following standards shall be applied:
A. Fences and walls shall be constructed of durable materials such as brick, cement block, chain link, or structural resin intended to remain in good condition in the Michigan climate. Sheet metal, chain link with woven screening, wood planks and other similar materials that may be subject to rusting, weathering or deflection under severe weather conditions shall not be permitted.
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-19 Zoning Ordinance
B. All fencing materials shall be properly maintained and located in accord with the terms of this ordinance and completely on the property of the owner. The Township Board upon recommendation of the Planning Commission may require that sufficient area be set aside on the outside of the fencing to permit maintenance of the fencing from the owner’s property.
C. The use of evergreen materials is permitted provided in the sole discretion of the Township Board upon recommendation of the Planning Commission the proposed materials meet the intent of a fence or wall in terms of screening to view of adjacent property owners or the general public. Evergreen material proposed must be maintained in a healthy and growing condition for a minimum of two (2) years after planting.
16-333 OUTDOOR STORAGE
There shall be no outdoor storage of goods and materials except as provided in sections 16-331 and 16-332.
16-334 RESERVED.
16-335 RIGHT TO FARM ACT
Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent a land owner from operating pursuant to and in accordance with the Right-to-Farm Act, being PA 93 of 1981, as amended, and Generally Accepted Agricultural Management Practices as promulgated by the Michigan Department of Agriculture.
16-336 SCREENING OF MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT
A. Rooftop Mechanical Equipment. All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened from view through one or more of the following methods: a concealing roofline, a parapet, a screening wall, or grillwork constructed of the same building material as the building directly surrounding the equipment, or an alternative screening mechanism satisfactory to the approving body. All mechanical equipment shall be sufficiently setback from the façade edge to be concealed from street-level view or where roofs are visible from abutting and adjacent residential areas, a roof will be required to screen mechanical units from view. Any screening material shall be no taller than necessary to achieve the required screening.
B. Other Mechanical Equipment. Ground mounted mechanical equipment intended or used for heating, air conditioning, make-up air, dust collection, plumbing ventilation, exhaust, telecommunication, or other purposes associated with the occupancy of the building, except single and two family dwellings, shall be screened from view with fencing or landscaping to the greatest extent possible. In the RD district, such screening shall be provided only when the equipment is located between a building and a residential zoning district. Screening shall be provided to the extent feasible as determined by the approving body.
16-337 SCENIC EASEMENTS
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-20 Zoning Ordinance
All lots subject to review and approval under the provisions of a site plan, special land use, subdivision, condominium or site condominium approval process shall be separated from the existing street by scenic easements. As used in this section, an existing street are those identified in the Charter Township of Oakland Right-of-Way Ordinance, Ordinance 42, as amended. Scenic easements shall be not less than thirty (30) feet in width as measured from the Future Right of Way and shall be located on each side of the street. Scenic easements shall be depicted on a landscaping plan for approval. A landscaping plan for a scenic easement shall include information required in Article Eight Landscaping.
16-338 SIDEWALKS/SAFETY PATH AND TRAIL CONNECTIONS
A. The location of any proposed pedestrian routes including a trail or safety paths as defined in this ordinance, shall provide pedestrian linkage to the neighborhood centers and schools or as provided for on the Township Trail and Pathways Strategy Plan.
B. Installation of ten (10) foot wide safety paths shall be considered in locations as depicted on the Township Trail and Pathways Strategy Plan.
C. Installation of ten (10) foot wide trails shall be considered as an integral part of the site plan in locations as depicted on the Township Trails and Pathway Strategy Plan.
D. The owner of an approved site plan that contains a trail and/or safety path may request deferring construction if the Township Board determines it is in the best interest of the Township or the construction of the trail and/or safety path would not be beneficial to the residents of the Township. Funds, as determined by the Board of Trustees, shall be deposited with the Township in lieu of safety path construction.
16-339 SITE PREPARATION AND EXCAVATION
Land filling, mining and other land-form contour changes to create a buildable area or to remove or stockpile topsoil, sand or earth shall not be undertaken, except in conformance with the requirements of this ordinance, applicable county, state and federal requirements and the Charter Township of Oakland Code of Ordinances, as amended. No person shall undertake any activity such as grading, clearing, cutting and filling, excavating, or tree removal in preparation for a use or structure which requires site plan review and approval until the proposed use or structure is authorized by a Zoning Compliance Permit per Section 16-109.
16-340 TEMPORARY LIVING QUARTERS (ON-SITE)
An on-site temporary living quarter, such as a mobile home or similar temporary dwelling approved by the Zoning Administrator, shall be permitted in situations when a property owner suffers a catastrophic event rendering their permanent dwelling unlivable and upon the approval by the Zoning Administrator. A temporary living quarter shall meet the following standards:
A. A temporary living quarter shall be permitted while the permanent dwelling on the site is being actively and continuously reconstructed, repaired, or rehabilitated after a catastrophic event, but shall not be permitted for a period exceeding 12 months.
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-21 Zoning Ordinance
B. A temporary living quarter shall meet all building code requirements and shall conform to the provisions of this ordinance including Section 16-312, Dwelling Standards.
C. The Zoning Administrator may place conditions on the approval of a temporary living quarter pertaining to architecture (including building materials, bulk, and square footage), landscaping and screening suitable to the surrounding neighborhood.
D. A temporary living quarter shall be removed upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the permanent dwelling.
16-341 TEMPORARY SALES AND CONSTRUCTION TRAILERS WITHIN DEVELOPMENTS
A. One (1) temporary sales trailer may be permitted within a development of a residential subdivision or condominium development consisting of more than 10 lots or units with review and approval of the Zoning Administrator, subject to the following regulations and requirements:
1. The temporary sales trailer shall be used by all builders in the development solely for the marketing and sale of dwellings in the development.
2. The sales trailer must be placed on a lot or unit, as proposed or existing in the development, and must meet all setback requirements for the zoning district in which it is located.
3. Walkways and at least one (1) entrance to the temporary sales trailer shall meet American with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements for accessibility.
4. A parking lot of crushed concrete or equivalent material with at least four (4) parking spaces shall be provided.
5. The trailer shall be skirted, and landscaping shall be provided to enhance the aesthetic appearance of the site and trailer and to buffer the view of the trailer from any adjacent roads.
6. The sales trailer shall be permitted for a period not to exceed the shorter of the following: Twelve (12) months from the date of approval; or the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a model home in the development to be used for sales or marketing purposes. Upon request of the applicant prior to the expiration of the initial twelve month period, approval for an additional six (6) months may be granted upon review by the Zoning Administrator, if it is demonstrated that there is good grounds for the failure to complete construction of a model home for sales purposes within the initial twelve-month period and that all provisions of this Section have been complied with during the initial twelve months. The applicant for any such extension shall be responsible for the advance payment of all review fees and charges incurred by the Township in connection with reviewing the extension application.
7. Any temporary lighting used in connection with the temporary sales trailer shall be shielded from adjacent properties.
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-22 Zoning Ordinance
8. The gross floor area of the sales trailer shall not exceed eight hundred and forty (840) square feet.
9. The hours of operation and occupancy for the sales trailer shall not exceed 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
10. Facilities shall be provided for on-site bathrooms and solid waste disposal.
11. Paved public access, or other improved means of public access, determined by the Fire Chief to be satisfactory for purposes of ingress and egress for fire equipment and personnel, shall be provided to and from the sales trailer.
12. The exterior design, appearance and color scheme of the sales trailer shall be such that it blends and is aesthetically harmonious with the dwellings located, or to be located, within the development as well as dwellings located on surrounding and adjacent properties.
13. A Site Plan and Landscape Plan (referred to together as the "Site Plan") shall be submitted to, and shall be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to installation or use of any temporary sales trailer. The Site Plan submission shall include all information and all fees required by Section 16-603 of this ordinance and shall provide plans, drawings, elevations, details and notations of all information required by Subsections 1 through 12, above. Review and approval for the installation and use of a temporary sales trailer will not occur until all required review fees and bonds have been provided to the Township and all required information has been submitted. Six (6) copies of the Site Plan, together with all applicable review fees, must be received to be considered for review by the Zoning Administrator. Such plans shall be distributed to the Township's Administrative Official, Township Planner, Township Engineer and any other township department, official and consultant from which the Zoning Administrator requests input. Based on the input of the various Township Departments and Township consultants, the Zoning Administrator shall approve or deny the proposed temporary sales trailer and site plan with or without modifications and conditions using the criteria provided in this section and in Section 16-605 Site Plan review criteria. If all required information is not submitted, the Zoning Administrator may request the Applicant to provide a complete submission.
14. The construction and use of a temporary sales trailer shall conform in all respects with the approved Site Plan, any conditions of an approval by the Zoning Administrator, the requirements of this section and the ordinance, and any other applicable Township ordinance, standard, specification, and regulation, even if not specifically included in an approved Site Plan or as a condition of approval by the Zoning Administrator.
15. A cash bond shall be posted with the Administrative Official as part of the applicant's Site Plan submission. Such bond shall ensure that the temporary trailer and premises upon which it is located are maintained in good condition and in accordance with the requirements of this section (as determined by the Administrative Official), that the use is discontinued and the trailer removed in a timely manner, and that the property on which the trailer and use were located is reasonably restored to its original condition in accordance with Subsection 16-341, B, 5. The bond shall be in an amount reasonably estimated by the Administrative Official as sufficient to remove the trailer and rehabilitate the premises in accordance with this Subsection.
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-23 Zoning Ordinance
B. One (1) temporary construction trailer may be permitted within a development involving a construction project for a use permitted under this ordinance and/or for the construction of roads, water mains or other public utilities or public works, with review and approval of the Zoning Administrator, subject to the following regulations and requirements:
1. The temporary construction trailer shall be used by all builders and developers in the development solely for the management of on-site development and construction activities.
2. The construction trailer must be placed on a lot, parcel or unit, as proposed or existing in the development, and must meet all setback requirements for the zoning district in which it is located.
3. A parking lot of crushed concrete or equivalent material with at least four (4) parking spaces shall be provided.
4. The trailer shall be skirted, and landscaping shall be provided to enhance the aesthetic appearance of the site and trailer and to buffer the view of the temporary construction trailer from any adjacent roads.
5. The construction trailer shall be permitted for a period not to exceed the shorter of the following time periods: Thirty (30) days after the last certificate of occupancy for the principal structure or structures within the development has or have been issued; thirty (30) days after the construction project has been completed; or a period of time set by the Zoning Administrator based upon the intent of the developer, if known, and the particular type and/or size of the development. The trailer shall be removed and the premises so used shall be reasonably restored to its original condition prior to the expiration of the applicable permitted time. Upon request of the applicant prior to the expiration of the initial period of time set by the Zoning Administrator for the trailer to be allowed to remain, approval for an additional period of time may be granted upon review by the Zoning Administrator if it is demonstrated that there is good grounds for the failure to complete construction of the development within the initial period and that all provisions of this Section have been complied with during such initial period of time. The applicant for any such extension shall be responsible for the advance payment of all review fees and charges incurred by the Township in connection with reviewing the extension application.
6. Any temporary lighting used in connection with the temporary construction trailer shall be shielded from adjacent properties.
7. The gross floor area of the construction trailer shall not exceed eight hundred and forty (840) square feet.
8. The hours of operation and occupancy for the construction trailer shall not exceed 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
9. On-site bathrooms and solid waste disposal shall be provided.
10. Paved access, or other improved means of access, approved by the Fire Chief as satisfactory for purposes of ingress and egress for fire equipment and personnel, shall be provided to and from the construction trailer.
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-24 Zoning Ordinance
11. A site plan and landscape plan (referred to together as the "Site Plan") shall be submitted to, and shall be reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to installation or use of any temporary construction trailer. The Site Plan submission shall include all information and all fees required by Section 16-603 of this ordinance and shall provide plans, drawings, elevations, details and notations of all information required by Subsections 1-10, above. Review and approval for the installation and use of a temporary construction trailer will not occur until all required review fees and bonds have been provided to the Township and all required information has been submitted. Six (6) copies of the Site Plan, together with all applicable review fees, must be received to be considered for review by the Zoning Administrator. Such plans shall be distributed to the Township's Administrative Official, Township Planner, Township Engineer and any other township department, official and consultant from which the Zoning Administrator requests input. Based on the input of the various Township Departments and Township consultants, the Zoning Administrator shall approve or deny the proposed temporary construction trailer and site plan with or without modifications and conditions using the criteria provided in this section and in Section 16-605 Site Plan review criteria. If all required information is not submitted, the Zoning Administrator may request the Applicant to provide a complete submission.
12. The construction and use of a temporary construction trailer shall conform in all respects with approved Site Plans, any conditions of an approval by the Zoning Administrator, the requirements of this section and this, and any other applicable Township ordinance, standard, specification, and regulation, even if not specifically included in an approved Site Plan or as a condition of approval by the Zoning Administrator.
13. A cash bond shall be posted with the Township Administrative Official as part of the applicant's Site Plan submission. Such bond shall ensure that the temporary trailer and premises upon which it is located are maintained in good condition and in accordance with the requirements of this Section (as determined by the Administrative Official), that the use is discontinued and the trailer removed in a timely manner, and that the property on which the trailer and use were located is reasonably restored to its original condition
in accordance with Subsection 16-341, B, 5. The
bond shall be in an amount reasonably estimated
by the Administrative Official as sufficient to
remove the trailer and rehabilitate the premises
in accordance with this Subsection.
16-342 RESERVED
16-343 TEST PLANS
A. Purpose. A test plan shall be submitted to the approving body in order to establish the maximum permitted density. The test plan shall identify how the lot could be developed under the conventional standards of the specific zoning district in which the property is situated (without application of this
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-25 Zoning Ordinance
section), and the requirements of all other applicable State, Federal, and Township regulations and standards.
B. Procedure. When required, a test plan shall be developed in accordance with the following:
1. The test plan shall depict what could feasibly be constructed and would constitute a plan that the Township would be required to approve applying the existing zoning standards and all otherwise applicable Township ordinances. Scenic easements, safety paths, requirements for natural feature setbacks, and other dimensional standards applicable to the existing zoning district and use shall be depicted on the test plan.
2. The test plan shall include areas depicted for all infrastructure improvements, including rights-of-way, utility easements, and drainage, detention and retention areas.
3. The test plan shall be drawn to scale as per Section 16-603B and shall include all existing easements on the subject property.
4. The test plan shall include lots that meet the requirements of the underlying zoning district and all provisions of this ordinance. A lot shall include at least five thousand (5,000) square feet of contiguous building area of land which is neither wetland, floodplain, or under water.1 When multiple zoning districts exist on the test plan subject property, a lot may not be divided by a zoning district line.
5. The test plan shall be provided to the Township in electronic format suitable to verify dimensions.
6. Drainage calculations, soils information, and other data may be required to support the test plan.
7. The test plan shall be designed to comply with Township Ordinances including wetlands, floodplains, and any other regulated natural areas. The test plan shall also be consistent with the Township Subdivision Ordinance and Site Condominium standards in Article X.
C. The approving body shall make the determination that a test plan is acceptable once it meets all applicable Federal, State, and Township ordinance requirements and, based on the test plan, determine the number of units permitted under the open space option and PUD provisions provided in this ordinance.
16-344 UNCLASSIFIED USES
A. Where a proposed use of land or use of a building is not expressly authorized, contemplated or named by this ordinance in any of the zoning districts, or where the Zoning Administrator has a question as to the appropriateness of a use that involves other features which are not expressly authorized, contemplated or specified in this ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall request a determination by the Planning Commission. If the Planning Commission determines that such use is not expressly authorized, contemplated or specified by this ordinance, or that it involves features which were not expressly authorized, contemplated or specified in this ordinance, as determined by the Zoning Administrator in the first instance, a
1 The 5,000 square feet is based on a study of all single family detached dwellings in the Township.
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-26 Zoning Ordinance
special use application may be filed by an applicant consistent with the provisions of Section 16-501.
B. The application shall be processed in the manner provided in Section 16-501, and in acting upon the application, in addition to applying and considering the standards, criteria and conditions set forth in Section 16-502, the Planning Commission and Township Board shall seek to ascertain in which district or districts, if any, the proposed use or features of use were intended to be permitted taking into consideration the spirit, purpose and intent of this ordinance as a whole and the spirit, purpose and intent of each individual district.
C. The Township Board may establish and apply additional conditions and specific review standards to uses granted by the Township Board under this Section, in a manner that is consistent with Section 16-502.B.
D. Use decisions under this section may not be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
E. After Township Board approval of a use on a lot under this Section, other lots proposing that use within the same zoning district shall apply for the use pursuant to the procedures of this Section, however the initial determinations of the Zoning Administrator and Planning Commission set forth in Section 16-344.A, above, shall not apply.
16-345 RESERVED
16-346 RESERVED
16-347 RESERVED
16-348 NATURAL FEATURE SETBACK
A. Intent and Purpose.
It is the intent of this section to require a minimum setback from natural features, and to regulate property within such setback in order to prevent physical harm, impairment and/or destruction of or to a natural feature. It has been determined that, in the absence of such a minimum setback, intrusions in or onto natural features would occur, resulting in harm, impairment and/or destruction of natural features contrary to the public health, safety and general welfare. This regulation is based on the police power, for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, including the authority granted in the Zoning Enabling Act, Act 110 of 2006, as amended.
It is the purpose of this section to establish and preserve minimum setback from natural features in order to recognize and make provision for the special relationship, interrelationship and interdependency between the natural feature and the setback area in terms of: Spatial relationship; interdependency in terms of physical location, plant species, animal species and an encouragement of diversity and richness of plant and animal species; over land and subsurface hydrology; water table; water quality; erosion or sediment deposition.
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-27 Zoning Ordinance
B. Regulation.
A natural feature setback shall be maintained in relation to all areas defined in this ordinance as being a "natural feature", unless and to the extent, it is determined to be in the public interest not to maintain such setback.
C. Definition of "Natural Feature".
See Article 2.
D. Authorization and Prohibition.
1. The natural feature setback shall be an area or feature with boundaries and limitations determined in accordance with the standards and provisions in this section in relation to respective types of natural features.
2. In conjunction with the review of plans or application materials submitted for Township approval for the development of property or to otherwise undertake a use or activity in, on, or adjacent to, a natural feature, applicable natural feature setbacks shall be determined, and authorizations and prohibitions established, by the body undertaking the plan or application review.
3. Within an established natural feature setback, unless and only to the extent determined to be in the public interest by the body undertaking the review of the plan or application, there shall be no: deposit of any soil, vegetation or other material; installation of placement of any structures, whether temporary or permanent; removal of any soils, minerals and/or vegetation including mowing; dredging, filling or land balancing; and/or constructing or undertaking seasonal or permanent operations. This prohibition shall not apply with regard to those activities exempted from this prohibition, below.
4. In determining whether proposed construction, uses, management of invasive vegetation, or operations in the Natural Feature Area are in the public interest, the benefit which would reasonably be expected to accrue from the proposal shall be balanced against the reasonably foreseeable detriments of the construction or other operation, taking into consideration the local, state and national concern for the protection and preservation of the natural feature in question. If, as a result of such a balancing, there remains a debatable question whether the proposed construction and/or operation is clearly in the public interest, authorization for the construction and/or operation within the natural feature setback shall not be granted. The following general criteria shall be applied in undertaking this balancing test:
i. The relative extent of the public and private need for the proposed activity.
ii. The availability of feasible and prudent alternative locations and methods to accomplish the expected benefits from the activity.
iii. The extent and permanence of the beneficial or detrimental effects which the proposed activity may have on the public and private use to which the area is suited, including the benefits the natural feature and/or natural feature setback provides.
iv. The probable impact of the proposed construction and/or operation in relation to the cumulative effect created by other existing and anticipated activities in the natural feature to be protected.
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-28 Zoning Ordinance
v. The probable impact on recognized historic, cultural, scenic, ecological, or recreational resources, and on fish, wildlife and the public health.
vi. The size and quantity of the natural feature setback being considered.
vii. The size and quantity of the remaining natural feature setback.
viii. Proximity of the proposed construction and/or operation in relation to the natural feature, taking into consideration the degree of slope, general topography in the area, soil type and the type of the natural feature to be protected.
ix. Economic value, both public and private, of the proposed construction and/or operation, and economic value, both public and private, if the proposed construction and/or operation were not permitted.
x. The necessity for the proposed construction and/or operation.
xi. The type, if any, of mitigation proposed for the impact.
E. Exemptions.
If and to the extent the Township is prohibited by its ordinances and/or law from regulating the proposed activity in or on the respective natural feature, regulation under this section shall be exempted.
F. Application form.
Application shall be made under this section on the form approved by the Township Board and provided by the Building Department.
G. Setback standards.
Unless otherwise determined by the body undertaking the plan review, the following setbacks shall apply:
1. A 25 foot setback from the boundary or edge of a wetland, as defined and regulated in the Township Wetland Ordinance, as amended;
2. A 25 foot setback from the ordinary high water mark of a watercourse.
16-349 WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEM
Wind energy conversion system shall be treated as an accessory structure and shall meet the standards of this section.
A. A wind energy conversion system shall be sized and intended only to supplement the electricity needs of the property on which it is located.
B. Such structures shall only be located in the rear yard, but outside the required rear or side yards.
C. The diameter of the generator blades shall not exceed eight (8) feet.
D. A free standing wind energy conversion system shall comply with the maximum building height permitted for the zoning district. A wind energy conversion system attached to a principal or accessory structure on the property may not extend more than ten (10) feet above
General Regulations
Charter Township of Oakland III-29 Zoning Ordinance
the roof structure.
E. A wind energy conversion system shall be so located on the premises that a distance at least equal to the height of the generator blades at their apogee is provided to the nearest property line.
F. The installation of a wind energy conversion system shall meet all applicable structural and electrical codes.
Zoning Districts
Charter Township of Oakland IV-1 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE IV: ZONING DISTRICTS
16-400 ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
The Township is hereby divided into the following Zoning Districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map:
A. The following districts are commonly referred to as the Residential Districts of the Township:
VLRD – Very Low Residential Density MHRD – Medium-High Residential Density
LRD – Low Residential Density MH – Manufactured Housing
LMRD – Low-Medium Residential Density RM – Multiple-Family Residential (new)
MRD – Medium- Residential Density
B. The following districts are commonly referred to as the Non-residential Districts of the Township:
OS – Office Service RC – Recreational Conservation
RD – Research and Development C – Commercial
C. The following districts are commonly referred to as Overlay Districts in the Township:
WCF – Wireless Communication Facilities Overlay
16-401 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
A. For the purposes of this ordinance the Zoning Districts as provided in this ordinance are bounded and defined as shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map of the Charter Township of Oakland", a copy of which accompanies this ordinance and which, with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby incorporated into and made a part of this ordinance by reference.
B. The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Supervisor, attested by the Township Clerk, and the seal of the Township under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in the Zoning Ordinance of the Charter Township of Oakland", together with the effective date of this ordinance, or any amendments thereto.
C. If, in accordance with the procedures of this ordinance and Michigan law, when a change is made in a Zoning District boundary, such change shall be made on the approved map with a revision date, by or under the direction of the Township Manager, promptly after the amendment authorizing such change shall have been adopted and becomes effective.
Zoning Districts
Charter Township of Oakland IV-2 Zoning Ordinance
D. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map which may from time to time be made or published, the Official Zoning Map which shall be located in the Charter Township of Oakland Hall shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of any land, parcel, lot, Zoning District, use, building or structure in the Township.
E. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of Zoning Districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules of interpretation shall apply:
1. A boundary indicated as approximately following the centerline of a highway, street, alley or easement shall be construed as following such line.
2. A boundary indicated as approximately following a recorded parcel line or a property line shall be construed as following such line.
3. A boundary indicated as approximately following the corporate boundary line of the Township shall be construed as following such line.
4. A boundary indicated as following a railroad line shall be construed as being the centerline of the railroad right of way.
5. A boundary indicated as following a shoreline shall be construed as following such shoreline, and in the event of change in a shoreline shall be construed as following the actual shoreline.
6. A boundary indicated as following the centerline of a water body shall be construed as following such centerline at the time of interpretation.
7. A boundary indicated as parallel to, or an extension of, a feature indicated in subsections 1 through 6 above shall be so construed.
8. A distance not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
F. Where a physical or cultural feature existing on the ground is at variance with that shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in any other circumstance not covered by Section 16-401, F above, or when there is a question in interpreting Section 16-401, F, 1 through 8 above, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall interpret the Zoning District boundary.
16-402 SUMMARY TABLES
A. Table 16-402.01, Table of Land Uses, summarizes the applicable regulatory standards for the land uses governed under this ordinance. However, it should not be substituted for careful reference to the specific language of this ordinance. In the event of a discrepancy between the table and the text of this ordinance, the text shall prevail.
B. The Schedule of District Regulations set forth as Table 16-402.02 provides the dimensional requirements of this ordinance applicable to the specific districts.
C. All uses shall conform to all applicable provisions of this ordinance and any another applicable local ordinances and state and federal laws.
Uses Table
Table 16-402.01 NOTE: P = Permitted S= Special Use Blank= Not Permitted
Charter Township of Oakland IV-3 Zoning Ordinance
USES VLRD
LRD LMRD
MRD MHRD
RM
RC OS C
RD
Accessory Building and Structure P
P P
P P
P P
P
P P
Accessory Use, to a special land use S
S S
S S
S S
S
S S
Accessory Use, when accessory to permitted uses P
P P
P P
P P
P
P P
Adult Family Day Care Home P
P P
P P
Adult Foster Care Family Home P
P P
P P
Adult Foster Care Small Group Home P
P P
P P
Adult Foster Care Medium Group Home S
Adult Group Day Care Home S
Agriculture, Farms and farm buildings P
P P
P
P
Animal Grooming
S S
Assisted Living for the Elderly
S
P
P
Bed and Breakfast S
S S
S S
Camps
S
Cemetery, Private S
S S
S S
S S
Child Foster Family Home P
P P
P P
Convalescent Center/Homes for the Aged
S
S
S
S
Convenience Store
P
Day Care, Commercial
S
Day Care Facility P
P P
P P
P
Day Care, Group S
S S
S S
Dry Cleaning and Laundry Establishment
S
Dwelling, Multiple Family
P
Dwelling, Single-Family P
P P
P P
P P
Dwelling, Two-Family
P
Educational Facility S
S S
S S
S S
Financial Institution
P
P P
Uses Table
Table 16-402.01 NOTE: P = Permitted S= Special Use Blank= Not Permitted
Charter Township of Oakland IV-4 Zoning Ordinance
USES VLRD
LRD LMRD
MRD MHRD
RM
RC OS C
RD
Funeral Home
P
S S
Gas Station7
P
Golf Course S
S S
S S
S S
Greenhouse, as an accessory structure
P
Home Occupation P
P P
P P
Independent Living for the Elderly
S S
S
P
P
Kennel/Animal Day Care
S
S
S S
Manufacturing Facilities
S
Medical Office
P
P P
Mini/Self Storage Facility
P
Mining, gravel and mineral S
S S
S S
S S
Mixed Use Development
S
S S
Motel/Hotel
P P
Nursery
P P
Office Building
P
P P
Oil and Gas Structures S
Open Space Developments P
P P
Personal Service Business
P P
Place of Public Assembly S
S S
S S
S
S
S
Planned Unit Development S
S S
S S
S
Professional Service Establishment
P
P P
Public and quasi-public uses P
P P
P P
P P
P
P P
Roadside Stand P
P P
P
Recreation Facilities, Indoor
P P
Residential Above Retail or Office
Uses Table
Table 16-402.01 NOTE: P = Permitted S= Special Use Blank= Not Permitted
Charter Township of Oakland IV-5 Zoning Ordinance
USES VLRD
LRD LMRD
MRD MHRD
RM
RC OS C
RD
Restaurant, Sit Down
P
Retail Sales
P
Scientific, Engineering, Research Laboratories
P
Social Service Center
P
P P
Stable, Riding Academy
S
Utility and public service buildings P
P P
P P
P P
P
P P
Veterinary Clinic
P
P
Veterinary Hospital
S
S
S P
Warehouse
P
Schedule of District Regulations
Table 16-402.02
Charter Township of Oakland IV-6 Zoning Ordinance
DISTRICT
MINIMUM LOT DIMENSIONS
MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE
MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS (FEET)
MAXIMUM BUILDINGHEIGHT
MINIMUM LAND AREA/ DWELLING
Area
(sq. ft.)
Width
(feet)
(%) of gross lot area
Front/Corner Front
Side
Rear
Feet/stories
(Sq.Ft. & Ft)
VLRD: w/o sewer
100,000
200
15%
50
20
55
35/2.5
Not Applicable (NA)
w/ sewer
75,000
150
LRD: w/o sewer
60,000
150
20%
50
20
55
35/2.5
NA
w/ sewer
45,000
130
LMRD: w/o sewer
40,000
130
25%
50
20
35
35/2.5
NA
w/ sewer
30,000
120
MRD: w/o sewer
26,000
120
25%
40
20
35
35/2.5
NA
w/ sewer
19,500
110
MHRD: w/o sewer
22,000
120
25%
40
10
35
35/2.5
NA
w/ sewer
16,500
110
RM:
Total land area must be at least 10 acres
N/A
N/A
40
40
40
35 (b)(c)
One bedroom
3,800
Two bedroom
5,700
Three bedroom
9,500
Four bedroom
11,400
RC: w/o sewer
10 acres
330
10%
50
40
55
35/2.5
NA
MH:
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
(a)
NA
Schedule of District Regulations
Table 16-402.02
Charter Township of Oakland IV-7 Zoning Ordinance
(a) See Section16-409 for building requirements
(b) The total number of stories including a walkout basement level, if provided, shall not exceed two (2).
(c) No part of a dwelling unit shall be below grade unless sloping topography affords special design opportunities for amenities. Except for the above special situation, the maximum building height shall be two (2) stories. No building shall contain more than sixteen (16) dwelling units. No building shall have a horizontal length greater than one hundred thirty-five (135) feet.
DISTRICT
MINIMUM LOT DIMENSIONS
MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE
MINIMUM YARD REQUIREMENTS (FEET)
MAXIMUM BUILDINGHEIGHT
MINIMUM FLOOR AREA/
Area
(sq. ft.)
Width
(feet)
(%) of gross lot area
Front/Corner Front)
Side
Rear
Feet/stories
(Sq.Ft. & Ft)
OS:
8,000
80
80%
40
20
40
35’/2.5
800 sq. ft.
C:
8,000
80
80%
40
20
40
35’/2.5
NA
RD:
4 acres
330 ft.
80%
100
50
50
35’/2.5
2,000 sq. ft.
Schedule of District Regulations
Table 16-402.02
Charter Township of Oakland IV-8 Zoning Ordinance
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-9 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE IV
DISTRICT STANDARDS
SECTION 16-403 VERY LOW RESIDENTIAL DENSITY DISTRICT
16-403 VLRD. VERY LOW RESIDENTIAL DENSITY DISTRICT
16-403.01 INTENT
The VLRD, Very Low Residential Density District is intended to provide for very low-density single-family residential development with special attention paid to the preservation of natural features as designated in the Township Community Master Plan. The character of this district is rural with single-family dwellings on large lots which provide large expanses of open space. It is intended and desired in this district that open spaces be preserved through careful placement of dwellings in areas where natural features would be least compromised. Neighborhoods are intended to be quiet and generally free of unrelated traffic, though limited, low-impact residentially related land uses may be permitted as described below. It is also the intent of this district to keep the paving of roads to a minimum. When possible, it is intended that natural features as identified in the Natural Features Assessment will be protected through conservation easements and other development tools.
16-403.02 DISTRICT PROVISIONS. The following is a list of uses permitted by right, special land uses, site and building placement standards, and building form standards applicable to the VLRD District.
A. PERMITTED USES
? Accessory Building and Structure, when accessory to a principal use
? Accessory Use, when accessory to permitted uses
? Adult Family Day Care Home
? Adult Foster Care Family Home
? Adult Foster Care Small Group Home
? Agriculture, farms and farm buildings
? Child Foster Family Home
? Day Care Facility
? Dwelling, Single-Family
? Home Occupation subject to 16-323
? Open Space Developments subject to 16-330
? Public and quasi-public uses, subject to 16-317
? Roadside stand subject to 16-410.03.B
? Utility and public service buildings, subject to 16-317
B. SPECIAL LAND USES
? Accessory Use, to a special land use, subject to 16-503
? Adult Foster Care Medium Group Home, subject to 16-347
? Adult Group Day Care Home, subject to 16-347
? Bed & Breakfast, subject to 16-505
? Cemetery, Private subject to 16-507
? Day Care, Group subject to 16-509
? Educational Facility, subject to 16-512
? Golf Course, subject to 16-514
? Mining, gravel and mineral, subject to 16-519
? Oil and Gas Structures
? Place of Public Assembly, subject to 16-523
? Planned Unit Development, subject to 16-524
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-10 Zoning Ordinance
C. SITE AND BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Minimum Lot Area w/o Sewer: 100,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width w/o Sewer: 200 feet
Minimum Lot Width Corner w/o Sewer: 200 feet
Minimum Lot Area w/ Sewer: 75,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width w/ Sewer: 150 feet
Minimum Lot Width Corner w/ Sewer: 150 feet
Maximum Lot Coverage: 15%
Maximum Building Height/Stories: 35 feet/2.5
Minimum Setbacks:
Front: 50 feet
Corner Front: 50 feet
Side: 20 feet
Rear: 55 feet
Table 16--402.02 and the footnotes set forth therein provide additional standards that are applicable.
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-11 Zoning Ordinance
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-12 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE IV
DISTRICT STANDARDS
SECTION 16-404 LOW RESIDENTIAL DENSITY DISTRICT
16-404 LRD. LOW RESIDENTIAL DENSITY DISTRICT
16-404.01 INTENT
The LRD, Low Residential Density District is intended to provide for low-density single-family residential development with special attention paid to the preservation of natural features as indicated in the Community Master Plan. The character of this district is rural with single-family dwellings on large lots which provide large expanses of open space. Such preservation can be accomplished through careful placement of dwellings in areas where natural features would be least compromised. The placement of residential development should foster linkages between wildlife corridors throughout the Township and contiguous areas for greenways. When possible, it is intended that natural features as identified in the Natural Features Assessment will be protected through conservation easements and other development tools.
16-404.02 DISTRICT PROVISIONS. The following is a list of uses permitted by right, special land uses, site and building placement standards, and building form standards applicable to the LRD District.
A. PERMITTED USES
? Accessory Building and Structure, when accessory to a principal use
? Accessory Use, when accessory to permitted uses
? Adult Family Day Care Home
? Adult Foster Care Family Home
? Adult Foster Care Small Group Home
? Agriculture, farms and farm buildings
? Child Foster Family Home
? Day Care Facility
? Dwelling, Single-Family
? Home Occupation subject to 16-323
? Open Space Developments, subject to 16-330
? Public and quasi-public uses, subject to 16-317
? Roadside stand subject to 16-410.03.B
? Utility and public service buildings, subject to 16-317
B. SPECIAL LAND USES
? Accessory Use, to a special land use, subject to 16-503
? Bed & Breakfast, subject to 16-505
? Cemetery, Private subject to 16-507
? Day Care, Group subject to 16-509
? Educational Facility, subject to 16-512
? Golf Course, subject to 16-514
? Mining, gravel and mineral, subject to 16-519
? Place of Public Assembly, subject to 16-523
? Planned Unit Development, subject to 16-524
C. SITE AND BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Minimum Lot Area w/o Sewer: 60,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width w/o Sewer: 150 feet
Minimum Lot Width Corner w/o Sewer: 150 feet
Minimum Lot Area w/ Sewer: 45,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width w/ Sewer: 130 feet
Minimum Lot Width Corner w/ Sewer: 130 feet
Maximum Lot Coverage: 20%
Maximum Building Height/Stories: 35 feet/2.5
Minimum Setbacks:
Front: 50 feet
Corner Front: 50 feet
Side: 20 feet
Rear: 55 feet
Table 16--402.02 and the footnotes set forth therein provide additional standards that are applicable.
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-13 Zoning Ordinance
LRD
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-14 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE IV
DISTRICT STANDARDS
SECTION 16-405 LOW-MEDIUM RESIDENTIAL DENSITY DISTRICT
16-405 LMRD. LOW-MEDIUM RESIDENTIAL DENSITY DISTRICT
16-405.01 INTENT
The LMRD, Low-Medium Residential Density District is intended to provide for low/medium density single-family residential development with special attention paid to the preservation of natural features to support a system of greenways. The character of this district is rural with single-family dwellings on large lots which provide large expanses of open space. Such preservation can be accomplished through careful placement of dwellings in areas where natural features would be least compromised.
16-405.02 DISTRICT PROVISIONS. The following is a list of uses permitted by right, special land uses, site and building placement standards, and building form standards applicable to the LMRD District.
A. PERMITTED USES
? Accessory Building and Structure, when accessory to a principal use
? Accessory Use, when accessory to permitted uses
? Adult Family Day Care Home
? Adult Foster Care Family Home
? Adult Foster Care Small Group Home
? Agriculture, farms and farm buildings
? Child Foster Family Home
? Day Care Facility
? Dwelling, Single-Family
? Home Occupation subject to 16-323
? Open Space Developments, subject to 16-330
? Public and quasi-public uses, subject to 16-317
? Roadside stand subject to 16-410.03.B
? Utility and public service buildings, subject to 16-317
B. SPECIAL LAND USES
? Accessory Use, to a special land use, subject to 16-503
? Bed & Breakfast, subject to 16-505
? Cemetery, Private subject to 16-507
? Day Care, Group subject to 16-509
? Educational Facility, subject to 16-512
? Golf Course, subject to 16-514
? Mining, gravel and mineral, subject to 16-519
? Place of Public Assembly, subject to 16-523
? Planned Unit Development, subject to 16-524
C. SITE AND BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Minimum Lot Area w/o Sewer: 40,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width w/o Sewer: 130 feet
Minimum Lot Width Corner w/o Sewer: 130 feet
Minimum Lot Area w/ Sewer: 30,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width w/ Sewer: 120 feet
Minimum Lot Width Corner w/ Sewer: 120 feet
Maximum Lot Coverage: 25%
Maximum Building Height/Stories: 35 feet/2.5
Minimum Setbacks:
Front: 50 feet
Corner Front: 50 feet
Side: 20 feet
Rear: 35 feet
Table 16--402.02 and the footnotes set forth therein provide additional standards that are applicable.
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-15 Zoning Ordinance
LMRD
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-16 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE IV
DISTRICT STANDARDS
SECTION 16-406 MEDIUM RESIDENTIAL DENSITY DISTRICT
16-406 MRD. MEDIUM RESIDENTIAL DENSITY DISTRICT
16-406.01 INTENT
The MRD, Medium Residential Density District is intended to provide for medium density single-family residential development in relatively rural and low density patterns. Since this district is located in areas with little or no significant natural features, a conventional lot split or platted subdivision would not negatively impact environmental quality. Neighborhoods are intended to be quiet and generally free of unrelated traffic, though limited, low-impact residentially related land uses may be permitted as described below. Except where topographic or other environmental constraints preclude such connectivity, streets within the MRD District should be interconnected, although both curvilinear and grid patterns are encouraged, some cul-de-sac and collector patterns may be developed.
16-406.02 DISTRICT PROVISIONS. The following is a list of uses permitted by right, special land uses, site and building placement standards, and building form standards applicable to the MRD District.
A. PERMITTED USES
? Accessory Building and Structure, when accessory to a principal use
? Accessory Use, when accessory to permitted uses
? Adult Family Day Care Home
? Adult Foster Care Family Home
? Adult Foster Care Small Group Home
? Agriculture, farms and farm buildings
? Child Foster Family Home
? Day Care Facility
? Dwelling, Single-Family
? Home Occupation subject to 16-323
? Public and quasi-public uses, subject to 16-317
? Utility and public service buildings, subject to 16-317
B. SPECIAL LAND USES
? Accessory Use, to a special land use, subject to 16-503
? Bed & Breakfast, subject to 16-505
? Cemetery, Private subject to 16-507
? Day Care, Group subject to 16-509
? Educational Facility, subject to 16-512
? Golf Course, subject to 16-514
? Independent Living for the Elderly, subject to 16-529
? Mining, gravel and mineral, subject to 16-519
? Place of Public Assembly, subject to 16-523
? Planned Unit Development, subject to 16-524
C. SITE AND BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Minimum Lot Area w/o Sewer: 26,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width w/o Sewer: 120 feet
Minimum Lot Width Corner w/o Sewer: 120 feet
Minimum Lot Area w/ Sewer: 19,500 square feet
Minimum Lot Width w/ Sewer: 110 feet
Minimum Lot Width Corner w/ Sewer: 120 feet
Maximum Lot Coverage: 25%
Maximum Building Height/Stories: 35 feet/2.5
Minimum Setbacks:
Front: 40 feet
Corner Front: 40 feet
Side: 20 feet
Rear: 35 feet
Table 16--402.02 and the footnotes set forth therein provide additional standards that are applicable.
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-17 Zoning Ordinance
MRD
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-18 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE IV
DISTRICT STANDARDS
SECTION 16-407 MEDIUM HIGH RESIDENTIAL DENSITY DISTRICT
16-407 MHRD. MEDIUM HIGH RESIDENTIAL DENSITY DISTRICT
16-407.01 INTENT
The MHRD, Medium High Residential Density District is intended to provide for medium high density single-family residential development with special attention to creating neighborhoods that are walkable while still exhibiting features of a rural, open space community. The character in this district is suburban with single-family dwellings on mid-sized lots which provide open space. This zoning district is characterized by meandering gravel or paved roads, sidewalks, street trees and scenic setbacks from major roads. Such preservation can be accomplished through careful placement of dwellings in areas where natural features would be least compromised. Neighborhoods are intended to be quiet and generally free of unrelated traffic, though limited, low-impact residentially related land uses may be permitted as described below. Except where topographic or other environmental constraints preclude such connectivity, streets within the MHRD District should be interconnected, although curvilinear patterns are encouraged, some cul-de-sac and collector patterns may be developed.
16-407.02 DISTRICT PROVISIONS. The following is a list of uses permitted by right, special land uses, site and building placement standards, and building form standards applicable to the MHRD District.
A. PERMITTED USES
? Accessory Building and Structure, when accessory to a principal use
? Accessory Use, when accessory to permitted uses
? Adult Family Day Care Home
? Adult Foster Care Family Home
? Adult Foster Care Small Group Home
? Child Foster Family Home
? Day Care Facility
? Dwelling, Single-Family
? Home Occupation subject to 16-323
? Public and quasi-public uses, subject to 16-317
? Utility and public service buildings, subject to 16-317
B. SPECIAL LAND USES
? Accessory Use, to a special land use, subject to 16-503
? Bed & Breakfast, subject to 16-505
? Cemetery, Private subject to 16-507
? Day Care, Group subject to 16-509
? Educational Facility, subject to 16-512
? Golf Course, subject to 16-514
? Mining, gravel and mineral, subject to 16-519
? Convalescent Center/Homes for the Aged, subject to 16-522
? Place of Public Assembly, subject to 16-523
? Planned Unit Development, subject to 16-524
? Independent Living for the Elderly, subject to 16-529
C. SITE AND BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Minimum Lot Area w/o Sewer: 22,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width w/o Sewer: 120 feet
Minimum Lot Width Corner w/o Sewer: 120 feet
Minimum Lot Area w/ Sewer: 16,500 square feet
Minimum Lot Width w/ Sewer: 110 feet
Minimum Lot Width Corner w/ Sewer: 120 feet
Maximum Lot Coverage: 25%
Maximum Building Height/Stories: 35 feet/2.5
Minimum Setbacks:
Front: 40 feet
Corner Front: 40 feet
Side: 10 feet
Rear: 35 feet
Table 16--402.02 and the footnotes set forth therein provide additional standards that are applicable.
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-19 Zoning Ordinance
MHRD
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-20 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE IV
DISTRICT STANDARDS
SECTION 16-408 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DISTRICT
16-408 RM. MULTIPLE-FAMILY DISTRICT
16-408.01 INTENT
The RM, Multiple-Family District is intended to provide for attached single-family and attached multi-family residential development to broaden the range of housing types in the community for different age and income levels. Multiple-family residential communities in the RM district is intended to incorporate walking paths, open space areas, street trees and other landscape features similar to single-family residential neighborhoods. These multiple-family districts may or are intended to serve as receptors to senior living environments and care services, and are intended to be located in close proximity to commercial and recreational areas.
16-408.02 DISTRICT PROVISIONS. The following is a list of uses permitted by right, special land uses, site and building placement standards, and building form standards applicable to the RM District.
A. PERMITTED USES
? Accessory Building and Structure
? Accessory Use, when accessory to permitted uses
? Dwelling, Multiple-Family, subject to 16-511
? Dwelling, Single-Family
? Dwelling, Two-Family
? Public and quasi-public uses, subject to 16-317
? Utility and public service buildings, subject to 16-317
B. SPECIAL LAND USES
? Accessory Use, to a special land use, subject to 16-503
? Assisted Living for the Elderly, subject to 16-529
? Cemetery, Private subject to 16-507
? Educational Facility, subject to 16-512
? Golf Course, subject to 16-514
? Independent Living for the Elderly, subject to 16-529
? Mining, gravel and mineral, subject to 16-519
? Convalescent Center/Homes for the Aged, subject to 16-522
? Place of Public Assembly, subject to 16-523
? Planned Unit Development, subject to 16-524
C. SITE AND BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Minimum Lot Size 10 acres
Dwelling, Single Family Same as 16-407.02C
Dwelling, Two Family Same as 16-407.02C
All Others:
Minimum Land Area Per Dwelling Unit:
One Bedroom/Efficiency Unit: 3,800 sq. ft.
Two Bedroom Unit: 5,700 sq. ft
Three Bedroom Unit: 9,500 sq. ft.
Four Bedroom Unit: 11,400 sq. ft.
(Land area used for computing densities shall exclude the rights-of-way of all roads, whether public or private.)
Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
Minimum Setbacks:
From any perimeter property line: 40 feet
From planned future right-of-way line: 40 feet
From scenic easement: 40 feet
From other buildings in development: The greater of 20 feet or the height of the building or adjacent building.
Table 16--402.02 and the footnotes set forth therein provide additional standards that are applicable.
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-21 Zoning Ordinance
RM
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-22 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE IV
DISTRICT STANDARDS
SECTION 16-409 MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT
16-409 MH-MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT
16-409.01 INTENT
It is the intent of this District to establish a locale to accommodate manufactured housing communities as regulated by the Michigan Mobile Home Commission Act, Act 96 of the Public Acts of 1987, as amended, and the rules and regulations of the Manufactured Housing Commission. All uses in this district shall receive approval by the Manufactured Housing Division and comply with Act 96 of the Public Acts of 1987, as amended.
16-409.02 REQUIREMENTS
The design standards of a manufactured housing community shall be governed by the rules and regulations of the Manufactured Housing Commission.
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-23 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE IV
DISTRICT STANDARDS
SECTION 16-410 RECREATION CONSERVATION DISTRICT
16-410 RC. RECREATION CONSERVATION DISTRICT
16-410.01 INTENT
The regulations of this district are intended to conserve open space, especially the contiguity of large parcels of open space areas with natural amenities, such as wildlife, lakes, streams and the shorelines thereof, pronounced topography, woodlands, floodplains, or other natural features. This district is designed to regulate public and private use of such areas for the recreation and enjoyment of persons, and to regulate the use, improvement, and development of such lands so as to safeguard the natural amenities and desirable influences and allow by special land use approval certain uses that may be found suitable at certain specific locations.
16-410.02 DISTRICT PROVISIONS. The following is a list of uses permitted by right, special land uses, site and building placement standards, and building form standards applicable to the RC District.
A. PERMITTED USES
? Accessory Building and Structure when accessory to a permitted use
? Accessory Use, when accessory to permitted uses
? Agriculture, farms and farm buildings
? Day Care Facility
? Dwelling, Single-Family
? Public and quasi-public uses, subject to 16-317
? Roadside stand subject to 16-410.03.B
? Utility and public service buildings, subject to 16-530
B. SPECIAL LAND USES
? Accessory Use, to a special land use, subject to 16-503
? Camps, subject to 16-506
? Cemetery, Private subject to 16-507
? Educational Facility, subject to 16-512
? Golf Course, subject to 16-514
? Kennel/Animal Day Care, subject to 16-517
? Mining, gravel and mineral, subject to 16-519
? Stable, Riding Academy, subject to 16-527
? Veterinary Hospital, subject to 16-528
C. SITE AND BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Minimum Lot Area w/o Sewer: 10 acres
Minimum Lot Width w/o Sewer: 330 ft.
Minimum Lot Width Corner w/o Sewer: 330 ft.
Minimum Lot Area w/ Sewer: 10 acres
Minimum Lot Width w/ Sewer: 330 ft.
Minimum Lot Width Corner w/ Sewer: 330 ft.
Maximum Lot Coverage: 10%
Minimum Setbacks:
Front: 50 feet
Corner Front: 50 feet
Side: 40 feet
Rear: 55 feet
Maximum Building Height/Stories: 35 feet/2.5
Table 16--402.02 and the footnotes set forth therein provide additional standards that are applicable.
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-24 Zoning Ordinance
16-410.03 NOTES:
A. There shall be not more than one (1) dwelling per ten (10) acres.
B. Roadside Stands shall comply with the following:
1. No more than one stand for the sale of agricultural products grown on the premises shall be permitted.
2. The stand shall not operate more than one hundred twenty (120) days per calendar year.
3. The stand shall only operate during daylight hours.
4. The stand shall be set back at least thirty (30) feet from the front lot line.
5. Off street parking shall be provided for not less than five (5) automobiles.
6. One (1) on-site and two (2) off-site temporary signs measuring not more than four (4) square feet each shall be allowed for each roadside stand. Express permission of the owner is required for location of the off-site signs. The temporary signs are allowed only during the duration of the maximum one hundred twenty (120) day operating period.
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-25 Zoning Ordinance
C. SITE AND BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Minimum Lot Area: 8,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width: 80 feet
Maximum Lot Coverage: 80%
(includes parking/paving)
Minimum Setbacks:
Front: 40 feet
Corner Front: 40 feet
Side: 20 feet
Rear: 40 feet
Minimum Gross Floor Area: 800 square feet
Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
ARTICLE IV
DISTRICT STANDARDS
SECTION 16-411 OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICT
16-411 OS. OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICT
16-411.01 INTENT
The intent of the Office Service District is to support office uses in specific locations within the Township which will be well integrated with the surrounding residential character. Where single-family detached dwellings exist in the Office Service district, adaptive reuse of these dwellings for office-service uses is encouraged. It is also intended that, where new development occurs, it will be compatible with residential neighborhoods using building height limitations, setbacks, and lot coverage standards set forth herein. To further promote these objectives, the regulations herein provide for the transition from residential to office-service uses to be marked by landscape buffers including berm, or evergreen screening, and lighting, signage, and parking lots are to be designed to have a minimum impact on residential uses.
16-411.02 DISTRICT PROVISIONS. The following is a list of uses permitted by right, special land uses, site and building placement standards, and building form standards applicable to the OS District.
A. PERMITTED USES
? Accessory Building and Structure when accessory to a permitted use
? Accessory Use, when accessory to permitted uses
? Assisted Living for the Elderly, subject to 16-529
? Financial Institution
? Funeral Home
? Independent Living for the Elderly, subject to 16-529
? Medical Office
? Nursing Home/Assisted Living
? Office Building
? Professional Service Establishment
? Public and quasi-public uses, subject to 16-317
? Social Service Center
? Utility and Public Service Buildings, subject to 16-317
? Veterinary Clinic
B. SPECIAL LAND USES
? Accessory Use, to a special land use, subject to 16-503
? Convalescent Center/Homes for the Aged, subject to 16-522
? Day Care, Commercial, subject to 16-508
? Kennel/Animal Day Care, subject to 16-517
? Mixed Use Development, subject to 16-512
? Place of Public Assembly, subject to 16-523
? Veterinary Hospital, subject to 16-528
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-26 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE IV
DISTRICT STANDARDS
SECTION 16-412 RESERVED
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-27 Zoning Ordinance
C. SITE AND BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Minimum Lot Area: 8,000 square feet
Minimum Lot Width: 80 feet
Maximum Lot Coverage: 80%
(includes parking/paving)
Minimum Setbacks:
Front: 40 feet
Corner Front: 40 feet
Side: 20 feet
Rear: 40 feet
Minimum Gross Floor Area: 800 square feet
Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
ARTICLE IV
DISTRICT STANDARDS
SECTION 16-413 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
16-413 C. COMMERCIAL DISTRICT
16-413.01 INTENT
The intent of the Commercial District is to support commercial uses in specific locations within the Township which will be well integrated with the surrounding residential character. It is intended that, where new development occurs, it will be compatible with residential neighborhoods using building height limitations, setbacks, and lot coverage standards set forth in this ordinance. The transition from residential to commercial uses is marked by landscape buffers including berms, or evergreen screening. Lighting, signage, and parking lots shall be designed to have a minimum impact on residential uses.
16-413.02 DISTRICT PROVISIONS. The following is a list of uses permitted by right, special land uses, site and building placement standards, and additional regulations applicable to the C District.
A. PERMITTED USES
? Accessory Building and Structure when accessory to a permitted use
? Accessory Use, when accessory to permitted uses
? Convenience Store
? Financial Institution
? Gas Station
? Greenhouse, as an accessory structure
? Medical Office
? Motel/Hotel
? Nursery
? Assisted Living for the Elderly, subject to Section 16-529
? Office Building
? Personal Service Business
? Professional Service Establishment
? Public and Quasi-Public uses, subject to 16-317
? Recreation Facility, Indoor
? Restaurant, Sit Down
? Retail Sales
? Independent Living for the Elderly, subject to 16-529
? Social Service Center
? Utility and public service buildings, subject to 16-317
? Veterinary Clinic
B. SPECIAL LAND USES
? Accessory Use, to a special land use, subject to 16-503
? Animal Grooming, subject to 16-504
? Convalescent Center/Homes for the Aged, subject to 16-522
? Funeral Home, subject to 16-513
? Kennel/Animal Day Care, subject to 16-517
? Mixed Use Development, subject to 16-521
? Place of Public Assembly, subject to 16-523
? Veterinary Hospital, subject to 16-528
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-28 Zoning Ordinance
C. SITE AND BUILDING PLACEMENT STANDARDS
Minimum Lot Area: 4 acres
Minimum Lot Width: 330 feet
Maximum Lot Coverage: 80%
(includes parking/paving)
Minimum Setbacks:
Front: 100 feet
Corner Front: 100 feet
Rear: 50 feet
Side: 50 feet
Ground Floor Area: 2,000 square feet
Maximum Building Height: 35 feet
ARTICLE IV
DISTRICT STANDARDS
SECTION 16-414 RESEARCH-DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
16-414 RD. RESEARCH-DEVELOPMENT District
16-414.01 INTENT
The RD district is intended to accommodate scientific research and development facilities, warehouses, and manufacturing and assembly operations whose external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and are well-matched to the surrounding uses. It is further intended that activities involving the manufacture or processing of material be entirely enclosed and that all uses conform to the performance standards of this ordinance.
16-414.02 DISTRICT PROVISIONS. The following is a list of uses permitted by right, special land uses, site and building placement standards, and building form standards applicable to the RD District.
A. PERMITTED USES
? Accessory Building and Structure when accessory to a permitted use
? Accessory Use, when accessory to permitted uses
? Financial Institution
? Medical Office
? Mini/Self Storage Facility
? Motel/Hotel
? Nursery
? Office Building
? Personal Service Business
? Professional Service Establishment
? Public and quasi-public uses, subject to 16-317
? Recreation Facilities, Indoor
? Scientific, engineering and/or research laboratories
? Social Service Center
? Utility and public service buildings, subject to 16-317
? Veterinary Hospital
? Warehouse
B. SPECIAL LAND USES
? Accessory Use to a special land use, subject to 16-503
? Animal Grooming, subject to 16-504
? Funeral Home, subject to 16-513
? Kennel/Animal Day Care, subject to 16-517
? Manufacturing Facilities, subject to 16-518
? Mixed Use Development, subject to 16-521
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-29 Zoning Ordinance
16-415 RESERVED
16-416 WCF, WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES OVERLAY
16-416.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT
It is the general purpose and intent of the Township to carry out the will of the United States Congress by authorizing communication facilities needed to operate wireless communication systems. However, it is the further purpose and intent of the Township to provide for such authorization in a manner which will retain the integrity of neighborhoods and the character, property values and aesthetic quality of the community at large. In fashioning and administering the provisions of this section, attempt has been made to balance these potentially competing interests. Recognizing the number of providers authorized to establish and operate wireless communication services and coverage, it is the further purpose and intent of this section to:
A. Facilitate adequate and efficient provision of sites for Wireless Communication Facilities.
B. Establish predetermined districts or zones of the number, shape, and in the location, considered best for the establishment of Wireless Communication Facilities, subject to applicable standards and conditions.
C. Recognize that operation of a wireless communication system may require the establishment of facilities in locations not within the predetermined districts or zones. In such cases, it has been determined that it is likely that there will be greater adverse impact upon neighborhoods and areas within the Township. Consequently, more stringent standards and conditions should apply to the review, approval and use of such facilities.
D. Ensure that Wireless Communication Facilities are situated in appropriate locations and relationships to other land uses, structures and buildings.
E. Limit inappropriate physical and aesthetic overcrowding of land use activities and avoid adverse impact upon existing population, transportation systems, and other public services and facility needs.
F. Promote the public health, safety and welfare.
G. Provide for adequate information about plans for Wireless Communication Facilities in order to permit the community to effectively plan for the location of such facilities.
H. Minimize the adverse impacts of technological obsolescence of such facilities, including a requirement to remove unused and/or unnecessary facilities in a timely manner.
I. Minimize the negative visual impact of Wireless Communication Facilities on neighborhoods, community landmarks, historic resources, natural beauty areas and public rights-of-way. This contemplates the establishment of as few structures as reasonably feasible, and the use of structures which are designed for compatibility, including the use of
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-30 Zoning Ordinance
existing structures and the avoidance of lattice structures that are unnecessary, taking into consideration the purposes and intent of this section.
J. The Township Board finds that the presence of numerous tower and/or pole structures, particularly if located within residential areas, would decrease the attractiveness and destroy the character and integrity of the community. This, in turn, may have an adverse impact upon property values. Therefore, it is necessary to minimize the adverse impact from the presence of numerous tower and/or pole structures having low architectural and other aesthetic appeal to most persons, recognizing that the absence of regulation would result in a material impediment to the maintenance and promotion of property values, and further recognizing that this economic component is an important part of the public health, safety and welfare.
16-416.02 PERMITTED USES
Subject to the standards and conditions set forth in Section 16-416.05, Wireless Communication Facilities shall be permitted uses in the following circumstances, and in the following overlay zones:
A. An existing structure which will serve as an Attached Wireless Communication Facility within a non-residential zoning district, where the existing structure is not, in the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, proposed to be either materially altered or materially changed in appearance; or an existing structure which will serve as an Attached Wireless Communication Facility within a residential zoning district if the accessory building is either not visible from any residence or can be screened to that extent in accordance with the standards set forth in Article Eight Landscaping and where the existing structure is not, in the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, proposed to be either materially altered or materially changed in appearance.
B. A proposed co-location upon an Attached Wireless Communication Facility which had been pre-approved for such co-location as part of an earlier approval by the Township.
C. An existing structure which will serve as an Attached Wireless Communication Facility consisting of a utility pole located within a right-of-way, where the existing pole is not proposed to be modified in a manner which, in the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, would materially alter the structure and/or result in an impairment of sight lines or other safety interests.
D. A proposal to establish a new Wireless Communication Facility shall be deemed a permitted use if proposed in a Permitted Use Overlay Zone, as shown on the overlay map made a part of this section.
16-416.03 SPECIAL LAND USE/OVERLAY ZONES
If it is demonstrated by an applicant that there is no reasonable difference of opinion that a Wireless Communication Facility may not reasonably be established as a permitted use under Section 16-416.02 and is required in order to operate a wireless communication service then a Wireless Communication Facility may be authorized under the procedures and as provided in
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-31 Zoning Ordinance
Section 16-502, as a special land use within a Special Land Use Overlay Zone, as shown on the overlay map made a part of this section, considering the standards and conditions in Sections 16-416.05 and 16-416.06.
16-416.04 SPECIAL LAND USES OUTSIDE SPECIAL LAND USE OVERLAY ZONES
If it is demonstrated by an applicant that there is no reasonable difference of opinion that a Wireless Communication Facility may not reasonably be established as a Permitted Use or within a Special Land Use Overlay Zone, identified in Sections 16-416.02 and 16-416.03, then, a Wireless Communication Facility may be permitted elsewhere in the Township under the procedures and as provided in Section 16-502, as a special land use, subject to the standards and conditions of Sections 16-416.05 and 16-416.06, and also subject to the following:
A. At the time of the submittal, the applicant shall demonstrate that a location within a Permitted Use or Special Land Use overlay zone cannot meet the need required for operation of a system.
B. Wireless Communication Facilities shall be of a design such as (without limitation) a steeple, bell tower, or other form which is compatible with the existing character of the proposed site, neighborhood and general area, as approved by the Township.
C. In single-family residential neighborhoods, site locations outside of an Overlay Zone identified in Sections 16-416.02D and 16-416.03, above, shall be considered first on the following sites (not stated in any order of priority), subject to application of all other standards contained in this section:
1. Religious or other institutional site.
2. Municipally owned site.
3. Other governmentally owned site.
4. Public park and other large permanent open space areas when compatible.
5. Public or private school site.
6. Other locations if none of the above is available.
16-416.05 STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL FACILITIES
All applications for Wireless Communication Facilities shall be reviewed in accordance with the following standards and conditions, and, if approved, shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with such standards and conditions and any additional conditions imposed with a special land use approval:
A. Facilities shall be located, landscaped and designed to be harmonious with the surrounding area. Among other things, all reasonable attempts shall be made and thoroughly explored to
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-32 Zoning Ordinance
utilize existing structures on which to place facilities, i.e. to utilize Attached Wireless Communications Facilities.
B. Wireless Communication Facilities shall comply with applicable federal and state standards relative to the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions, as confirmed by submission of a certification of compliance by the applicant's licensed engineer.
C. Applicants shall demonstrate a justification for the proposed height of the structures and an evaluation of alternative designs which might result in lower heights. Structures which require or are proposed to have high intensity (strobe) lighting shall not be permitted.
D. The maximum height of the new or modified support structure and antenna shall be the minimum height demonstrated to be necessary for reasonable communication by the applicant (and by other entities to co-locate on the structure). The accessory building contemplated to enclose such things as switching equipment shall be limited to the maximum height for accessory structures within the respective district.
E. The setback of a new or materially modified support structure from any residential district shall be at least the height of the highest point of the structure. The setback of the support structure from any existing or proposed rights-of-way or other publicly traveled roads shall be no less than the height of the structure.
F. Where the proposed new or materially modified support structure abuts a parcel of land zoned for a use other than residential, the minimum setback of the structure, and accessory structures, from that abutting parcel shall be in accordance with the required setbacks for main or principal buildings as provided in the schedule of regulations for the zoning district in which the support structure is located or be otherwise sufficient taking into account the information required by Section 16-416.07C.
G. There shall be unobstructed access to the support structure, for operation, maintenance, repair and inspection purposes, which may be provided through or over an easement. This access shall have a width and location determined by such factors as: the location of adjacent thoroughfares and traffic and circulation within the site; utilities needed to service the tower and any attendant facilities; the location of buildings and parking facilities; proximity to residential districts and minimizing disturbance to the natural landscape; and, the type of equipment which will need to access the site.
H. The division of property for the purpose of locating a Wireless Communication Facility is prohibited unless all zoning requirements and conditions are met.
I. Where an Attached Wireless Communication Facility is proposed on the roof of a building, if the equipment enclosure is proposed as a roof appliance or penthouse on the building, it shall be designed, constructed and maintained to be architecturally compatible with the principal building. The equipment enclosure may be located within the principal building or may be an accessory building. If proposed as an accessory building, it shall conform to all district requirements for principal buildings, including yard setbacks. For co-location facilities
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-33 Zoning Ordinance
served by an accessory building, there should be a single, architecturally uniform accessory building for all providers.
J. The design and appearance of the support structure and all accessory buildings shall be reviewed and approved so as to minimize distraction, reduce visibility from off site, maximize aesthetic appearance including at and from ground level, and ensure compatibility with surroundings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to maintain the Wireless Communication Facility in a neat and orderly condition.
K. The support system shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable building codes and shall include the submission of a soils report from a geotechnical engineer, licensed in the State of Michigan. This soils report shall include soil borings and statements confirming the suitability of soil conditions for the proposed use.
L. The requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communication Commission, and Michigan Aeronautics Commission shall be noted.
M. A maintenance plan, and any applicable maintenance agreement, shall be presented and approved as part of the site plan for the proposed facility. Such plan shall be designed to ensure long term, continuous maintenance to a reasonably prudent standard.
N. The use of high intensity (strobe) lighting on a Wireless Communication Facility shall be prohibited, and the use of other lighting shall be prohibited absent a demonstrated need.
O. Applications made which do not include the signature of the licensed operator of a wireless communication service at the time of Township processing may be tentatively approved, but shall not receive final approval unless and until the application has been amended to include a signature on behalf of a licensed operator. A tentative approval shall be valid for ninety (90) days. If, during a ninety (90) day tentative approval period, final approval is granted to authorize a Wireless Communication Facility within two miles of the property on which a facility has been tentatively approved, such tentative approval shall thereupon expire unless the applicant granted tentative approval demonstrates that it would not be feasible for it to co-locate on the facility that has been newly granted final approval.
P. The antenna and other attachments on a Wireless Communication Facility shall be designed and constructed to include the minimum attachments required to operate the facility as intended at the site, both in terms of number and size of such attachments, and shall be designed and constructed to maximum aesthetic quality.
16-416.06 STANDARDS AND CONDITIONS APPLICABLE TO SPECIAL LAND USE FACILITIES
Applications for Wireless Communication Facilities which may be approved as special land uses under Sections 16-416.03 or 16-416.04, shall be reviewed, and if approved, constructed and maintained, in accordance with the standards and conditions in Section 16-416.05, any special land use approval conditions, and in accordance with the following standards:
A. The applicant shall demonstrate the need for the proposed facility to be located as proposed based upon the presence of one or more of the following factors:
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-34 Zoning Ordinance
1. Proximity to an interstate or major thoroughfare
2. Areas of population concentration
3. Concentration of commercial, industrial, and/or other business centers.
4. Areas where signal interference has occurred due to tall buildings, masses of trees, or other obstructions.
5. Topography of the proposed facility location in relation to other facilities with which the proposed facility is to operate.
6. Other specifically identified reason(s) creating facility need.
B. The proposal shall be reviewed in conformity with the co-location requirements of this section.
16-416.07 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS
A. A site plan prepared in accordance with Article 6, Site Plan Review shall be submitted, showing the location, size, screening and design of all buildings and structures, including fences, and the location and size of outdoor equipment, and the location, number, and species of proposed landscaping.
B. The site plan shall also include a detailed landscaping plan where the support structure is being placed at a location which is not otherwise developed, or where a developed area will be disturbed. The purpose of landscaping is to provide screening and aesthetic enhancement for the structure base, accessory buildings and enclosure as required by the standards and conditions set forth in Section 16-416.05.
C. The application shall include a signed certification by a State of Michigan licensed professional engineer with regard to the manner in which the proposed structure will fall, which certification will be utilized, along with other criteria such as applicable regulations for the district in question, in determining the appropriate setback to be required for the structure and other facilities.
D. The application shall include a description of security to be posted with the Township at the time of receiving a building permit for the facility to ensure removal of the facility when it has been abandoned or is no longer needed, as provided in paragraph H below. In this regard, the security shall, at the election of the applicant, be in the form of: (1) cash; (2) surety bond; (3) letter of credit; or, (4) an agreement in a form approved by the Township Attorney and recordable at the office of the Register of Deeds establishing a promise of the applicant and owner of the property to remove the facility in a timely manner as required under this section of the ordinance, with the further provision that the applicant and owner shall be responsible for the payment of any costs and attorney’s fees incurred by the Township in securing removal.
E. The application shall include a map showing existing and known proposed Wireless Communication Facilities within the Township, and further showing existing and known proposed Wireless Communication Facilities within areas surrounding the borders of the
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-35 Zoning Ordinance
Township in the location, and in the area, which are relevant in terms of potential co-location or in demonstrating the need for the proposed facility. If and to the extent the information in question is on file with the Township, the applicant shall be required only to update as needed. Any such information which is trade secret and/or other confidential commercial information which, if released would result in commercial disadvantage to the applicant, may be submitted with a request for confidentiality in connection with the development of governmental policy. MCL 15.243(l)(f). This ordinance shall serve as the promise to maintain confidentiality to the extent permitted by law. The request for confidentiality must be prominently stated in order to bring it to the attention of the Township.
F. The name, address and phone number of the person to contact for engineering, maintenance and other notice purposes. This information shall be continuously updated during all times the facility is on the premises.
G. The application fee, in the amount specified by Township Board Resolution.
H. The owner or duly authorized representative of all ownership interest in the land on which the Wireless Communication Facility is proposed to be located shall sign the application. In addition, if a licensed entity intended to be the operator on the facility does not sign the application, approval shall be restricted as provided in Section 16-416.05P.
16-416.08 CO-LOCATION
A. Statement of Policy:
It is the policy of the Township to minimize the overall number of newly established locations for Wireless Communication Facilities and Wireless Communication Support Structures within the community, and encourage the use of existing structures for Attached Wireless Communication Facility purposes, consistent with the statement of purpose and intent, set forth in Section 16-416.0l. Each licensed provider of a Wireless Communication Facility must, by law, be permitted to locate sufficient facilities in order to achieve the objectives promulgated by the United States Congress. However, particularly in light of the dramatic increase in the number of Wireless Communication Facilities reasonably anticipated to occur as a result of the change of federal law and policy in and relating to the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, it is the policy of the Township that all users should co-locate on Attached Wireless Communication Facilities and Wireless Communication Support Structures in the interest of achieving the purposes and intent of this section, as stated above, and as stated in Section 16-416.01. If a provider fails or refuses to permit co-location on a facility owned or otherwise controlled by it, where co-location is feasible, the result will be that a new and unnecessary additional structure will be compelled, in direct violation of and in direct contradiction to the basic policy, intent and purpose of the Township. The provisions of this subsection are designed to carry out and encourage conformity with the policy of the Township.
B. Feasibility of co-location:
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-36 Zoning Ordinance
Co-location shall be deemed to be "feasible" for purposes of this section where all of the following are met:
1. The wireless communication provider entity under consideration for co-location will undertake to pay market rent or other market compensation for co-location. For purposes of this standard and the demonstration required under Section 16-416.08C(1), "market rent or other market compensation" means an amount and/or form of compensation or consideration that represents the amount that knowledgeable persons acting in good faith, after reasonable negotiations would agree upon.
2. The site on which co-location is being considered, taking into consideration reasonable modification or replacement of a facility, is able to provide structural support.
3. The co-location being considered is technologically reasonable, e.g., the co-location will not result in unreasonable interference, given appropriate physical and other adjustments in relation to the structure, antennas, and the like.
4. The height of the structure necessary for co-location will not be increased beyond a point deemed to be permissible by the Township, taking into consideration the intent and purpose of this section and the several standards contained in Sections 16-416.05 and 16-416.06.
C. Requirements for Co-location:
1. A special land use permit for the construction and use of a new Wireless Communication Facility shall not be granted unless and until the applicant demonstrates that a feasible co-location is not available for the coverage area and capacity needs. In determining whether an applicant has undertaken to pay "market rent or other market compensation for co-location", consideration shall be given to whether the applicant's claim is supported by the opinion, award, determination or recommendation of a qualified, fully informed and disinterested third person such as an arbitrator or mediator with a rebuttable presumption that absent such support, the applicant has not undertaken to pay market rent or other market compensation for co-location.
2. All new and modified Wireless Communication Facilities shall be designed and constructed so as to accommodate co-location.
3. The policy of the Township is for co-location. Thus, if a party who owns or otherwise controls a Wireless Communication Facility shall fail or refuse to alter a structure so as to accommodate a proposed and otherwise feasible co-location, such facility shall thereupon and thereafter be deemed to be a nonconforming structure and use, and shall not be altered, expanded or extended in any respect.
4. If a party who owns or otherwise controls a Wireless Communication Facility shall fail or refuse to permit a feasible co-location, and this requires the construction and/or use of a new wireless communication support structure, the party failing or refusing to permit a feasible co-location shall be deemed to be in direct violation and contradiction of the policy, intent and purpose of the Township, and, consequently such party shall take responsibility for the violation, and shall be prohibited from receiving approval for a new Wireless Communication Support Structure within the Township for a period of five
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-37 Zoning Ordinance
years from the date of the failure or refusal to permit the co-location. Such a party may seek and obtain a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals if and to the limited extent the applicant demonstrates entitlement to variance relief which, in this context, shall mean a demonstration that enforcement of the five year prohibition would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent wireless communication services, or that such enforcement would have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless communication services.
D. Incentive
Review of an application for co-location, and review of an application for a permit for use of a facility permitted under Section 16-416.02, shall be expedited by the Township.
16-416.09 REMOVAL
A. A condition of every approval of a Wireless Communication Facility shall be adequate provision for removal of all or part of the facility by users and owners upon the occurrence of one or more of the following events;
1. When the facility has not been used for 180 days or more. For purposes of this section, the removal of antennas or other equipment from the facility, or the cessation of operations (transmission and/or reception of radio signals) shall be considered as the beginning of a period of non-use.
2. Six months after new technology is available at reasonable cost as determined by the municipal legislative body, which permits the operation of the communication system without the requirement of the support structure, or with a support structure which is lower and/or more compatible with the area.
B. The situations in which removal of a facility is required, as set forth in Section 16-416.09A, may be applied and limited to portions of a facility.
C. Upon the occurrence of one or more of the events requiring removal, specified in Section 16-416.09A, the property owner or persons who had used the facility shall immediately apply or secure the application for any required demolition or removal permits, and immediately proceed with and complete the demolition/removal, restoring the premises to an acceptable condition as reasonably determined by the Zoning Administrator.
D. If the required removal of a facility or a portion thereof has not been lawfully completed within sixty (60) days of the applicable deadline, and after at least thirty (30) days written notice, the Township may remove or secure the removal of the facility or required portions thereof, with its actual cost and reasonable administrative charge to be drawn, collected and/or enforced from or under the security posted at the time application was made for establishing the facility.
E. The person who had used the facility shall immediately notify the Township Clerk in writing if and as soon as use of a facility ceases.
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-38 Zoning Ordinance
District Standards
Charter Township of Oakland IV-39 Zoning Ordinance
16-416.09 EFFECT AND APPROVAL
A. Subject to Section 16-416.09B, final approval under this section shall be effective for a period of six (6) months.
B. If construction of a Wireless Communication Facility is commenced within two miles of the land on which a facility has been approved, but on which construction has not been commenced during the 6 month period of effectiveness, the approval for the facility that has not been commenced shall be void thirty (30) days following notice from the Township of the commencement of the other facility unless the applicant granted approval of the facility which has not been commenced demonstrates that it would not be feasible for it to co-locate on the facility that has been newly commenced.
16-416.10 REVIEW PERIOD, FEES FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
A. An application for wireless communication facility special land use shall be governed according to the time limits and application fees as specified in P.A. 110 of 2006, MCL 125.3514, as amended and as summarized below.
B. After an application for a special land use approval is filed with the Township, the Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is administratively complete. Unless the Zoning Administrator determines that the application is deficient and notifies the applicant accordingly, the application shall be considered to be administratively complete within fourteen (14) business days after receipt of the application.
C. For wireless communication equipment proposed for placement or installation on an existing wireless support structure, the Planning Commission shall approve or deny the application not more than sixty (60) days after the application has been deemed administratively complete.
D. For wireless communication equipment proposed at new sites without an existing wireless communication support structure, the Planning Commission shall approve or deny the application not more than ninety (90) days after the application has been deemed administratively complete.
E. Fees required by Oakland Township shall not exceed $1,000.00.
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-1 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE V: SPECIAL LAND USES
16-500 SPECIAL USES GENERALLY
A special use is a use that is permitted within a specified zoning district after meeting specific requirements listed in this Article 5. It is the purpose of this Article to set forth the general procedures and general review standards applicable to all special uses (Sections 16-501 and 16-502) and name, describe, and list the additional specific requirements and conditions applicable to each special land use specified in the respective zoning districts (Sections 16-503 through 16-528). Due to the nature of the use, a special use requires special consideration in relation to the welfare of adjacent properties and to the community as a whole.
16-501 SPECIAL USE PROCEDURES
A Special Use application shall be submitted and processed according to the following procedure:
A. Submission of Application. An application shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. Each application shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee established in the Review Expense Ordinance, as amended. A special use application shall be placed on the agenda of the Planning Commission by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with this ordinance. An application, which is incomplete or otherwise not in compliance with this ordinance, shall be returned to the applicant. No application shall be processed until properly prepared and submitted and all required fees and escrow payments paid in full.
B. Data Required. A special use application for any project reviewed by the Planning Commission and Township Board shall include sixteen (16) copies of all required information, including application form and a site plan with all information as required in Article 6 of this ordinance. The information shall include the following:
1. A complete special use permit application including the following information:
i. Name and address of applicant and owner(s).
ii. Legal description, property parcel number, and street address of the subject parcel of land.
iii. Area of the subject lot stated in acres, or if less than one (1) acre, in square feet.
iv. Present zoning classification of the parcel.
v. Present and proposed land use.
vi. A letter or signed narrative describing in detail the proposed special use and detailing why the location selected is appropriate.
vii. Applicant's statement of the expected effect of the special use on emergency service requirements, schools, storm water systems, water system facilities, ground water, natural features, pedestrian circulation, sanitary sewer facilities, automobile and truck circulation patterns, and local traffic volumes.
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-2 Zoning Ordinance
viii. Any additional material information necessary to consider the impact of the project upon adjacent properties and the general public as may be required by this ordinance, by the Township Zoning Administrator, the Planning Commission or the Township Board; including, but not limited to, measures which will be undertaken to control soil erosion, excessive noise, or adverse impacts of the development on the surrounding properties; elevations on all buildings, including accessory buildings; and, an environmental assessment.
ix. A statement and other evidence or proof by the applicant of present and future compliance with the standards required for approval in this Article and other standards imposed by this ordinance affecting the special use under consideration.
2. A complete site plan containing all the applicable data required by Section 16-603.
3. Supporting statements, evidence, data, information and exhibits that address the standards and requirements for assessing the specific special use requested.
4. Any additional information deemed necessary for the Township Board upon recommendation of the Planning Commission to determine the impact of the proposed special use on the adjacent properties, public infrastructure, and community as a whole.
5. See Section 16-706 for sign posting requirements for land use change.
C. Special Use Review Procedures. An application for special use approval shall be processed as follows:
1. Public Hearing Procedures. Once a completed special use application has been provided to the Township, a public hearing shall be required. A public hearing shall not be scheduled until the special land use application has been checked for completeness by Township staff. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 16-103.
2. Planning Commission Recommendation. After the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall review the application, any information supplied at or in connection with the public hearing, and any reports of Township personnel, planning or engineering or other consultants and shall reach a decision to recommend to the Township Board approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application. Such decision shall be reached within a reasonable period of time following the public hearing on the application. The Planning Commission's recommendation to the Township Board shall be incorporated in a motion containing conclusions and findings reached relative to the proposed special use which motion shall provide the basis for the recommendation and any conditions in connection with the recommendation.
3. Township Board Public Hearing. Upon receiving the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the Township Board shall schedule a public hearing on the special use application consistent with the procedures set forth in Section 16-109.
4. Township Board Decision. After the public hearing, consideration of the Planning Commission recommendation and upon review of the merits of the special use permit application, the Township Board shall reach a decision of approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application. Such decision shall be reached within a reasonable period of time following the public hearing on the application. The Township
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-3 Zoning Ordinance
Board decision shall be incorporated in a motion containing conclusions and findings reached relative to the proposed special use which motion shall provide the basis for the decision and any required conditions.
6. Basis for Action. In arriving at its decision, the Township Board shall refer to and be guided by those standards and conditions set forth in this Article. If the facts regarding the special use do not establish by a preponderance of the evidence that the standards, conditions and requirements set forth in this Article can and will be met, the application shall be denied.
7. Attachment of Conditions. The conditions and regulations set forth in this Article (Section 16-502 etal.) for the various types of special land uses and accessory uses related thereto shall apply to each such type of special land use upon approval of same and the Township Board or other approving body therefore does not need to specifically identify such conditions and regulations as part of its approval action. The Township Board may prescribe conditions of approval deemed necessary for the protection of the general welfare, individual property rights, and to ensure that the purposes of this ordinance are met.
D. Issuance of a Special Use Permit. Upon approval by the Township Board, the Zoning Administrator shall issue the special use permit, which permit shall identify any and all conditions, terms, and restrictions applicable to the approved special use. The special use permit shall become effective upon Township Board approval, provided the following are met:
1. The Building Official shall not issue a Building Permit until approval of such special use permit and any conditions pertaining to such approval are met.
2. Until a Building Permit has been granted pursuant to the special use permit, there shall be no construction or excavation of said land, nor shall there be any use of the land in anticipation of the special use unless such use is incorporated in the conditions of approval adopted by the Township Board.
3. Land subject to a special use permit may not be used or occupied for such special use until after a certificate of occupancy has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, or the zoning compliance approval of the Zoning Administrator has been granted for uses not subject to the requirements for a certificate of occupancy.
If pre-conditions to the issuance of the permit are given, the Zoning Administrator shall verify that all conditions are met prior to issuance of a special use permit. It shall be the responsibility of the Zoning Administrator to monitor and verify compliance with the terms, conditions and restrictions of any special use permit and take any enforcement action necessary in the event of a violation of the special use permit.
E. Appeals. A decision or condition related to a special use application may not be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
F. Amendments. Amendments to special use permit shall be handled in the same manner as the initial special use permit application. Minor non-substantive changes to a site plan in accordance with Section 16-608 may be made to an existing special use permit with the approval of the Zoning Administrator.
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-4 Zoning Ordinance
G. Transfers. Prior to completion of construction related to a special use, the special use permit, with any and all associated benefits, conditions and required security may be transferred to a new owner only upon the sale or transfer of the property in question. The original owner, upon transferring the special use permit, shall advise the Zoning Administrator of said transfer in order to insure the continued validity of the permit, compliance with security, and other conditions. Following completion of construction and commencement of the special use, the special use permit shall run with the land, subject to Section 16-502, J, 4, pertaining to abandonment.
H. Expiration. A special use permit shall be valid for as long as the approved use continues in accordance with the terms and conditions of the approved permit. The special use permit will expire on the occurrence of one or more of the following conditions:
1. If replaced or superseded by a subsequent permitted use or special use permit.
2. If the applicant or current owner of the property requests the rescinding of the special use permit.
3. If a condition of approval included a stipulation that the special use permit shall expire by a certain date.
4. If the special use is abandoned in accordance with Section 16-502.K.
5. If a zoning permit has not been obtained or the on-site development has not commenced pursuant to Section 16-109 within one (1) year, the special use permit approval shall become null and void.
I. Abandonment. Any permitted special use shall be considered abandoned and such use shall not be resumed thereafter if any of the following conditions apply:
1. When the owner declares or otherwise makes evident his intent to discontinue such use.
2. When the use has been replaced by a different use permitted in the underlying zoning district.
3. The cessation of the permitted special use for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months shall result in a rebuttable presumption of the owner's and any lawful occupant's intent to permanently discontinue and abandon the special use. At any time after said twelve (12) consecutive month period, the Zoning Administrator may notify the owner and any occupants in writing of said presumption and such writing shall provide the owner and any occupants at least thirty (30) days to rebut the presumption in a writing addressed and delivered to the Zoning Administrator by certified mail with a return receipt. If the owner and occupants fail to provide written evidence rebutting the presumption within said thirty (30) day period, the owner’s and occupant's intent to discontinue and abandon the special use shall thereby be established. The notice from the Zoning Administrator shall be sent by certified mail, with a return receipt, to the owner and any occupants at the mailing address of the owner listed on the Township tax rolls and at the street address of the property in question if a building with an address exists at said location.
J. Violations. Any violation of the terms, conditions or limitations of a special use permit shall be cause for revocation or suspension of the permit. The Township Board may either revoke or suspend, pending correction of the violation, any special use permit. The act to revoke or suspend the permit shall occur after giving notice to the permit holder, specifying the alleged
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-5 Zoning Ordinance
violation(s) and disclosing when a hearing will be held on the matter. The notice shall be delivered by registered mail. Any interested party may appear in person or by attorney at the hearing. The act to revoke or suspend the permit shall occur after or at the hearing on the matter. Before revoking or suspending the permit, the Township Board shall make a finding that a material violation of the special use permit exists. The permit holder shall be given reasonable opportunity to correct the violation(s).
16-502 SPECIAL USE REVIEW STANDARDS
A. General Review Standards. The Planning Commission and Township Board, before acting on a special use permit application, shall employ and be guided by standards which shall be consistent with and promote the intent and purpose of this ordinance, and ensure that the land use or activity authorized shall be compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use. The Planning Commission and Township Board shall review each application and take action to approve a special use application only if it finds that such special use meets each of the following standards, together with any and all special use standards reflected for the zoning district, any and all applicable specific review standards found in this Article and all other generally applicable requirements of this ordinance. The Planning Commission and Township Board shall find adequate evidence that each use at its proposed location will be consistent with the public health, safety, and welfare of the Township and shall comply with the following standards:
1. The proposed special land use shall be of such location, size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the surrounding neighborhood and/or vicinity and applicable regulations of the zoning district in which it is to be located.
2. The proposed use shall be of a nature that will make vehicular and pedestrian traffic no more hazardous than is normal for the district involved, taking into consideration vehicular turning movements in relation to routes of traffic flow, proximity and relationship to intersections, adequacy of sight distances, location and access of off-street parking and provisions for pedestrian traffic, with particular attention to minimizing pedestrian-vehicle interfacing.
3. The location, size, intensity, site layout, physical, structure, and amenities, and periods of operation the proposed use shall be designed and established in a manner that eliminates any possible nuisance emanating there from which might be noxious to the occupants of any other nearby permitted uses, whether by reason of traffic, dust, noise, odors, glare, fumes, vibration, smoke or lights.
4. The proposed use shall be such that the proposed location and height of buildings or structures and location, nature and height of walls, fences and landscaping will not interfere with or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonably affect their value.
5. The proposed use shall relate harmoniously with the physical and economic aspects of adjacent land uses as regards prevailing shopping habits, convenience of access by prospective patrons, continuity of development, and need for particular service and facilities in specific areas of the Township.
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-6 Zoning Ordinance
6. The proposed use is so designed, located, planned and to be operated so that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected.
7. The proposed use shall not cause substantial injury to the value of other property in the neighborhood in which it is to be located and will not be detrimental to existing and/or other permitted land uses in the zoning district.
8. The site plan standards established in Article 6.
B. Additional Conditions and Approval Standards. In addition to the standards and conditions set forth for each type of special use in this Article, the Township Board may establish reasonable conditions of approval for a special use permit. The conditions may include, but are not limited to, conditions necessary to insure that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to insure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Further, in addition to the standards and conditions set forth for each type of special use in this Article, the Township Board may adopt specific review standards for any proposed special use proposed if this Article 5 does not provide such specific review standards for such use. Any such conditions imposed or specific review standards employed shall:
1. Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety, and welfare, and the social and economic well-being of those who will use the land use or activity under consideration, residents and land owners in the vicinity of the proposed land use or activity, and the community as a whole.
2. Be related to the valid exercise of the police power, and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity.
3. Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this ordinance, be related to the standards established in this ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration, and be necessary to insure compliance with those standards.
16-503 ACCESSORY USES RELATED TO PERMITTED SPECIAL LAND USES
Upon approval of this special land use pursuant to Section 16-500, the following regulations and conditions shall apply to such special land use in addition to site plan requirements under this and other applicable Township ordinances and any other conditions specifically made part of the approval under subsection 16-502.
Minimum Regulations and Conditions. The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Township Board that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
1. An accessory use related to a permitted special land use shall not generate any effects on neighboring properties, including, but not limited to, noise, parking, traffic, glare, vibration, light, odors, fumes, smoke, or dust, greater than or more burdensome than such impacts from the principal use of the property.
2. Where an accessory use related to a permitted special use is proposed, and regulations are contained in this ordinance for said permitted special land use, those regulations shall be met; provided, the Township Board may impose additional conditions on approval, to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the Township and its residents.
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-7 Zoning Ordinance
3. The Township Board may require site or performance measures pertaining to an accessory use related to a permitted special land use to address on-site impacts or off-site impacts and/or other potential impacts resulting from said accessory use or the combination of the accessory use and the principal permitted special use.
16-504 ANIMAL GROOMING
Upon approval of an animal grooming special land use pursuant to Section 16-500, the following regulations and conditions shall apply to such special land use in addition to site plan requirements under this and other applicable Township ordinances and any other conditions specifically made part of the approval under subsection 16-502.
Minimum Regulations and Conditions. The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Township Board that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
1. All portions of the animal grooming facility must be served with a central air-conditioning and ventilation system which shall be maintained in a proper operating condition so that windows and doors may remain closed year-round without producing an adverse interior environment.
2. When such uses are located in a building occupied by other uses and to which access is gained through a common entry, access to the grooming facility must be from a separate entry, which shall give direct access from the street or sidewalk.
3. All rooms in which animals are to be contained for more than 30 minutes without receiving consistent attention from a handler must be equipped with sufficient soundproofing materials to insure that noise does not carry to adjacent businesses or residences.
4. Animals shall not be kept overnight.
16-505 BED AND BREAKFAST
Upon approval of a bed and breakfast special land use pursuant to Section 16-500, the following regulations and conditions shall apply to such special land use in addition to site plan requirements under this and other applicable Township ordinances and any other conditions specifically made part of the approval under subsection 16-502.
Minimum Regulations and Conditions. The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Township Board that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
1. The bed and breakfast shall be compatible with other allowed uses in the vicinity.
2. The impact of the establishment shall be no greater than that of a private home with houseguests.
3. The number of sleeping rooms rented to transient guests within a Bed and Breakfast Establishment shall not exceed the following standards:
i. Within the RC and VLRD districts: 4 sleeping rooms
ii. Within the Commercial districts: 5 sleeping rooms
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-8 Zoning Ordinance
iii. The minimum lot size shall be consistent with the district minimum for a single family dwelling.
iv. Parking; two (2) parking spaces for the use of the owner/occupant and one (1) off-street space per rental sleeping room. Parking shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of the building.
v. The establishment shall be the principal dwelling unit on the property and shall be occupied as the residence of the owner and operator at all times.
vi. The rooms utilized for sleeping shall be a part of the primary residential use and not specifically constructed for rental purposes.
vii. The bed and breakfast shall not alter the residential character of the building or structure.
viii. The rental sleeping rooms shall have a minimum size of one hundred-twenty (120) square feet for one (1) or two (2) occupants with an additional fifty (50) square feet for each occupant to a maximum of four (4) occupants per room.
ix. Approval shall not be granted if the essential character of the lot or structure in terms of traffic generation or appearance will be changed substantially.
x. A site plan shall include a floor plan layout of the proposed structure drawn to a scale of not less than 1” = 8’ that shows the specific layout of the proposed facility in accord with the provisions of this ordinance.
xi. The lighting standards, as applicable, of Section 16-325 shall be illustrated on the site plan.
xii. No conference/meeting room facilities will be permitted.
xiii. The bed and breakfast shall employ no more than three (3) persons in addition to the owners and their immediate family, including spouses, siblings and children.
xiv. Any dumpsters on site shall be enclosed on four (4) sides with an opaque fence equipped with a lockable gate and shall not be visible from lot lines.
16-506 CAMPS AND CAMP GROUNDS
Upon approval of a camp and camp grounds special land use pursuant to Section 16-500, the following regulations and conditions shall apply to such special land use in addition to site plan requirements under this and other applicable Township ordinances and any other conditions specifically made part of the approval under subsection 16-502.
Minimum Regulations and Conditions. The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Township Board that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
1. Any dumpsters on site shall be enclosed on four (4) sides with an opaque fence equipped with a lockable gate and shall not be visible from lot lines.
2. The application shall provide for measures acceptable to the Township Board to prevent any noise in excess of 60 decibels at any property line. Unless specifically approved by
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-9 Zoning Ordinance
the Township Board, the use of amplifiers, banners, and other attention gathering devices shall be prohibited.
3. If provided, restrooms and/or shower facilities shall be maintained free from debris and in working order at all times.
4. Electrical and water hook ups, if provided, shall conform to applicable state and county electrical and maintenance regulations.
16-507 CEMETERY, PRIVATE
Upon approval of a private cemetery special land use pursuant to Section 16-500, the following regulations and conditions shall apply to such special land use in addition to site plan requirements under this and other applicable Township ordinances and any other conditions specifically made part of the approval under subsection 16-502.
Minimum Regulations and Conditions. The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Township Board that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
1. A proposed private cemetery that provides a chapel or other enclosure for graveside interment and committal services shall be appropriately designed to accommodate occasional gatherings, including necessary restroom facilities, utilities, parking, lighting, and other improvements.
2. A landscape buffer of 50 feet shall be provided where a private cemetery abuts a residentially zoned or used parcel.
3. The use shall be so arranged that an adequate assembly area is provided off-street for vehicles to be used in a funeral procession. This assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area.
4. Points of ingress and egress for the site shall be designed so as to minimize possible conflicts between traffic on adjacent major thoroughfares and funeral processions or visitors entering or leaving the site.
5. No building shall be located closer than fifty (50) feet from a property line that abuts any residentially used or zoned property.
16-508 DAY CARE, COMMERCIAL
Upon approval of a commercial day care special land use pursuant to Section 16-500, the following regulations and conditions shall apply to such special land use in addition to site plan requirements under this and other applicable Township ordinances and any other conditions specifically made part of the approval under subsection 16-502.
Minimum Regulations and Conditions.
1. All required state and local licensing shall be maintained at all times.
2. All outdoor areas used for care and play area shall be located in the rear or side yards only and shall have appropriate fencing for the safety of the children. Such fence shall consist of a 6-foot high opaque fence along the area adjoining another residence, and a 6-
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-10 Zoning Ordinance
foot high fence in the rear yard and in the side yard up to the front building line. Play areas abutting a public right-of-way shall be prohibited.
3. Such facilities shall be located at least 1,500 feet from any of the following:
i. A licensed or pre-existing operating group or commercial day-care home.
ii. An adult foster care facility.
iii. A facility offering substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation service to 7 or more people.
iv. A community correction center resident home halfway house or similar facility under jurisdiction of the County Sheriff or the Department of Corrections.
4. Such facilities shall at all times be maintained in a manner consistent with the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
5. The Township Board shall not prohibit evening operations completely, but may establish limitations on hours of operation and/or activities between the hours of 10PM and 6AM.
6. Any dumpsters on site shall be enclosed on four (4) sides with an opaque fence equipped with a lockable gate and shall not be visible from lot lines.
7. Such facility shall be located either adjacent to or within 300 feet of Rochester Road, Adams Road, Orion Road or 32 Mile Road.
16-509 DAY CARE, GROUP
B. Minimum Regulations and Conditions.
1. All required state and local licensing shall be maintained at all times.
2. All outdoor areas used for care and play area shall be located in the rear or side yard only, and shall have appropriate fencing for the safety of the children. Such fence shall consist of a 6-foot high opaque fence along the area adjoining another residence, and a 4-foot to 6-foot high fence in the rear yard and in the side yard up to the front building line. Play areas abutting a public right-of-way shall be prohibited.
3. Such facilities shall be located at least 1,500 feet from any one of the following:
i. A licensed or pre-existing operating group or commercial day-care home.
ii. An adult foster care facility.
iii. A facility offering substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation service to 7 or more people.
iv. A community correction center resident home halfway house or similar facility under jurisdiction of the Department of Corrections.
4. Such facilities shall at all times be maintained in a manner consistent with the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
5. The Township Board shall not prohibit evening operations completely, but may establish limitations on hours of operation and/or activities between the hours of 10PM and 6AM.
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-11 Zoning Ordinance
16-510 DRIVE-THROUGH BUSINESS
Upon approval of a drive-through business special land use pursuant to Section 16-500, the following regulations and conditions shall apply to such special land use in addition to site plan requirements under this and other applicable Township ordinances and any other conditions specifically made part of the approval under subsection 16-502.
Minimum Regulations and Conditions. The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Township Board that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
1. All automobile queuing for a drive-through window shall be separated from other on-site traffic patterns.
2. Pedestrian areas shall be clearly marked.
3. The drive-through lane(s) shall be designed to accommodate a full-size passenger vehicle pulling a recreation-vehicle trailer.
4. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township Board that vehicle stacking areas for the drive-through facility are sufficient to accommodate the highest volume likely at the facility without encroaching on the public right-of-way or the drive aisles, parking, or pedestrian areas on site. In no event shall the stacking of vehicles be less than six (6) vehicles per drive-through lane.
5. Any dumpsters on site shall be enclosed on four (4) sides with an opaque fence equipped with a lockable gate and shall not be visible from any lot line.
6. Any commercial establishment with a drive-through facility which adjoins a property zoned or used for residential purposes shall be screened from view from such property.
16-511 DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY
Minimum Regulations and Conditions. The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Township Board that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
1. Scaled elevation drawings depicting architectural features shall be provided. In an area of predominately single-family homes, a multi-family dwelling shall be designed to look like a one-unit dwelling and shall include architectural details found on the majority of dwellings in the neighborhood, so that the multi-family dwelling is consistent with the aesthetic character of existing buildings.
2. A garage serving a multi-family dwelling shall be recessed or placed in the rear of the dwelling, with side or rear entry.
3. In no instance shall more than one out of six (6) multiple-family units in any multiple-family development be designed as an efficiency dwelling unit.
4. A minimum separation distance of fifteen (15) feet shall be provided between buildings located on the same parcel if they are not attached by a common wall.
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-12 Zoning Ordinance
16-512 EDUCATIONAL FACILITY
Upon approval of an educational facility special land use pursuant to Section 16-500, the following regulations and conditions shall apply to such special land use in addition to site plan requirements under this and other applicable Township ordinances and any other conditions specifically made part of the approval under subsection 16-502.
Minimum Regulations and Conditions. To the extent allowed by law, the applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Township Board that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
1. All outdoor play areas shall be located in the rear or side yards only and shall be enclosed with a fence six (6) feet in height, or four (4) feet in height if adjoining a right-of-way. Provided, however, the Township Board may permit chain link or wrought iron fences up to six (6) feet in height adjoining a right-of-way upon a finding that such fences are necessary for the safety of pupils of the facility.
2. All required state and local licenses, charters, permits and similar approvals shall be issued prior to occupancy for any educational purposes and shall be maintained in good standing.
3. The Township Board may establish standards to limit routine noise generated by an Educational Facility to no more than 60 decibels at the property line, taking into account the nature of the facility, the surrounding uses and zoning and the probable frequency of objectionable noise levels that may be generated by the use.
4. Off street parking shall be arranged so the area for bus loading and unloading of students will not be in the path of vehicular traffic.
5. Sidewalks shall be required connecting the off-street parking area to the main entrance of the educational facility, and to any trails and/or safety paths in accordance with Section 16-338.
6. An Educational Facility with a Place of Public Assembly shall comply with the special land use standards for Place of Public Assembly set forth in Section 16-523 and 16-512.
16-513 FUNERAL HOME
Upon approval of a funeral home special land use pursuant to Section 16-500, the following regulations and conditions shall apply to such special land use in addition to site plan requirements under this and other applicable Township ordinances and any other conditions specifically made part of the approval under subsection 16-502.
Minimum Regulations and Conditions. The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Township Board that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
1. A proposed funeral home shall be located on a parcel of land with a minimum area of three (3) acres. Provided, however, that such facility shall not exceed the maximum lot coverage requirements of this ordinance.
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-13 Zoning Ordinance
2. The use shall be so arranged that adequate assembly area is provided off-street for vehicles to be used in a funeral procession. This assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area.
3. Points of ingress and egress for the site shall be designed so as to minimize possible conflicts between traffic on adjacent major thoroughfares and funeral processions or visitors entering or leaving the site.
4. Loading and unloading areas used by ambulances, hearses, and/or other such service vehicles shall be obscured from the road right-of-way and all residential views with a wall six (6) feet in height. The Township Board may also require evergreen landscaping for purposes of obscuring the loading and unloading areas.
5. All required federal, state and local licensing and permits shall be maintained at all times.
6. A caretaker’s residence may be provided within the main building of the mortuary establishment.
7. A mortuary that includes a crematorium shall locate any cremating facilities at least five hundred (500) feet from any residential use.
16-514 GOLF COURSE
Upon approval of a golf course special land use pursuant to Section 16-500, the following regulations and conditions shall apply to such special land use in addition to site plan requirements under this and other applicable Township ordinances and any other conditions specifically made part of the approval under subsection 16-502.
Minimum Regulations and Conditions. The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Township Board that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
1. The design and layout of a golf course shall be configured to prevent stray golf shots from traveling off the golf course and onto rights-of-way, neighboring properties or lands within the golf course development designed for uses other than the playing of golf. The Township may request a special review of the golf course by an independent golf course architect to review playability and potential impacts on such adjacent areas.
2. All off-street parking shall be in compliance with Article IX of this ordinance, to provide for adequate parking for banquets, weddings, golf tournaments, conferences, and other activities and events at the golf course.
3. Any accessory uses and buildings associated with the golf course, and any buildings on the site shall conform to setback and dimensional requirements of the district.
4. Any dumpsters on site shall be enclosed on four (4) sides with an opaque fence equipped with a lockable gate and shall not be visible from lot lines.
5. Storm water management shall be in compliance with the Township Storm Water Management Ordinance.
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-14 Zoning Ordinance
16-515 RESERVED
16-516 RESERVED
16-517 KENNEL/ANIMAL DAY CARE
Upon approval of a kennel/animal day care special land use pursuant to Section 16-500, the following regulations and conditions shall apply to such special land use in addition to site plan requirements under this and other applicable Township ordinances and any other conditions specifically made part of the approval under subsection 16-502.
Minimum Regulations and Conditions. The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Township Board that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
1. The minimum lot area shall be one (1) acre for the first four (4) animals, and an additional one-third (1/3) acre for each animal in addition to the first four (4).
2. Buildings where animals are kept, dog runs, and exercise areas shall not be located nearer than one hundred (100) feet to any adjacent occupied dwelling and shall be set back at least seventy-five (75) feet from any VLRD, LRD, LMRD or MRD district.
3. Dog runs and exercise areas shall not be located in any front yard or required side or rear yard setback area.
4. All principal use activities, other than outdoor dog runs or exercise areas, shall be conducted within a totally enclosed building.
16-518 MANUFACTURING FACILITIES
Upon approval of a manufacturing facility special land use pursuant to Section 16-500, the following regulations and conditions shall apply to such special land use in addition to site plan requirements under this and other applicable Township ordinances and any other conditions specifically made part of the approval under subsection 16-502.
Minimum Regulations and Conditions. The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Township Board that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
1. The Township Board may establish hours of operation to protect the character of the land uses in the vicinity.
2. The applicant shall disclose any hazardous, flammable or corrosive materials proposed to be stored, used or handled on the site. Use and handling shall be conducted in accordance with applicable local, state and federal requirements.
3. Federal, state and local agency requirements for storage, spill prevention, record keeping, emergency response, transport and disposal of hazardous substances and polluting materials shall be met. No discharge to groundwater, including direct and indirect discharges, shall be allowed without appropriate state and county permits and approvals.
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-15 Zoning Ordinance
4. Any storage facilities shall provide adequate security and signage to notify the public of any hazardous materials and to prevent trespass.
5. Outdoor storage of materials, substances, products or component parts is not permitted.
6. Vehicles and equipment that are actively used as an integrated component of the establishment may be temporarily parked on the site from time to time provided such parking is located in the side or rear yard, and screened from public view. Screening shall consist of fencing or landscape materials approved by the Township Board and shall screen the equipment from any street or non-industrial district or use. No portion of the parking area shall be located within two hundred (200) feet of any residential district or use.
7. The Township Board reserves the right to require buffering, screening, setbacks and other elements that are greater than those otherwise required by this ordinance in keeping with the spirit and intent of this ordinance to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
8. The applicant shall demonstrate and disclose the following:
i. Potential environmental impacts on air, surface water, ground water, soils, and natural features. These potential impacts shall be minimized or fully mitigated.
ii. Potential impacts on the health of residents of the Township and surrounding communities and on plant and wildlife communities in the vicinity. The Township Board shall not approve the proposed manufacturing, compounding, or processing use if potential impacts are significant.
iii. The potential chemical constituents of all emissions to the air, groundwater and surface waters shall be disclosed.
16-519 MINING, GRAVEL AND MINERAL
Upon approval of a mining, gravel and mineral special land use pursuant to Section 16-500, the following regulations and conditions shall apply to such special land use in addition to site plan requirements under this and other applicable Township ordinances and any other conditions specifically made part of the approval under subsection 16-502.
Minimum Regulations and Conditions. The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Township Board that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
1. General Site Plan Requirements: In addition to meeting all requirements of this ordinance and submitting the regular application for a special land use and payment of fees, the plan and all aspects of the use shall be reviewed pursuant to and shall meet the requirements of Ordinance 47, Ordinance to License and Regulate Gravel and Other Mineral Mining, as amended.
16-520 RESERVED
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-16 Zoning Ordinance
16-521 MIXED USE DEVELOPMENT
Upon approval of a mixed use development special land use pursuant to Section 16-500, the following regulations and conditions shall apply to such special land use in addition to site plan requirements under this and other applicable Township ordinances and any other conditions specifically made part of the approval under subsection 16-502.
Minimum Regulations and Conditions. The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Township Board that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
1. The applicant shall demonstrate how the proposed mixing of uses will reduce traffic generation and provide a substantial amenity for the Township.
2. The mixing of uses must be compatible with adjacent land uses, the natural environment, and the capacities of affected public services and facilities, and such use shall be consistent with the public health, safety and welfare of Township residents. The mixing of uses shall be consistent with the policies set forth in the Township Master Plan.
3. The development shall consolidate and maximize usable open space, wherever possible.
4. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed mixing of uses will not constitute a nuisance to future inhabitants or users of the development, or the Township in general.
5. Off-street parking facilities for such mixed uses may be provided collectively, provided that the total number of spaces so located together shall not be less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use, unless the Township Board finds that such requirements may be modified due to varying hours of operation or other factors.
6. A proposed mixed use development shall be designed in such a manner that will lead to compatible, efficient, and attractive uses of property in the Township, and shall:
i. Encourage unique retail, office and residential use alternatives.
ii. Establish neighborhood places that will define and strengthen the community character and supplement the identity of the Township.
iii. Provide for the redevelopment of underutilized sites.
iv. Facilitate pedestrian oriented development using design options such as sidewalk cafes, rear parking, residential condominiums above small-scale service or retail uses, and enhanced landscape open spaces, squares, and parks.
v. Facilitate vehicular and pedestrian circulation within the development including without limitation trails and/or safety paths in accordance with Section 16-338. Access to the development shall be safe, convenient, non-congested and well defined. Shared access to parking areas will be required, where determined by the Township Board to be appropriate.
16-522 CONVALESCENT CENTER / HOMES FOR THE AGED
Upon approval of a convalescent center /home for the aged special land use pursuant to Section 16-500, the following regulations and conditions shall apply to such special land use in addition to site plan requirements under this and other applicable Township ordinances and any other conditions specifically made part of the approval under subsection 16-502.
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-17 Zoning Ordinance
Minimum Regulations and Conditions. The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Township Board that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
1. The use shall be established and maintained in accordance with all applicable local, state and federal laws.
2. If the use is operating as a nursing home, under the provisions of Article 17 of Michigan Public Act 368 of 1978, the nursing home shall maintain all valid state and local licenses at all times as a condition of Special Use approval.
3. A convalescent center / home for the aged, as defined herein, shall not be located within fifteen hundred (1,500) feet of any other convalescent / home for the aged facility.
4. Parking shall comply with the parking requirement for each specific use on the site; however, parking requirements may be reduced if the Township Board finds that such requirements may be modified due to varying hours of operation or other factor.
16-523 PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY
Upon approval of a place of public assembly special land use pursuant to Section 16-500, the following regulations and conditions shall apply to such special land use in addition to site plan requirements under this and other applicable Township ordinances and any other conditions specifically made part of the approval under subsection 16-502.
Minimum Regulations and Conditions. The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Township Board that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
1. The use shall front on and be accessed primarily from a major street.
16-524 PUD. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
16-524.01 INTENT
The Planned Unit Development (PUD) is intended to provide enhanced housing, traffic circulation and recreational opportunities and environments for the people of Charter Township of Oakland; to encourage developers to use a more creative and imaginative approach in the development of residential areas; to encourage the use of land in accordance with its character and adaptability and to encourage efficient usage of land; to insure that the goals and objectives of the Township's Master Plan are promoted without applying unreasonably restrictive development standards which discourage innovation; to insure a quality of construction commensurate with other developments within the Township; to combine and coordinate architectural styles, building forms, and building relationships within the planned unit development; to promote the efficient use of land to facilitate a more economic arrangement of buildings, circulation systems, land use and utilities; to accommodate changing housing market conditions and community housing desires; to provide a development procedure which will insure that the desires of the developer and the community are understood and approved prior to commencement of construction; to encourage the establishment of open areas in residential
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-18 Zoning Ordinance
developments, and to preserve as much of the natural character of the property as reasonably possible, including but not limited to the following:
? Areas containing natural resources, including wetlands and watercourses, woodlands, prairie remnants and areas that serve as natural habitat.
? Open land areas (by way of example only, open land areas include contiguous areas of meadow, open field, and grass land).
? View sheds needed to retain Township character and aesthetics by virtue of their location in relation to views, including natural landscapes, topography, tree canopies and other “frames”, farm views, and historic resources.
? Land and/or building used for agricultural purposes, including by way of example (only), farm fields, barns, and silos.
? Historic buildings and/or other historic resources, including by way of example (only), centennial farms, cemeteries, registered historic places, Native American villages and/or trails, archaeological sites, and mills.
? Greenway corridors used, or to be used, by wildlife or pedestrians plus without limitation trails and safety paths in accordance with Section 16-338.
16-524.02 PUD QUALIFYING FACTORS
To qualify for consideration of Special Use PUD approval, the proposed PUD must meet all of the following minimum standards and requirements.
A. The minimum area of a PUD shall be thirty (30) acres.
B. Uses permitted in a PUD are limited to the following:
1. Permitted and special land uses designated in the underlying zoning district or districts; and
2. Attached single family dwellings.
C. A Planned Unit Development shall be served by public water and sewer.
D. The applicant must demonstrate that the development will result in a recognizable and substantial benefit to the ultimate users of the project and to the community, where such benefit would otherwise be unfeasible or unlikely to be achieved. For purposes of the foregoing, a “recognizable and substantial benefit” shall mean a clear benefit, both to the ultimate users of the property in question and to the community, which would reasonably be expected to accrue, taking into consideration the reasonably foreseeable benefits and potential detriments of the proposed development and uses, including, without limitation: long-term protection and/or preservation of natural resources and natural features and/or historical and/or architectural features of a significant quantity and quality desired to be protected or preserved on a local, state and/or national basis as outlined in the intent statement of this section.
E. The following shall be demonstrated by the applicant as a condition to the grant of a Special Use PUD of property:
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-19 Zoning Ordinance
1. The proposed type and density of use shall not place a burden upon the subject and/or surrounding land and/or property owners and occupants and/or the natural environment, in excess of the use and burden reasonably anticipated to result from development pursuant to regulations applicable in the underlying zoning district or districts.
2. The proposed development shall not have an adverse impact upon the Charter Township of Oakland Community Master Plan and shall be consistent with the intent and spirit of this Section and the Master Plan.
3. The proposed development shall meet the open space requirement set forth in Section 16-524.04.
4. The proposed development shall be under single ownership and/or control such that there is a single person or entity having responsibility for completing, or having legal authority for completing, the project in conformity with this ordinance, provided, such responsibility shall not include individual principal buildings and facilities on the site of such buildings which serve only such buildings and have no relation or impact upon other portions of the development. This provision shall not prohibit a transfer of ownership and/or control, upon due notice to the Township Clerk, to another person or entity that meets the requirements of this subsection.
5. Where a project is proposed for construction in phases, a detailed site plan shall be submitted for each phase prior to commencement of construction of that phase. Absent Township Board approval, which shall not be unreasonably withheld, each phase of the project must be adjacent to any previously approved portion of the development plan, and shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission and Township Board in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Section 16-524. Where the Township Board authorizes non-adjacent development within the project area, the plan and development shall assure that, assuming subsequent phases are not developed for any reason, there are no isolated and undeveloped parcels which would not be capable of reasonable use in conformance with all Township ordinances.
6. Where provisions of Act 288 of 1967 as amended (Land Division Act) and the Charter Township of Oakland Subdivision Control Ordinance, as amended, apply to the proposed PUD project, the proprietor shall be required to make application for plat approval subsequent to Final Development Plan approval for that phase.
7. When a PUD project contains plans for a site condominium development, the development shall comply with the requirements established in Article X of this Ordinance and the Michigan Condominium Act, being Public Act 59 of 1978 as amended.
F. See Section 16-706 for sign posting requirements for a land use change.
16-524.03 DENSITIES
A. Base Density. The total number of residential dwelling units permitted in a PUD shall not exceed the base density for the parcel, determined by a test plan submitted in accordance with Section 16-343.
B. Additional Density Opportunity. Provided the combined additional density permitted pursuant to this section shall not exceed 125% of the base density, the Township Board upon
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-20 Zoning Ordinance
recommendation of the Planning Commission may, but shall not be required to, approve residential density of up to 125% of the base density in the following instances only: where public access to important natural features is incorporated within the PUD design; and/or an existing gravel road will be paved to a County primary road; and/or more than the minimum area of open space shall be provided. If it is determined that the proposed PUD qualifies for additional density, the following guidelines shall guide the Township Board decision:
1. For each one (1) acre of additional open space, exclusive of primary conservation areas, dedicated in excess of the minimum required by Section 16-524.04, the density of the development may be increased by one percent (1%) up to a maximum of 10%, provided the following areas shall be included within the open space area considered for density bonus calculation:
i. The open space along the exterior public roads shall have a depth of at least fifty (50) feet, either landscaped or preserved in a natural condition.
ii. Open space shall be situated to maximize the preservation of any natural features ranking as excellent, high, good or fair as per the Natural Features Assessment Map in the Master Plan.
iii. A minimum one-hundred (100) foot wide undisturbed open space setback shall be maintained from the edge of any stream or wetland; provided that the Township Board may permit trails, boardwalks, observation platforms or other similar structures that enhance passive enjoyment of the site's natural amenities within the setback.
iv. A minimum one-hundred (100) foot wide open space buffer shall be maintained between residential lots and any adjacent parcel.
v. Where adjacent land includes open space, public land, or existing or planned PUDs or open space developments, open space connections shall be provided between the site and adjacent open space. Trails between adjoining open space development shall be constructed to allow future interconnection between neighborhoods plus without limitation trails and safety paths in accordance with Section 16-338.
vi. Any open space area shall be a minimum of at least fifty (50) feet in all dimensions.
2. Where general public access is proposed to a portion of the natural areas within a proposed PUD, and where the Township Board determines that such public access is desirable and feasible and can be accomplished safely and without significant damage to the natural areas or detriment to current or future neighboring land uses, the density of the development may be increased by a maximum of ten percent (10%).
3. Where the proposed road paving is consistent with the Township Community Master Plan and provides primary access from the proposed development to a paved primary County Road, the density of the development may be increased by a maximum of ten percent (10%).
16-524.04 OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS
A. For PUDs proposed in VLRD, LRD, LMRD or MHRD districts open space shall be determined consistent with the Charter Township of Oakland Community Master Plan, and the following:
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-21 Zoning Ordinance
1. In the VLRD, open space shall be provided consistent with the Natural Resource Conservation land use designation as designated in the Master Plan at a ratio of at least 10 acres preserved for each 1 acre developed.
2. In the LRD district, open space shall be provided consistent with the Low Density Conservation land use designation as designated in the Master Plan at a ratio of at least 5 acres preserved for each 1 acre developed.
3. In the LMRD district, open space shall be provided consistent with the Medium Density Conservation land use designation as designated in the Master Plan at a ratio of at least 1 acre preserved for each 1 acre developed.
4. In the MHRD district, open space shall be provided consistent with the Rural Residential land use designation as designated in the Master Plan at a ratio of at least .5 acres preserved for each 1 acre developed.
B. For the purposes of making determinations concerning open space preservation and developed area under this Section 16-524, the following shall apply:
1. Open Space Preservation:
i. Any submerged land area of a pond, lake, stream, constructed grassy swales, bio-retention facilities, wetlands and storm water detention/retention ponds, and any such grass swales, bio-retention facilities, wetlands, and detention/retention ponds designed to appear and function similar to natural wetlands and ponds, may be counted as open space, to the extent at least fifty percent (50%) of the minimum required open space area shall be in the form of usable park area or upland nature preserves,
ii. Natural features as defined in this ordinance may be counted as open space; and
iii. Golf courses may be counted as open space, excluding the land area associated with any buildings, structures and parking areas associated with the golf course operation, provided the provisions of Section 16-524.04D apply. Land area to be included as open space shall only be the actual golf course area and associated buffer areas.
2. Developed Area:
i. Lot areas proposed as single family residential or site condominiums, including the minimum required setbacks around the building;
ii. Area proposed to be occupied by multiple family dwellings, including the minimum required setbacks around buildings; and
iii. The area of any road right-of-way or private road easement.
C. Open space shall be planned in locations accessible to all in the planned unit development and may either be centrally located, located along the road frontage of the development, located to preserve natural features, located to buffer adjacent farmland, or located so as to connect open space areas on adjacent developments, parks, or public recreation areas.
D. Maintenance of Open Space
1. No PUD shall be approved by the Township Board until documents pertaining to maintenance and preservation of common natural open space areas, common landscaped
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-22 Zoning Ordinance
areas, and common recreational facilities located within the development plan have been reviewed by the Township Attorney and Township Manager.
2. Maintenance shall apply to the open space, landscaped areas, and recreational facilities owned by or used in common by the residents.
3. The Township shall be identified as having the right to enforce the conditions, covenants and restrictions placed on the open space, roads, and storm water drainage, detention and retention facilities, unless otherwise directed by the Township Board or Township Attorney, with the documentation utilized for such purpose to be in a form and substance approved by the Township Attorney.
16-524.05 DESIGN STANDARDS
A. Density. Permitted densities shall be determined by developing a test plan in accordance with Section 16-343. Also see Section 16-524.03.
B. Open Space. See Section 16-524.04 herein.
C. Grading.
1. In order to keep all graded areas and cuts and fills to a minimum, to eliminate unsightly grading and to preserve the natural appearance and beauty of the property as far as possible, with due regard to the requirements of development of the property, as well as to serve the other specified purposes of this section, specific requirements may be placed on the size of areas to be graded or to be used for building, and on the size, height, and angles of cut slopes and fill slopes and the shape thereof, so long as such requirements are reasonable. In appropriate cases, retaining walls may be required.
2. All areas indicated as natural open space on the approved concept and final development plan shall be undisturbed by grading, excavating, structures or otherwise, except as permitted by this subsection. If designated on the approved concept and final development plan, drainage improvements, utility lines, riding trails, hiking trails, picnic areas, stables and similar recreational improvements and amenities may be placed in natural open space areas. Where natural open space is disturbed for recreational and/or open space improvements, best engineering efforts shall be undertaken to make said improvements as unobtrusive as practicable and trenched areas (and similar ground disturbances) shall be treated so as to encourage rapid regeneration of the natural coverage.
3. Grading within the project boundaries shall take into account the environmental characteristics of the property and shall be designed in keeping with the best engineering practices to avoid erosion or flooding and to have as minimal an effect upon the environment as reasonably feasible.
4. Landscaped berms shall exist at all egress and ingress drives. There shall be landscaped islands in all parking areas containing four (4) or more parking spaces.
D. Landscaping.
1. The PUD concept and final development plan shall include provisions for the planting of newly created banks or slopes for erosion control or to minimize their visual effect.
2. Landscaping shall be of varying species, dimensions and designs.
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-23 Zoning Ordinance
3. Landscaping requirements shall include all landscaping references contained in this section and Article Eight Landscaping.
4. The use of natural existing landscape is preferred where appropriate as determined by the Planning Commission and consistent with the parameters set forth in the Natural Feature Inventory contained in the Master Plan.
E. Lot Area, Height, Bulk and Placement Regulations
1. Total ground area occupied by all buildings and structures (excluding paved areas) may not exceed thirty-five (35%) percent of the total ground area of the PUD.
2. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, provided that the Township Board upon recommendation of the Planning Commission may allow greater heights when that portion of the PUD which increased the height is adjacent to a zoning district that allows a greater height or when greater open spaces, setbacks, topography or nature of the use would warrant.
3. No building, structure or parking area may be erected closer than one hundred (100) feet from any PUD boundary, provided the Township Board upon recommendation of the Planning Commission may allow a lesser setback when all or a portion of the PUD boundary is adjacent to a dedicated open space area, natural feature, a dedicated park or other open element that achieves the separation purpose of this section.
4. All uses located within the PUD shall provide off-street parking as required in Article VIII of this ordinance and include plantings on all islands, if applicable.
5. The phases of a PUD development shall be so scheduled that, if later stages of the development are not implemented, the initial phase(s) shall be consistent with the provisions of this subsection and shall not detract from the feasibility of developing the remaining portion of the subject PUD area in an appropriate and desirable manner.
6. The plan shall be in keeping with the physical character of the Township, the area surrounding the PUD, and the policy objectives of the Township Community Master Plan. The plan shall provide for an efficient, aesthetic, and desirable use of the open areas.
7. Private roads within the PUD, if any, shall conform to the minimum road standards established by the Township for public roads. There shall be only one collector road access on an arterial road, unless the Township Board upon recommendation of the Planning Commission approves additional access points.
8. Scenic open space, equal to one half the width of the right-of-way, shall be provided along all existing arterial roads in addition to the required future road right-of-way.
9. The proposed location and arrangement of structures shall not have a detrimental effect on residents of existing developments in the area. Open space shall be used as a transitional device to buffer surrounding uses.
10. A bon-a-fide variety and mixture of housing types is encouraged consistent with the provisions of Section 16-524.01B and the PUD shall include adequate provisions and safeguards to assure that the planned variety and proportions of housing types will be accomplished within a reasonable period of time.
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-24 Zoning Ordinance
11. Adequate areas shall be reserved for facilities such as utilities, walkways, playgrounds, recreation areas, parking, and other open spaces and areas to be used by the public and/or by residents of the development.
12. Trails and safety paths which are located on the Township Trails and Pathways Master Plan shall be separated as completely as possible from the vehicular circulation system so as to reduce and minimize points of traffic conflict, and to enhance safety of pedestrian and bicycle circulation. The internal road system shall be designed and configured in a manner that discourages pass-through vehicular traffic.
13. Any existing use of property zoned PUD (including property with an approved development plan) shall be subject to the provisions of Article I of this ordinance pertaining to nonconforming land uses. No expansion of a nonconforming land use, expansion of a nonconforming building, or addition of any new structures associated in any manner with an existing land use or building shall be allowed unless prior approval is given by the Township Board via special land use permit.
14. The PUD shall be compatible with previously developed properties in the vicinity and any proposed land balancing shall preserve the natural, topographic features of the site, and create opportunities for man-made structures to blend with the environment and located in such a manner as to complement the natural terrain and landscape.
15. Adequate public safety measures must be incorporated into the design of the plan.
16. Signs shall be installed in conformance with Article 7 and shall be of an unimposing style and well-coordinated with surrounding sign styles, dimensions, materials, and colors.
17. Dumpsters shall be screened with materials that are well-coordinated with the principle structure.
18. The performance standards contained in Article 3 shall apply to all PUDs.
16-524.06 PROCEDURES FOR APPLICATION, REVIEW AND APPROVAL
A. In general. The procedure for application, review and approval of a PUD shall be a two part process:
1. The first part shall be application and approval of a Concept Development Plan. Such action, if and when approved, shall confer upon the applicant concept approval for the length of time established by the Township Board. The duration of the effectiveness of concept approval shall be determined in relation to the size of the property and in relation to the anticipated time for development and marketing, all taking into consideration the probability and effect of a change in law or ordinance which would bear upon approval of the Concept Development Plan. Upon application prior to the expiration of the Concept Development Plan, the Township Board may extend the effectiveness of the Concept Development Plan on a periodic basis, which shall not be less than one (1) year.
2. The second part of the review and approval process shall be the application for an approval of a Final Development Plan for the entire project, or for any one or more phases of the project. Final Development Plan approval shall require the grant of special land use and site plan approval, to be approved by the Township Board following recommendation of the Planning Commission.
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-25 Zoning Ordinance
B. Concept Development Plan Approval
1. Prior to submission of an application for PUD approval, the applicant shall meet with the Zoning Administrator, together with such consultants as deemed appropriate by the Township, for a pre-application conference. The applicant shall present at such conference, or conferences, at least a sketch plan of the proposed PUD, as well as the following information:
i. a legal description of the property in question;
ii. the total number of acres in the project;
iii. a statement of the use type and approximate number of units, including a test plan prepared in accordance with Section 16-343 applicable to the underlying zoning district for the limited purpose of determining the total number of units which could be feasibly developed on the property;
iv. the known deviations from regulations in this ordinance to be sought;
v. the number of acres to be preserved as open or recreational space and intended uses of such space; and
vi. all known natural resources and natural features to be preserved.
vii. all known historic resources to be preserved.
2. Thereafter, sixteen (16) copies of a Preliminary Concept Development Plan, including a site plan, conforming to the application provision set forth in subsection 5 below, shall be submitted within 90 days of the pre-application conference required in the immediately preceding paragraph. Such submission shall be made to the Zoning Administrator, who shall present the same to the Planning Commission for consideration at a regular or special meeting.
3. The Planning Commission shall review the Preliminary Concept Development Plan, and shall be entitled to make reasonable inquiries of and receive answers from the applicant. Within a reasonable time following review, the Zoning Administrator shall provide the applicant with written comments, which shall be part of the official minutes of the Planning Commission.
4. Following preliminary review by the Planning Commission, referenced in the immediately preceding paragraph, the applicant shall submit to the Zoning Administrator sixteen (16) copies of a proposed Concept Development Plan taking into consideration the comments of the Planning Commission during preliminary review, and conforming to the application provision set forth in subsection 5 below. This Plan shall constitute an application for Concept Development Plan and shall be noticed for public hearing as per Section 16-103.
5. The application for Concept Development Plan approval shall include the following information and materials:
i. Development Concept: A summary explanation of the development concept of the proposed PUD. The development concept shall describe the project and outline the basis for PUD qualification consistent with Section 16-524.01-05.
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-26 Zoning Ordinance
ii. Density
a. Overall maximum
b. Approximate maximum for each proposed phase
c. A test plan in accordance with Section 16-343
iii. Road System
a. General description of road system and circulation pattern
b. Approximate location of roads
c. Location and layout of entrances/exits
d. Approximate location and layout of pedestrian walkways
e. Statement whether roads are intended to be public or private
iv. Utilities
a. General description of proposed water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer systems
b. General location of utility lines
c. General indication of size and location of storm water detention and permanent retention/detention ponds
v. Open space/common areas
a. General description of proposed open space and common areas
b. Total area of open space, and open space in each proposed phase
c. Proposed uses of open space and common area including recreation areas, trails and safety paths
vi. Uses
a. List of all proposed uses
b. Location, type and land area to be devoted to each use in each phase
c. Reasonably based estimate of the number of units for each use type
vii. Development Guidelines
a. Map of total project area by use type
b. Typical setback and lot dimensions
c. Minimum lot size for each use
d. Typical, minimum, and maximum building height and size
e. General provisions for parking, fencing, lighting and berming
f. Type of building construction, e.g. prefabricated, steel and glass, wood, brick, or a combination (and if a combination, include a description)
viii. Landscaping
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-27 Zoning Ordinance
a. General landscaping plan, including entrances and perimeters
b. Any theme/streetscape design
c. Type of irrigation, and areas to be irrigated
ix. Natural resources and features
a. Flood way/flood plain locations and elevations
b. Wetlands and water courses
c. Location
d. Description of each
e. Any proposed encroachments by roads, utilities, or other improvements
f. Woodlands: location and area of tree stands
g. Location and description of other natural resources
h. Location and description of natural features
x. Phasing information
a. Approximate location, area and boundaries of each phase
b. Anticipated sequence of development, including phasing areas and associated improvements
c. Anticipated timing for commencement and completion of each phase
xi. Public services and facilities
a. Description of the anticipated demand and burden to be generated by the development for public sewer, water, off-site roads, schools, solid waste disposal, off-site disposal, police and fire.
b. Description of the sufficiency of each service and facility to accommodate such demand and burden
c. Anticipated means by which insufficient services and facilities shall be provided
xii. Historical structures and resources
a. Location and description
b. Proposed preservation plan
xiii. Site topography, at five foot intervals
xiv. Signage
a. Entrance
b. For road system
c. Other, if any
xv. Brief description of the amenities to be included in the development
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-28 Zoning Ordinance
xvi. Existing zoning classification(s) on and within 300 feet of the site
xvii. Specification of each deviation from the regulations applicable to projects in the underlying zoning district which will be sought to be approved, and the safeguards, features and/or planning mechanisms proposed to achieve the objectives intended to be accomplished by the regulations from which a deviation is being sought.
xviii. A community impact statement, which shall provide an assessment of the developmental, ecological, social, economic and physical impacts of the project on the natural environment and physical improvements on and surrounding the development site. Information that has been required for compliance with other ordinances shall not be required to be duplicated in the community impact statement.
xix. Demonstration, including map and text, showing the off-site utilities that will provide services to the project.
xx. Traffic analysis as outlined in Article 6 reflecting the anticipated impact of the development upon roads and highways anticipated to service the project during construction and the occupants and users of the project when completed.
6. Effect of Approval: If the Township Board adopts a resolution approving the Concept Development Plan pursuant to this section, such designation shall confer upon the applicant concept approval for the Concept Development Plan for a period to be established by the Township Board, applying the standards set forth in Section 16-524.06 A.1 above. Such period of time shall be specified as part of the resolution granting the Concept Development Plan for the property. During the period of effectiveness of the Concept Development Plan, as established by the Township Board, the property owner shall be permitted to submit one (or more if the project is to be proposed in phases) site plan application(s), seeking Final Development Plan approval in the manner provided below. Upon application prior to the expiration of the Concept Development Plan, the Township Board may extend the effectiveness of the Concept Development Plan on a periodic basis. In determining whether to extend the effectiveness of the Concept Development Plan, approval may be granted if the resolution, ordinances and laws applicable to the project have not changed in a manner which would adversely affect the project as previously approved. In the event of an expiration of the effectiveness of a Concept Development Plan as to all or any phase of the PUD project., the property owner may either make application for a new Concept Development Plan or make application for some other approval for the portion of the development for which a Final Development Plan has not been approved.
C. Final Development Plan Approval
1. Development of property granted Concept Development Plan shall require the grant of special land use and site plan approval. The grant of special land use and site plan approval shall be made by the Township Board following recommendation of the Planning Commission shall constitute Final Development Plan approval.
2. Special land use and site plan approval may be applied for and granted with respect to the entire development or in one or more phases. However, if the project is proposed in phases, the design shall be such that, upon completion, the aggregate of the completed phases shall be capable of standing on their own in terms of the density and the presence
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-29 Zoning Ordinance
of services and facilities, and shall contain the necessary components to ensure protection of natural resources and the health, safety, and welfare of the users of the PUD and the residents of the surrounding area. In addition, where the density of a particular phase, taking into consideration all previously approved phases, has a density greater than the density permitted for the project, the Township Board shall require the execution and recordation of an appropriate conservation easement or other means determined appropriate by the Township for the purpose of ensuring that the maximum density permitted under this section shall not be exceeded in the event future phases are not approved and/or constructed. The Township Board shall specify the improvements within the project required to be constructed outside of the phase or phases proposed in order to support and service such phase or phases. The Township Board may require, in addition to the documents referenced above, the recordation of permanent or temporary easements, open space agreements, and other instruments in order to ensure the use and development of the property as proposed is consistent with and/or promotes and/or protects the public health, safety and welfare in a specific manner, in accordance with the intent and spirit of this section. The applicant may also submit for preliminary subdivision or preliminary site condominium approval at this time, if appropriate.
3. Subject to the specific provisions of this section, Final Development Plan approval shall be based upon the standards and procedures set forth in this ordinance for special land use approval, site plan approval and the standards and provisions of this Section 16-524. In addition to the required information for a site plan contained in Article VI, the applicant shall submit a Final Development Plan containing the following:
i. Sixteen (16) copies of a Final Development Plan, which shall be accompanied by the following data prepared by a design team consisting of a professional civil engineer and either a licensed architect or professional planner:
a. Applicant's name and address
b. The name of the proposed development
c. Common description of property and complete legal description
d. Dimensions of land, width, length, acreage and frontage
e. Existing zoning and zoning of all properties within 300-feet of the PUD. Classify zoning within the proposed PUD by acreage.
f. Statement of intent of proposed use of land and any phasing of the project
g. Name, address, city and phone number of: firm or individual who prepared the plan and the owner of the property and applicant, if other than owner.
h. Delineation of the one hundred (100) year floodplain and proposed uses therein, if any
i. Current proof of ownership of and, if developer does not own the land, or evidence of a contractual right and ability to acquire the PUD Property, such as an option or purchase contract. If the developer does not own the PUD property, the application must be signed by both the developer and the owner, and the owners signed authorization for the developer to act on the owners behalf in all respects
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-30 Zoning Ordinance
pertaining to the and in order to obtain Township approval of the PUD must also be proved.
j. A statement of the method the developer will use to pay for the construction of the improvements
k. A site plan indicating the following:
1. The proposed location, height and dimensions of all buildings and man-made structures, the use to which those buildings and structures would be put and a range of materials to be used, and general color scheme for all such buildings and structures;
2. The location and dimensions of all off-street parking spaces and loading areas;
3. The location, dimensions and materials of all bicycle paths, riding and hiking trails, and pedestrian walkways;
4. Table listing land coverages by percentage and acreage for the following: landscaped area, natural open spaces, buildings, parking; streets, sidewalk, paths and recreational facilities, land use (single family residential, commercial, etc.), and wetlands;
5. Sign style, location and dimension; and
6. Residential portions shall include a calculation of the estimated population density of the development and the location of proposed building envelopes.
ii. A landscaping plan consistent with the requirements contained in Article Eight Landscaping plus the following:
a. Natural open space, if any, which will remain upon completion of the development;
b. Site, species, and location of all existing trees larger than six inches in diameter outside of natural open space areas and whether or not such tree(s) is (are) to be removed or destroyed;
c. Maturation sizes of all new trees and shrubs to be installed by the developer;
d. Species of all plant material to be installed by the developer;
e. Evidence of an irrigation system (indicating whether manual or automatic); and,
f. Location, style and dimension of all other landscape treatments, including walls, fences, greenbelts, monuments, and fountains.
iii. A utility drainage plan consistent with the Township Engineering Standards including the following:
a. Location of existing and proposed easements;
b. Location of existing and proposed drainage courses, flood plains, lakes, streams and wetlands;
c. Intentions with respect to water and sewer; and,
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-31 Zoning Ordinance
d. Retention pond safety and buffering mechanisms.
iv. A transportation plan indicating the following:
a. Current traffic volumes on roads abutting the subject site;
b. Projected traffic volumes if the PUD is approved and developed as stated in the development plan;
c. Dimension and location of all curb cuts providing ingress and egress to the subject site;
d. Interior and exterior street elevations with enough detail to allow for accurate clear vision triangle determinations at all proposed ingress and egress access points along thoroughfares abutting the subject site and along the collectors within the subject site, and clear vision determinations shall be included in the transportation plan;
e. Existing and proposed right-of-way widths of all adjoining external roads and internal roads, and layout of all internal roads including pavement widths, street grades, whether streets are to be public or private, and all proposed frontage improvements on new and existing streets; and
f. Proposed acceleration, deceleration, and passing lanes.
v. A topographical map shall be at a scale no smaller than one inch equals one hundred feet showing contour lines existing prior to grading at an interval of not more than two feet.
vi. A grading plan showing increments of the depths of all cuts, fills and depths in various colors or any similar display which shows the cuts, fills, and depths thereof and readily distinguishes between differing cuts, fills and depths; and a slope classification map showing, in contrasting colors, all land which has less than ten percent slope, all land which has a slope between ten percent, and twenty percent and all land which has a slope greater than twenty percent.
xiii. A specification of all deviations proposed from the regulations that would be necessary of the land were development in the manner proposed under the regulations of the underlying zoning district, except such deviations as have been approved and incorporated into the Concept Development Plan. This specification shall state the reasons and mechanisms to be utilized for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare in lieu of the regulations which would otherwise apply to the development under regulations of the underlying zoning district.
xiv. The purpose proposed for each designated open space.
xv. A schedule of the intended development and construction details, including phasing and timing, and the general improvements to constitute a part of the development, including, without limitation, lighting, signage, the mechanisms designed to reduce noise, utilities and visual screening features.
4. Upon receipt of a recommendation on a Final Development Plan from the Planning Commission following the procedure outlined in Article VI, the Township Clerk shall place the matter on the agenda of the Township Board for review and action. The
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-32 Zoning Ordinance
Township Board may adjourn the consideration from time-to-time if determined appropriate for the purpose of receiving further information or consultation on the proposed Final Development Plan.
5. At the conclusion of the Township Board's deliberation, the Township Board shall grant Final Development Plan approval, with or without conditions, or deny. If approval is denied, the minutes of the Township Board shall include the grounds for denial. If approval is granted with conditions, the minutes of the Township Board shall include a statement of the conditions.
16-524.07 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES
The Township Board may require reasonable performance guarantees as authorized by law to insure completion of improvements. The performance guarantee shall be approved by the Township Attorney, and the developer and owner of the property shall enter into an agreement with the Township, the form and substance of which shall be approved by the Township Attorney regarding the completion of the improvements and providing for the disposition of the letter of credit.
16-524.08 CONDITIONS
A. Reasonable conditions may be required with the approval of the Special Use PUD, including Concept Development Plan and Final Development Plan, to the extent authorized by law, for the purpose of insuring that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased services and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, protecting the natural environment and conserving natural resources and energy, insuring compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and promoting the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall be designed to protect natural resources and the public health, safety and welfare of individuals in the project and those immediately adjacent, and the community as a whole. In addition, conditions imposed shall be reasonably related to the purposes affected by the PUD, and shall be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this ordinance, and be related to the objective of insuring compliance with the standards of this ordinance.
B. The conditions and regulations applicable to the PUD shall be set forth in a document to be known as the permit conditions for the PUD, which shall be prepared by the Township Attorney, agreed to by the applicant and property owner, and approved by the Township Board as part of the Final Development Plan Approval for the PUD, or if the PUD is to be developed in phases as part of the Final Development Plan Approval for the first phase of development. Such permit conditions shall be signed by the applicant, property owner, and Township, and a copy of said permit conditions or an affidavit providing notice of the PUD approval and general description of the regulations and conditions applicable thereto, approved by the Township Attorney, shall be recorded against the property comprising the PUD.
16-524.09 COMMENCEMENT AND COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION
A. Construction of a PUD must be started within one (1) year from the effective date of the grant of Final Development Plan approval. This time limit may be extended one (1) year upon application to the Township Board if it is demonstrated that substantial progress is being made in the detailing of plans and securing of financing. With a multiple-phase PUD,
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-33 Zoning Ordinance
beginning construction of a phase shall satisfy the requirements even though the total PUD may be a number of years from completion; provided that consecutive phases must be started within the later of one (1) year of: (i) the schedule set forth in the approved Concept Development Plan, or (ii) completion of the previous phase. This time limit may be extended for additional periods of up to two (2) years each if the Township Board determines that conditions beyond the developer's control have caused the need for an extension, and, taking into consideration changed facts and circumstances and/or modified ordinance and/or law, there is no just basis for denial of an extension. If construction has not begun within these time limits, the final development plan approval granted under this section shall expire. Starting of construction shall be deemed to mean commencement of construction of the improvements included in and applicable specifically to the Final Development Plan. Completion of a phase shall be the date all structures designed for occupancy by homeowners, tenants, residents or businesses have been built and are approved for occupancy.
B. Where a project is proposed for construction in phases, the planning and designing shall be such that, upon completion, each phase in conjunction with other completed phases shall be capable of standing on its own in terms of the presence of services, facilities, and open space, and shall contain the necessary components to insure protection of natural resources and the health, safety, and welfare of the users of the planned unit development and the residents of the surrounding area.
16-524.010 EFFECT OF APPROVAL
If and when approved, a Final Development Plan interpreted together with the Concept Development Plan, with all conditions imposed, if any, shall constitute the Special Use authorization for the property, and all improvement and use shall be undertaken accordingly. At the time of approval of the Concept Development Plan, the applicant shall record an affidavit with the Register of Deeds of the County of Oakland containing the legal description of the entire project, specifying the date of approval of the PUD, and declaring that all future development of the property has been authorized and required to be carried out in accordance with the approved Concept Development Plan and Final Development Plan or Plans unless the Final Development Plan expires or unless an amendment is duly adopted by the Township upon the request and/or approval of the applicant, or applicant's transferees and/or assigns.
16-524.011 ALTERATION OF PUD
A. Minor changes in the location, siting, and height of buildings, structures and/or other features may be authorized by the Township Board without additional public hearings if required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time the final plan was approved. No change authorized by this subsection may cause any of the following:
1. A change in the use or character of the development, including any change inconsistent with the Concept Development Plan;
2. An increase in overall coverage of structures;
3. An increase in the intensity of use;
4. An increase in the problems of traffic circulation and public utilities;
5. A reduction in approved open space;
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-34 Zoning Ordinance
6. A reduction of off-street parking and loading space; or
7. A reduction in required pavement widths.
B. All other changes consistent with the Concept Development Plan shall be made by new application under the procedure for review and approval of a special land use, including notice and public hearing.
16-524.012 FEES
There shall be an advanced payment of fees at the time of the pre-submission conference, at the time of application for Concept Development Plan Approval, and at the time of application for Final Development Plan Approval. The amount of such fees shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the Township Board.
16-525 OIL AND GAS STRUCTURES
A. It is the purpose and intent of these provisions to comply with the relevant and applicable case law and nay and all federal, state, or local laws and regulations.
B. This Ordinance recognizes that the construction and operation of oil or gas structures as defined in Section 16-216 of this Ordinance may result in very serious consequences to the vicinity of the property at issue and therefore special land use review and approval, as provided for under this Ordinance is required prior to the placement of an oil and gas structure. In reviewing a special land use application for an oil and gas structure, the Township shall determine whether very serious consequences would result from the placement and operation of the proposed oil and gas structure. In making this determination, the Township shall not consider the standards for special land use approval; rather all of the following factors may be considered:
1. The relationship of extraction and associated activities with existing land uses.
2. The impact on existing land uses in the vicinity of the property.
3. The impact on property values in the vicinity of the property and along the proposed hauling route serving the property, based on credible evidence.
4. The impact on pedestrian and traffic safety in the vicinity of the property and along the proposed hauling route serving the property.
5. The impact on other identifiable health, safety, and welfare interests in the local unit of government.
6. The overall public interest on the extraction of the specific natural resources on the property.
C. In consideration of the above criteria and to minimize the likelihood of very serious consequences occurring as a result of the placement and operation of an oil and gas structure, the following requirements are established for all oil and gas structures in Oakland Township:
1. An oil or gas structure shall only be permitted in the VLRD zoning district as a special land use and shall be located on a parcel that meets the minimum lot width and area requirements for the VLRD district.
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-35 Zoning Ordinance
2. Upon a showing that there would be an impact on existing land uses in the vicinity, an impact of property values in the vicinity, or an impact on pedestrian safety in the vicinity, the Township may require that oil or gas structures be located on a paved road.
3. An oil or gas structure shall not be located closer than 1,000 feet from a residential dwelling or place of worship, school, hospital, child care center or park. A new oil or gas well shall also not be located closer than 330 feet from an adjoining property line.
4. Prior to construction or use of an oil or gas structure the owner or operator of the structure, shall provide to the Township a copy of the Environmental Impact Assessment and all other applications, permits and materials filed as a part of the application.
5. Oil and gas structures shall be completely enclosed with an eight (8)-foot high fence designed to prevent unauthorized entry. The structures shall be screened from neighboring properties by natural barriers, berms or other method(s) acceptable to the Planning Commission.
6. The applicant shall take all necessary precautions deemed adequate by the Township Engineer and shall implement measures necessary to control any objectionable dust, noise, vibrations, light, fumes, or odors from leaving the property or adversely affecting or unreasonably disturbing persons living or working in the vicinity pursuant to Section 16-334 of this Ordinance. All operations shall be conducted in accordance with best practices determined by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality for the production of oil, gas and hydrocarbons in urban and residential areas.
7. There shall be no off-site discharge of storm water except to an approved drainage system in accordance with the Township’s engineering requirements.
8. The property on which the oil or gas structure is located shall be maintained in accordance with applicable Township Ordinances.
9. The owner or operator shall provide to the Township and its emergency responders any information necessary to assist the emergency responders with an emergency response plan and hazardous materials survey establishing written procedures to minimize any possible hazard resulting from the operation, and shall further provide to the Township and its emergency responders up-to-date contact information and a means to contact a responsible representative of the owner on a twenty-four (24) hour basis.
16-526 RECREATION FACILITY, COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR
Upon approval of a commercial outdoor recreation facility special land use pursuant to Section 16-500, the following regulations and conditions shall apply to such special land use in addition to site plan requirements under this and other applicable Township ordinances and any other conditions specifically made part of the approval under subsection 16-502.
Minimum Regulations and Conditions. The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Township Board that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
1. Such facilities shall maintain, at all times, all required state and local licenses and permits.
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-36 Zoning Ordinance
2. Facilities that include paint-ball, archery, and/or shooting ranges shall employ effective physical barriers and isolation distances to assure that no projectile shall carry, or be perceptible, beyond the property limit.
3. Any or all of the property of a building may be required to be fenced to contain any debris or materials used or discarded on site and/or to prevent unauthorized access to the grounds.
4. Such facilities shall provide sufficient isolation distance from residential uses or other measures acceptable to the Township Board to mitigate any potential detrimental impact on surrounding residential uses.
16-527 STABLE AND RIDING ACADEMY
Upon approval of a stable and riding academy special land use pursuant to Section 16-500, the following regulations and conditions shall apply to such special land use in addition to site plan requirements under this and other applicable Township ordinances and any other conditions specifically made part of the approval under subsection 16-502.
Minimum Regulations and Conditions. The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Township Board that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
1. All riding academies and commercial stables of horses for hire shall be located on a site having a minimum of fifteen (15) acres and a minimum lot width of three hundred thirty (330) feet. All buildings shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from adjoining properties.
2. Any buildings used to breed, house, feed, train, or shelter horses shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from any lot line and paddocks or corrals must be at least ten (10) feet from any side or rear lot line.
3. The facilities shall be so constructed and maintained that odor, dust, noise, or drainage shall not constitute a nuisance, disturbance, or hazard to adjacent or nearby property owners.
4. All on-site accumulations of manure, bedding or other animal related solid wastes shall be disposed of in accordance with Oakland County Health Department and State health regulations and Generally Accepted Agricultural Management Practices (GAAMPS).
5. Any dumpsters on site shall be enclosed on four (4) sides with an opaque fence equipped with a lockable gate and shall not be visible from lot lines.
16-528 VETERINARY HOSPITAL
Upon approval of a veterinary hospital special land use pursuant to Section 16-500, the following regulations and conditions shall apply to such special land use in addition to site plan requirements under this and other applicable Township ordinances and any other conditions specifically made part of the approval under subsection 16-502.
Minimum Regulations and Conditions. The applicant shall provide documentation acceptable to the Township Board that the proposed use shall meet the following standards:
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-37 Zoning Ordinance
1. Animal wastes, biohazard materials or byproducts shall be disposed of as required by the Oakland County Health Department, the Michigan Department of Public Health, or other duly appointed authority. All other wastes shall be contained in leak-proof and odor proof containers removed not less frequently than twice per week. No animal wastes, biohazard materials or byproducts shall be buried or incinerated on site.
2. The operator of the veterinary hospital shall maintain at all times, all required state and local licenses and permits for the operation of the hospital. Any failure on the part of the operator to maintain proper licensing shall be grounds for the revocation of a special use approval for a veterinary hospital.
3. Said use shall be located on a parcel not less than one-half (1/2) acre in size, provided all operations and the housing of animals are contained in one or more completely enclosed buildings.
4. Buildings where animals are kept, dog runs, and exercise areas shall not be located nearer than one hundred (100) feet to any adjacent occupied dwelling and shall be set back at least seventy-five (75) feet from any VLRD, LRD, LMRD or MRD district.
5. Dog runs and exercise areas shall not be located in any front yard or required side or rear yard setback area.
6. All principal use activities, other than outdoor dog runs or exercise areas, shall be conducted within a totally enclosed building.
16-529 SENIOR HOUSING
A. Intent. The intent of providing independent and assisted living for the elderly is to recognize the housing needs of an aging population by permitted housing options. This section establishes standards to ensure development of senior housing is developed in appropriate locations and allows for building and site design that meet the needs its residents and the properties in the vicinity.
B. Type of Dwelling and Density.
1. Independent living for the elderly: Dwellings may be provided for a single-family detached, two-family, or multiple-family units. Each unit shall provide 9,500 square feet of site area.
2. Assisted living for the elderly: Where such facilities contain individual dwelling units with kitchen facilities, the density requirements set forth in Section 16-529 B. 1. shall apply. Where facilities do not contain kitchen facilities within individual dwelling units, the site area per bed shall be four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet.
C. Minimum Site Area. The minimum site area shall be ten (10) acres for all types of elderly housing developments.
D. Building Length.
1. Assisted living for the elderly: A building for assisted living elderly housing shall not exceed two hundred and fifty (250) feet in overall length, measured along the front line of connecting units, inclusive of any architectural features, which are attached to or connect the parts of the building together. The Planning Commission may permit buildings of greater length when it can be demonstrated that architectural design and natural and
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-38 Zoning Ordinance
topographic features ensure that the building is compatible with the site and surrounding areas.
2. Independent living for the elderly: A building for independent living elderly housing shall not exceed one hundred thirty-five (135) feet in overall length, measured along the front line of connecting units, inclusive of any architectural features, which are attached to or connect the parts of the building together. The Planning Commission may permit buildings of greater length when it can be demonstrated that architectural design and natural and topographic features ensure that the building is compatible with the site and the surrounding areas.
E. Perimeter Setbacks. The minimum yard setbacks from the perimeter property boundaries shall be no less than seventy-five (75) feet from the front property line and fifty (50) feet from all other property lines.
F. Internal Setbacks.
1. A minimum setback requirement for single- and two-family dwellings located on individual lots shall be as follows:
Table 16-529 F.1.
Minimum Setbacks for Single- and Two-Family Dwellings on Individual Lots
Yard
Setbacks per Dwelling Unit (in Feet)
Front and Rear:
Front
25
Rear
35
Side:
Least
7.5
Total of same lot
20
Total between abutting lots
20
2. Minimum setbacks for single- and two-family dwellings which are not located on individual lots and multiple-family dwellings shall be based on the spacing between buildings, in accordance with the following requirements:
Table 16-529 F.2.
Minimum Setbacks and Distances Between Buildings (in feet)
Setbacks
Multiple-Family
Single- and Two-Family
Minimum Setbacks*
Internal drives/streets
25
25
Distance between buildings
Side/side orientation
30
20
Side/front, side/rear orientation
30
35
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-39 Zoning Ordinance
Front/front, front/rear, rear/rear orientation
50
50
*Where the elderly housing development contains drives or streets without a recorded easement, setbacks shall be measured from the edge of pavement.
3. In the case of multiple-family dwellings, enclosed walkways connecting buildings may be permitted, provided applicable building and fire code and building spacing requirements are met.
G. Minimum Floor Area. Each dwelling unit shall comply with the following minimum floor area requirements, excluding basements:
Table 16-529 G.
Elderly Housing – Minimum Floor Area
Dwelling Size
Floor Area/Unit (sq.ft.)
Assisted Living Unit
Floor Area/Unit (sq.ft.)
Independent Living Unit
Efficiency
500
600
One bedroom
650
750
Two bedroom
800
900
Each additional bedroom
200
200
H. Building Height. The maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet in height, or two (2) stories. The Township Board, following recommendation of the Planning Commission, and following a public hearing, may at its discretion permit up to three (3) stories only if the following conditions are met:
1. The site contains significant natural resources such as slopes or wetlands.
2. No increase in density shall be allowed.
3. Approval by the Fire Department is required.
4. An increased setback distance is established with respect to each required setback at the discretion of the Township Board, including front, rear, and side yard requirements and spacing requirements between buildings. The extent of increase, if any, for each setback measurement shall be established as part of the approval by the Township Board.
5. In no event shall the maximum height of any such building exceed thirty-five (35) feet, in the manner defined and calculated in accordance with the terms of this Ordinance.
I. Utilities. Senior housing developments must be located where public sewer and water facilities are available.
J. Open Space/Recreation. Open space and recreation shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements:
Special Land Uses
Charter Township of Oakland V-40 Zoning Ordinance
1. The total open space required shall be a minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of the site; and
2. Recreation facilities shall be appropriate and designed to meet the needs of the resident population. Active recreation shall be located conveniently in relation to the majority of dwelling units intended to be served.
K. Resident Services. Support services offered solely to residents may be permitted, provided such services are contained within the principal building and are strictly accessory to the principal use as an elderly residential facility. Such support services may include congregate dining, health care, personal services, and social, recreation, and education facilities and programs.
L. Security. The applicant shall specify and install a security system designed to protect the safety and welfare of residents. Such system shall be certified by the project architect or engineer to be designed consistent with state of the art standards of the industry. Such certification shall be shown on the project plans reviewed by the Planning Commission.
Site Plan Review
Charter Township of Oakland VI-1 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE VI: SITE PLAN REVIEW
16-600 INTENT
Site Plan Review procedures are instituted to provide an opportunity for the Township Planning Commission, Township Board and the applicant to coordinate the utilization of land in the best interest of the community, the adjoining property, and the proposed improvement.
16-601 APPLICABILITY
Subject to the provisions of this section, a site plan shall be required in conjunction with any of the following:
A. Any activity requiring application for a building permit, except for a detached single-family dwelling and/or buildings or uses accessory thereto.
B. The construction or expansion of any parking lot.
C. As specified in this ordinance or in the Subdivision Ordinance, as amended.
16-602 PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE
A pre-application conference shall be held with the Township planner and any others as deemed appropriate by the Zoning Administrator to provide information and guidance to the applicant before undertaking preparation of site plans and information. There shall be no fee for a pre-application conference.
16-603 REQUIRED INFORMATION AND FEES
A. A schedule of fees for review of site plans shall be established in the Review Fee Ordinance, Ordinance Number 67, as amended. Review by the Planning Commission and Township Board will not occur until all required review fees are paid and all required information has been submitted. Final construction plans must be submitted to the Building Department for review and approval prior to issuance of a Building Permit.
B. Site plans shall consist of an overall plan for the entire development. Sheet size shall be at least 24" x 36" with plan view drawn to a scale of 1"=50' for property less than three acres or l"=100' for property of three or more acres. Included on the site plan will be the following:
All Site Plans:
1. Proprietor's name, address, and telephone number;
2. Name of the township, city or village where residing;
3. Date(month/day/yr.),including revisions;
4. Title block;
5. Scale;
Site Plan Review
Charter Township of Oakland VI-2 Zoning Ordinance
6. North point;
7. Legal description and common description of property;
8. Gross and net acreage figures;
9. Location map drawn at a scale of l"-2,000' with north point indicated;
10. Architect, engineer, surveyor, landscape architect, or planner's seal;
11. On parcels of more than one acre, topography on site and 50 feet beyond site at two foot intervals;
12. Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas, etc. on the parcel and within 100 feet of the site;
13. Proposed lot lines, property lines and all structures, parking areas, etc. within the site, and within 100 feet of the site;
14. Centerline, and existing and proposed right-of-way lines;
15. Acceleration, deceleration, and passing lane, where required;
16. Proposed locations of access drives, street intersections and driveway locations;
17. Zoning classification of petitioner's parcel and all abutting parcels;
18. Location of existing drainage courses, flood plains, and lake or stream and all elevations;
19. Location of all natural features present on site as determined by the Natural Features Inventory in the Master Plan;
20. Proximity to major thoroughfares and/or section corners;
21. Location of sanitary sewers existing and proposed;
22. A general indication of the following:
i. Location of well sites in proposed development
ii. Water mains, hydrants and building services and sizes
iii. Storm sewers, site grading, drainage, retention basins and/or other pertinent facilities
23. All buildings (existing and proposed) with floor plans and setback and yard dimensions;
24. Parking spaces, drives and method of surfacing consistent with the provisions of Article 9 Parking;
25. Exterior lighting locations including type and specification of shielded fixture;
26. All future road rights-of-way with dedication documents;
27. The location of trails and safety paths or other pedestrian ways consistent with Section 16-338;
28. Building elevations illustrating surface type, building height and window placement;
29. Storm water management plan;
30. All engineering elements shall meet the Township Engineering Standards;
Site Plan Review
Charter Township of Oakland VI-3 Zoning Ordinance
31. Sign information consistent with the provisions of Article 7 Signs;
32. Identification and location of any historic resources as noted in the Master Plan or otherwise recognized within the Township;
33. Specific land area occupied by recreation and or open space, and the type of facilities to be provided. Must provide ratio of open space to developed land;
34. A landscaping plan consistent with the provisions of Article Eight Landscaping;
35. Any subdivision deed restrictions or condominium master deed and bylaws to be executed and recorded with respect to the development;
36. Use of Low Impact Development (LID) techniques in the design of the site plan;
37. The location and status of any floor drains in existing or proposed structures on the site. The point of discharge for all drains and pipes shall be specified on the site plan;
38. An inventory of hazardous substances to be stored, used or generated on-site, presented in a format acceptable to the fire chief including CAS numbers;
39. Descriptions of type of operations proposed for the project and drawings showing size, location, and description of any proposed interior or exterior areas of structures for storing, using, loading or unloading of hazardous substances, hazardous wastes, and/or polluting materials;
40. Description and location for any existing or proposed above ground and below ground storage facilities;
41. Delineation of areas on the site which are known or suspected to be contaminated, together with a report on the status of cleanup or closure; and
42. Any other information necessary to address a requirement of this ordinance, the character or features of the use or structures, or otherwise may be deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission or Township Board for purposes of coordinating the utilization of land in the best interest of the community, adjoining property, and the proposed improvement.
Additional information required for site plans with multiple-family dwellings:
1. Density calculations by type of unit and bedroom count;
2. Designation of unit types and building types;
3. Interior sidewalks, and safety paths;
4. Building elevations of typical building including height;
5. Designation of fire lanes;
6. Carport locations and details where proposed;
7. Trash receptacle location, transformer pad location, and mail box cluster location and method of screening for each;
8. Front, side, and rear yard dimensions and clear space around each building;
Site Plan Review
Charter Township of Oakland VI-4 Zoning Ordinance
9. Building length and width dimensions;
10. Obscuring walls or berm locations, and cross-sections, where required;
11. Dedicated road or service drive locations;
12. Entrance details including sign locations and size;
13. Details of community building and fencing of swimming pools, if proposed;
14. Specific amount of recreation space and locations;
15. Type of recreation facilities to be provided in recreation space;
16. Any design standards proposed by the applicant; and
17. Copies of maintenance agreements and recorded proposed easements, if applicable.
Additional information required for site plan with non-residential uses:
1. Front, side and rear yard dimensions;
2. Loading/unloading area;
3. Total and usable floor area;
4. Building elevations including height;
5. Berm or obscuring wall locations and cross-sections;
6. Interior and exterior sidewalk locations;
7. Designation of fire lanes;
8. Trash receptacle location, transformer pad location, and mail box cluster location and method of screening for each;
9. Entrance details including sign locations and sizes;
10. Any design standards proposed by the applicant; and
11. Copies of maintenance agreements and recorded easements, if applicable.
Additional information required for site plan with senior housing uses:
1. Density calculations by type of unit by bedroom count.
2. Gross and net acreages.
3. Interior sidewalks and sidewalks within right-of-way.
4. Building elevations of typical building.
5. Designation of fire lanes.
6. Carport locations and details where proposed, if any.
7. Trash receptacle location and method of screening.
8. Transformer pad location and method of screening.
Site Plan Review
Charter Township of Oakland VI-5 Zoning Ordinance
9. Front, side, and rear yard dimensions and clear space around each building.
10. Building dimensions.
11. Obscuring walls or berm locations, and cross-sections, where required.
12. Landscape plan.
13. Dedicated road or service drive locations.
14. Entrance details including sign locations and size.
C. Special Studies or Research. For complex site plans, mixed use, and/or for land uses that may generate significant impacts on surrounding land uses or public facilities as determined by the Zoning Administrator, the Planning Commission or the Township Board, the applicant may be required to submit any or all of the following reports or studies, or components thereof, as a part of a complete site plan.
1. An Environmental Assessment in accordance with the following standards:
i. Purpose: The purpose of the Environmental Assessment shall be:
a. to provide relevant information to the Planning Commission on the potential environmental impact of applications for special land use permits for substantial projects that may have an impact on the natural, social and economic environment of the Township; and,
b. to inject into the developer’s planning process consideration of the characteristics of the land.
ii. Guidelines. When required by the Zoning Administrator, the Planning Commission and/or the Township Board pursuant to this section, an applicant for site plan approval or any process identified in this ordinance requiring a site plan approval process shall prepare an Environmental Assessment in accordance with these guidelines. An Environmental Assessment is not an Environmental Impact Statement, but rather a summary review of the site in question considering the past and present land uses and the proposed development. The analysis is intended to demonstrate how the proposed development will meet the goals and objectives of the community as they are expressed in the Master Plan including but not limited to; natural feature preservation and protection, maintenance of rural quality of life, provision of non-motorized trails, historic preservation, and others. The complexity of the Environmental Assessment will depend on the scope of the project and the magnitude of the potential impact. In preparing the Environmental Assessment, judgment should be exercised to keep the form and extent of responses required in Section 16-603.C.1.iii in proportion to the scope of the project. Each response is to be as brief as practicable, although the Planning Commission and/or Township Board may request further elaboration. All information must be submitted in the format identified in Section 16-603.C.1.iii below and shall not merely reference a study or report completed previously, rather whenever possible, the Environmental Assessment report shall incorporate a summary of the findings of such study or report in addition to such cross-references. In addition, any cross-referenced study or report shall be submitted with the Environmental Assessment.
Site Plan Review
Charter Township of Oakland VI-6 Zoning Ordinance
iii. Content. The following material shall be included and/or addressed in the Environmental Assessment, unless specifically waived by the Planning Commission and/or Township Board as not applicable:
a. A description of the site in its current condition. This shall indicate any buildings to be preserved and those to be removed along with an indication of what will be done with the demolition debris. This must also include information on:
1. Flora and fauna, including any endangered species on-site;
2. General topography and drainage patterns on the property including any regulated features such as wetlands, high-risk erosion areas, steep slopes or other features;
3. Watercourses on the property; and
4. Existing wells on the property, approximate depth, use and condition.
b. A description of any existing contamination on-site. This should include a description of the nature of the contamination and what will be done on to mitigate or contain it, including the proposed methodology and any state or federal regulatory agency reviews that may apply. If the on-site contamination includes airborne contaminants, including but not limited to asbestos, the proposed abatement shall include a description of the method to ensure this material does not get into the surrounding area. If the project includes work that may disturb or displace existing contaminated soils or water, this should include a description of proposed methods to contain and/or dispose of the generated waste.
c. If the proposed project will impact any floodplain or involve riparian work along adjacent waterways, a description of the proposed work and the methodology proposed to protect waterways shall be provided.
d. A description of the existing soils on-site and a statement as to the suitability of these soils for the proposed use.
e. A description of any historical or archeological significance associated with the site. If any such areas are present, this shall include a description of methods to protect and preserve any historic or archeological resources. If a federal, state, or local regulatory authority has conducted an inspection of the site, a brief description of the findings and provide a copy of the report or results.
f. A description of any emissions from the proposed development as it relates to air quality. If any emissions are proposed, this shall include a description of each element and the effects of each element to nature and human life.
g. A description of any chemicals, hazardous materials or waste to be stored on-site. This shall include a description of proposed methods to contain such materials and prevent any migration into adjoining soils or groundwater or into the atmosphere.
h. A description of any storm water or process water discharges from the site. This shall include a characterization of such discharge in terms of the quantity, quality
Site Plan Review
Charter Township of Oakland VI-7 Zoning Ordinance
and chemical constituents and temperature and a description of the possible effects this discharge may have on the receiving waters and/or land forms.
i. If a federal, state, or local authority has conducted an Environmental Assessment, Environmental Impact Statement, historical or archeological survey, or a preliminary assessment/site inspection or environmental survey of the site, a brief description of the findings and a copy of the report or results.
j. A description of the anticipated noise levels to be generated at all property lines of the proposed use. This shall include a description of measures proposed to mitigate noise.
k. A description of off-site impacts from odors or lighting and measures to mitigate such effects.
l. A description of the anticipated traffic to be generated by the proposed use.
m. A description of plans for site restoration after construction.
n. A description of methods to handle sanitary waste for the project both during construction and after completion.
o. A description of how potable water will be provided to the site. If any on-site wells are proposed or any lake-draw systems are proposed for the project, this shall include a description of the type of well or lake draw system, any regulatory requirements that may apply, and the status of such regulatory approval.
p. A description of any additional items as needed to describe the potential environmental impacts of the proposed project.
q. Chain of title history from abstract company detailing easements, deed restrictions and/or other encumbrances.
r. Photographic inventory of the property submitted in an electronic format approved by the Township.
iv. The individual preparing the Environmental Assessment must sign and seal (if prepared by a registered engineer, land surveyor, community planner or landscape architect) the submitted document.
v. The Zoning Administrator may submit the study to the Township planner, engineer, environmental consultant(s) for review and independent comment.
2. Traffic Impact Study. The Zoning Administrator may recommend and the Planning Commission and/or Township Board may require that a traffic impact study completed by a qualified professional be prepared as an attachment to a site plan submitted for special land use, planned unit development or planned residential rezoning overlay in the Township meeting the requirements of this subsection. The purpose of this subsection is to set forth the standards to be used by the Planning Commission and/or Township Board in requiring the submission of such a traffic impact study, the required minimum content of such a study and the standards and procedures for the review of its findings.
i. Criteria for Requiring a Traffic Impact Study. The Planning Commission and/or Township Board may require that a traffic impact study be prepared by a qualified
Site Plan Review
Charter Township of Oakland VI-8 Zoning Ordinance
professional selected by the Township as an attachment to a site plan for any proposed development utilizing the guidelines established in Evaluating Traffic Impact Studies, Michigan Department of Transportation, 1994 or any other edition document, and the following thresholds:
a. Sites of more than 10 acres
b. When there are more than 75 dwelling units proposed.
c. When the proposed use of the property will result in 150 peak hour trips or 750 trips daily based on traffic engineering projection standards, Trip Generation, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers.
The Planning Commission and/or Township Board may consult appropriate planning and engineering texts including, but not limited to, Trip Generation, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers and/or may seek the counsel and assistance of a traffic engineer or other professional consultant.
ii. Description. A traffic impact study shall include an analysis of the existing traffic conditions on the roadway network in the vicinity of a proposed project, including any accident history, average speeds, average daily and peak hour traffic volumes and levels of service of all key roadway segments and intersections, plus projects under construction or approved by the Township utilizing the same road segments within two (2) miles of the subject property. The study shall further indicate the effect of the proposed development on adjacent roadways and intersections and indicate the anticipated points of origin, direction and volume of traffic flow to and from the proposed development. The study shall be prepared by either a registered professional engineer (P.E.) or transportation planner with at least five (5) years of experience preparing traffic impact studies in Michigan selected by the Township and paid from applicant escrow funds. The study shall include a summary of the qualifications and documented experience of the author and specifically describing experience in preparing traffic impact studies in Michigan. If the traffic impact study involves geometric design recommendations, the study shall be prepared or supervised by a registered engineer with a strong background in traffic engineering.
iii. Required Study Content. In general, a required traffic impact study shall document existing conditions on the existing roadway network including all intersections within the defined study area as determined by staff and approved by the Planning Commission prior to the start of the study including average daily traffic and peak hour volumes in all directions, existing turning movements, levels of service, average traffic speeds and accident history. Existing pedestrian and non-motorized traffic volumes shall also be estimated. The traffic impact study shall project the impact of the proposed development on the roadway network including all intersections within the defined study area of the proposed development including projected average daily traffic and peak hour volumes in all directions, anticipated turning movements and anticipated levels of service. Anticipated impacts on pedestrian and non-motorized traffic volumes shall also be projected. The following specific elements shall be addressed in a required traffic impact study, unless specifically waived by the Planning Commission and/or Township Board:
Site Plan Review
Charter Township of Oakland VI-9 Zoning Ordinance
a. A narrative summary at the beginning of the report, including, but not limited to:
1. The applicant and project name.
2. A location map.
3. The size and type of development.
4. Generated traffic volumes based on type and size of land use which are compatible with those listed in the Institute of Transportation Engineers – publication, Trip Generation (current edition).
b. Project phasing identifying the year of development activities per phase and proposed access plan for each phase.
c. A transportation system inventory, which describes the physical, functional and operational characteristics of the study area highway system and, where appropriate, locate transit services. The description should provide, where pertinent, data on:
1. peak-hour volumes (existing and projected)
2. number of lanes
3. cross-section
4. intersection traffic signals and configuration
5. traffic signal progression
6. percentage of heavy trucks
7. adjacent access point locations
8. jurisdiction
9. grades
10. expected impact of other projects already approved by the Township.
d. A plan showing proposed roadway per phase for each access. Driveway design and roadway improvements shall meet Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) or Oakland County standards and guidelines.
e. A capacity analysis shall be performed at each access point. The Township’s preference is the use of Highway Capacity Software, (HCS 2000), or a later version thereof. Default values shall not be used when actual values are reasonably available or obtainable. The interaction of conflicting traffic movements shall be addressed in the traffic impact study. Any proposed signalized access within one (1) mile of an existing signalized intersection shall be analyzed in coordination with the existing signal timing.
f. A traffic impact study shall include an analysis of conditions with and without the proposed development on the existing system, and with the proposed development for both existing and projected traffic volumes. The traffic volumes for the development shall assume a total build out. The completed analysis shall
Site Plan Review
Charter Township of Oakland VI-10 Zoning Ordinance
be summarized in a table showing all the Measures of Effectiveness (MOE) for all of the above conditions.
g. Required operational changes shall be part of the site plan review and any access permit approval process.
iv. Evaluation and Criteria. As a general criterion, the existing roadway network and all access points to a proposed development shall be demonstrated to be fully capable of accommodating the increased average and peak hour traffic anticipated. In the event the anticipated level of service on any roadway segment or intersection is shown to decline, the traffic impact study shall present alternative approaches proposed to manage anticipated traffic without such decline.
v. The Township Engineer, Planner and/or an independent traffic engineer or transportation planner may be asked to review and comment on any traffic impact study prepared pursuant to this subsection.
16-604 PROCEDURES FOR SITE PLAN REVIEW
A. Site plans for any project reviewed by the Planning Commission and Township Board shall include sixteen (16) copies of all required information, including application form, as well as one disk with a .pdf file or other electronic media version of the site plan approved by the Township, and one 11x17 reduced copy of the site plan. It shall be prepared by an Engineer, Architect, or Landscape Architect licensed to work in Michigan and shall include and illustrate at a minimum the requirements found as listed above, unless deemed unnecessary by the Zoning Administrator.
B. The complete application must be received at least twenty one (21) days prior to the next regular Planning Commission meeting in order to appear on the agenda. Upon receipt, the application package shall be distributed to the planner, engineer, environmental consultant, and others as needed for initial review to determine completeness.
C. A recommendation for approval or denial shall be made at a regular or special Planning Commission meeting. The applicant may request that the matter be tabled for any reason.
D. The application shall be placed on the Township Board agenda no sooner than twenty (20) calendar days after recommendation by the Planning Commission. The Township Board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed site plan with or without modifications. The applicant may request that the matter be tabled for any reason.
E. Before a site plan is marked "approved", it shall be revised to reflect any conditions attached to the approval, or changes or corrections required to obtain approval.
F. All requirements of this ordinance, and any other applicable township ordinance, standard, specification or regulation shall be complied with even if not specifically included in an approved site plan.
G. When an applicant receives site plan approval, they must develop the site as approved by the Township Board.
H. Two (2) complete sets of "as-built" drawings certified by the project engineer or architect must be submitted at the time of application for an occupancy permit.
Site Plan Review
Charter Township of Oakland VI-11 Zoning Ordinance
16-605 CRITERIA FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL
The Planning Commission and Township Board shall use the following criteria in evaluating a site plan submittal:
A. Whether the required information has been furnished and is in sufficiently complete and understandable form to allow an accurate description of the proposed use(s), structure(s), improvements and development in terms of density, location, area, height, bulk, placement, setbacks, performance characteristics, parking, and traffic circulation.
B. Whether there are ways in which the configuration of uses, structures, improvements, and development can be changed which would improve the impact of the development on adjoining and nearby properties, persons, and activities, and on the community, while allowing reasonable use of the property within the scope of district regulations and other regulations of this ordinance that are applicable to the property and proposed use and structures.
C. The extent to which natural features and characteristics of the land will be preserved; the regard given to existing large trees, natural groves, watercourses, and other natural features that would add attractiveness to the property and environs if they were preserved; the preservation of natural drainage systems in accordance with the Floodplain and Wetlands Protection Ordinance No. 44, as amended; the dedication and/or provision, where appropriate, of scenic easements, natural buffering, and other techniques for preservation and enhancement of the physical environment.
D. The extent to which lands identified as historic resources within the Charter Township of Oakland Master Plan, or identified by the Charter Township of Oakland Natural Features Inventory and incorporated into the Charter Township of Oakland Community Master Plan and Natural Features Assessment Map and/or the Township Trails and Pathways Master Plan have been addressed, preserved or protected.
E. That the proposed streets and circulation conform to any street or access plan adopted by the Township, Oakland County Road Commission or the Michigan Department of Transportation.
F. That any adverse effect of the proposed development and activities emanating therefrom upon adjoining and nearby residents or owners shall be minimized by appropriate screening, fencing or walls or landscaping.
G. That all provisions of this ordinance are complied with, unless an appropriate variance has been granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals.
H. That a plan for erosion control and storm water discharge has been approved by the appropriate public agency, and if appropriate, the Township Engineer.
I. That all utility services are provided to the site in a manner least harmful to surrounding properties.
Site Plan Review
Charter Township of Oakland VI-12 Zoning Ordinance
16-606 POSTING OF FINANCIAL GUARANTEE
The developer shall install and, during the construction of the development, the developer shall maintain and preserve all development improvements (including, but without limitation, all road improvements, storm drainage facilities, water facilities, sewage disposal facilities, grading, landscaping, trees, shrubs, sidewalks, safety paths, trails, utilities, berms, screening and walls, and any site amenities or improvements that are part of a special or conditional approval or planned unit development) in accordance with this Ordinance and the approved site plan and any conditions related thereto. Unless another time is specified in this ordinance or pursuant to any conditions of approval, prior to the issuance of building permits, the developer and/or owner of the property shall provide to the Township financial assurances satisfactory to the Township for purposes of guaranteeing completion of the installation, establishment, preservation, replacement, repair and maintenance of all development improvements in accordance with the site plan and this ordinance. Such financial assurances shall be in the form of: (1) cash or an irrevocable and automatically renewing letter of credit, approved by the Township Manager and issued by an institution doing business in Oakland County, in an amount equal to 125% of the estimated cost of the installation and materials involved, as specified in a bona fide contract or estimate for such installation and materials that has been approved by the Township Manager or his designee: and (2) an agreement with the Township, approved by the Township Attorney and signed by the owner and developer, authorizing (but not requiring) the Township to draw the security funds, enter upon the property, and complete the installation, replacement, repair and/or maintenance of the development improvements, if the developer has failed to do so pursuant to this ordinance and the approved site plan and any conditions related thereto. Said agreement shall include additional security in the form of liens or otherwise, as necessary to adequately ensure installation, establishment, preservation, replacement, repair and maintenance of the development improvements. The agreement shall also provide for partial releases of the funds in appropriate intervals as determined by the Township Manager in consultation with the Township Attorney and Township Engineer, given the size, complexity and expected time for completion and establishment of the development improvements.
16-607 TERM OF APPROVAL OF THE SITE PLAN
Approval of the site plan shall be valid for a period of one (1) year after the date of approval. The Township Board may grant extensions if applied for and granted in writing. The reasons for extensions may be the inability to complete the requirements, financial constraints, regulatory approvals or other proven hardship. If a zoning compliance permit has not been obtained or the on-site development has not commenced within said one (1) year, the site plan approval shall become null and void. A new site plan approval application shall be required and approved before any construction or earth change is commenced upon the site.
Site Plan Review
Charter Township of Oakland VI-13 Zoning Ordinance
16-608 AMENDMENT TO THE SITE PLAN
No changes shall be made to an approved site plan prior to or during construction unless approved application submitted to the Zoning Administrator, according to the following procedures:
A. The Zoning Administrator may review, with the assistance of Township consultants, and approve the following minor amendments to a site plan:
1. Reduction in the number of parking spaces by no more than five (5) percent;
2. Changes in the building size, up to five (5) percent of the gross floor area;
3. Movement of buildings or other structures by no more than ten (10) feet;
4. Replacement of plant material specified in the landscape plan with comparable materials of an equal or greater size and/or number, and the same or better quality;
5. Changes to building materials to a comparable or higher quality;
6. Changes in floor plans that do not alter the character of the use; and
7. Changes required or requested by the Township, the Road Commission of Oakland County, or other County, State or Federal regulatory agency in order to conform to other laws or regulations.
B. All other changes shall be deemed a major change and require review and approval by the Planning Commission and Township Board, in the same manner as the original application was submitted, reviewed, and approved.
16-609 CONFORMITY TO APPROVED SITE PLANS
Property which is the subject of site plan approval must be developed in compliance with the approved site plan, any conditions pertaining thereto, and any amendments thereto which have received the approval of the Township Board. If construction and development does not conform to such approved plans and conditions, or if the proposed development is found in violation of this ordinance, the approval shall be revoked by the Zoning Administrator by written notice of such revocation posted upon the premises involved and mailed to the applicant at the last known address. The Zoning Administrator shall be empowered to issue a Stop Work Order for any development that is not in compliance with this ordinance. Upon issuance of such Stop Work Order or revocation of such approval, all construction activities shall immediately cease upon the site, other than for the purpose of correcting the violation. However, the Township Board may, upon proper application, approve an amendment to the site plan pursuant to Section 16-608 Amendment to the Site Plan.
16-610 APPEALS
With regard to site plan approval decisions, an appeal may be taken to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, or board of the Township.
Signs
Charter Township of Oakland VII-1 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE VII: SIGNS
16-700 PURPOSE AND SCOPE
The purpose of this Article is to regulate the size, number, location and manner of construction and display of signs in Charter Township of Oakland. This Article is further intended to protect all zoning districts from visual chaos and clutter, eliminate distractions hazardous to motorists, protect appropriately identified uses from excessive signage, provide ability for the public to identify premises and establishments, and preserve and enhance the aesthetics of the community.
16-701 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL SIGNS
All signs shall meet the following standards unless the sign is exempt under the provisions of Section 16-702:
A. All signs shall conform to all applicable codes and ordinances of Charter Township of Oakland and shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator, and a permit issued if applicable.
B. Sign Area. The area of a sign shall be measured within a single, continuous rectilinear perimeter composed of straight lines which encloses the extreme limits of the advertising message, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display, message, drawing, or similar device, or used to differentiate same from the background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary supports, braces and/or uprights of the sign. When two (2) sign faces are placed back-to-back, so that both faces cannot be
viewed from any one point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than twenty-four (24) inches apart at any point, the sign area shall be computed by the measurements of one (1) of the faces.
C. Height. Sign height shall be measured as the vertical dimension from the finished grade to the highest point of the highest attached component of the sign. A sign shall not extend beyond the edge of the wall to which it is affixed nor above the roof line of a building to which it is
attached.
D. Sign Setbacks. All signs, except election signs, shall be set back a minimum of one-half of the minimum front yard setback. All signs, except election signs, shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any other property line. In addition, all signs shall comply with the clear vision requirements of Section 16-308.
E. Illumination. When illumination of signs is permitted, illumination shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Illumination shall not be flashing, blinking, intermittent, or an on-and-off type of lighting.
Ground Sign
Measuring a sign using a continuous rectilinear box to frame extreme limits of the message sign.
Sign base not included in sign area calculation
Height measured from finished grade to top of sign
Signs
Charter Township of Oakland VII-2 Zoning Ordinance
2. Illumination shall be arranged so that light is deflected away from adjacent properties and any public right-of-way, and so that no direct sources of light are visible to any motorist or pedestrian located in a public right-of-way or street easement or from any adjacent property.
3. Any external lighting of signs shall be downward facing or otherwise directed to illuminate only the sign face.
4. Illumination shall be of a continuous white light.
5. An illuminated sign shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from a VLRD – Very Low Density Residential District, LRD – Low Residential Density District, LMRD – Low-Medium Residential Density District, MRD Medium Residential District, and a MHRD – Medium-High Residential Density District.
F. Maintenance. All signs shall be maintained in a safe condition with proper bracing, anchorage and foundation and be subject to inspection by the Zoning Administrator or other designated representative. A sign that no longer serves the purpose for which it is intended or is abandoned or is not maintained in accordance with applicable regulations of Charter Township of Oakland shall be removed by the owner, or by the Township at the expense of such owner, upon written notice by Charter Township of Oakland.
G. Where a proposed sign appears to meet the definition of more than one (1) type of sign, the most restrictive requirements and limitations of the defined sign types shall apply.
H. Wall Signs. Wall signs shall not extend further than twelve (12) inches from the face of the wall to which it is attached. The maximum width of a wall sign shall not exceed ninety (90) percent of the width of the wall to which the sign is attached.
I. Where a projecting sign, awning or canopy sign or suspended sign protrudes over any public or private sidewalk or walkway, the bottommost point of the sign structure shall be at least 9 feet from the sidewalk or walkway.
16-702 EXEMPT SIGNS
Except for the regulation of area and height set forth in Section 16-701, the following signs shall be exempt from regulations in this Article:
A. Any public notice, traffic control or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state, or local law, regulation, ordinance, or traffic control order.
B. Property address and owner identification sign up to one (1) square foot in area.
C. Any sign wholly located within a building and not visible from outside the building. This does not include window signs.
D. Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message.
E. Works of art that do not contain a commercial message.
F. Directional signs or menu boards on private properties that do not contain a commercial message, including Stop, Yield, One Way, and similar signs, provided the following standards are met:
Signs
Charter Township of Oakland VII-3 Zoning Ordinance
1. Drive-through menu boards shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area or six (6) feet in height.
2. Directional signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area or six (6) feet in height. The number of directional signs permitted on a property shall be the minimum necessary to provide adequate orientation, as determined by the applicable Charter Township of Oakland representative, board or commission.
3. Customary lettering on, or other insignia which are a structural part of, a gasoline pump, consisting only of the brand name of gasoline sold, lead warning sign, a price indicator, and any other sign required by law, and not exceeding a total of three (3) square feet on each pump.
G. Governmental historical designation signs.
H. A flag up to twenty-four (24) square feet in area.
I. Construction signs identifying a building project including the names of the developer, financier, and the various professionals and contractors involved. Such signage shall be allowed only during the time in which the development is actually under construction and shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet in sign area per frontage of the development. Such signage shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. One construction sign shall be permitted per street frontage of the development.
J. Special event signage on public property.
K. All yard signs, as defined herein, provided such yard signs shall be limited to one (1) sign per front yard, not greater than six (6) square feet in area. Such signs shall be removed within seven (7) days after the sale on which the event occurs.
L. Election signs shall be subject to the following regulations.
1. All election signs must be erected on private property. The placement or erection of election signs within a public right-of-way is strictly prohibited.
2. No election sign shall be located on township-owned property.
3. No election sign shall be erected more than one hundred (100) day prior to an election. Candidates and campaign committees shall remove their elections signs within fifteen (15) days of the election unless the candidate or election issue is on the ballot for a subsequent election to occur within one hundred (100) days.
4. The Zoning Administrator may cause to remove any election signs placed on public property. The Zoning Administrator shall store all removed signs and provide a schedule for retrieval of the signs by the candidate or campaign committee represented on the signs. All signs not retrieved within fifteen (15) days after an election may be disposed of by the Zoning Administrator.
5. No such sign shall be illuminated.
6. No such sign shall be placed in such a manner as to obstruct the view of vehicle drivers when leaving or entering a street, driveway, or parking space.
7. The painting of any such sign on the exterior surface of any building or structure is prohibited.
Signs
Charter Township of Oakland VII-4 Zoning Ordinance
8. Every such sign shall have identified on it the name, address, and telephone number of the person or organization/agency who posted or had caused the posting of the sign.
16-703 PROHIBITED SIGNS
The following signs shall not be allowed in any District:
A. Signs that do not relate to existing business or products for sale or available on the site.
B. Signs which are illegal under State laws or regulations and applicable local ordinances or regulations, and which are not consistent with the standards in this ordinance.
C. Animated or moving signs, except such signs in the business district which display:
1. The time of day and/or current temperature so long as no additional lighting, animation or message appears within the same sign;
2. Provided that the sign does not transition more often than once every 10 seconds;
3. The animated or moving portion of the sign is integrated into and accessory to the overall sign; and
4. The overall sign complies in all respects to the provisions of this ordinance.
D. Temporary pennants, searchlights, flags, banners or bunting, air balloons, air-filled balloons, signs animated by forced air, streamers, and temporary signage of any kind, except where otherwise permitted.
E. Signs that are not clean and in good repair, and signs that are out of compliance with applicable building and electrical codes.
F. Signs not securely affixed to a supporting structure.
G. Signs that are not official traffic signs that appear to or attempt to regulate, warn, or direct the movement of traffic, which interfere with or resemble any official traffic sign, signal, or device, and which may obstruct a motorist’s vision.
H. Portable signs, pole signs, bench signs and roof signs.
I. Signs located in, projecting into or overhanging within a public right-of-way or dedicated public easement, except:
1. Official traffic signs posted by a governmental agency;
2. Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines, pipes, or facilities;
3. Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, a public utility company, or a contractor doing authorized or permitted work within the right-of-way; and
4. Any sign installed by the Township or Road Commission
J. Motor vehicle sign. A sign measuring more than two (2) square feet in size that is mounted, placed, written, or painted on a vehicle or trailer, whether motor-driven or not.
Signs
Charter Township of Oakland VII-5 Zoning Ordinance
It shall be unlawful to park, place or store a vehicle or trailer on which there is a motor vehicle sign on private or public property for the purpose of advertising a business or products or for the purpose of directing people to a business or business activity.
1. Presumption. There shall be a presumption that subsection J above, has been violated if the motor vehicle sign is visible from a street and one (1) or more of the following circumstances exist:
i. The motor vehicle sign is attached to a vehicle or trailer that is unregistered or not operable;
ii. The motor vehicle sign is larger in any dimension than or extends beyond any surface of the vehicle or trailer to which it is attached;
iii. The motor vehicle sign is attached to a vehicle or trailer that is parked or stored in a public right-of-way or an area not designed, designated, or commonly used for parking;
iv. The motor vehicle sign is attached to a vehicle or trailer that is regularly parked or stored in a "front yard" or "side yard," as such terms are defined in this ordinance, that abuts a street, when there are other areas of the property designed, designated, or available for the parking or storage of the vehicle or trailer that are not visible from the street or do not abut streets; or
v. The motor vehicle sign is attached to a vehicle or trailer that is regularly parked or stored within fifty (50) feet of a street, when there are other areas of the property designed, designated, or available for the parking or storage of the vehicle or trailer that are more distant from the street or not visible from the street.
2. Rebuttal of presumption. The presumption set forth in subsection (1), above, may be rebutted by evidence showing all of the following:
i. The vehicle is temporarily parked in a particular location in the course of conducting personal activities or business activities that involve the loading or unloading of goods for customers, providing services to off-site customers, conducting off-site business, or engaging in work breaks;
ii. The activities in subsection a., above, are being actively undertaken during the period of such parking;
iii. The activities in subsection a., above, require the presence of the vehicle for purposes of transporting equipment, people, supplies and/or goods necessary for carrying out such activities; and
iv. The activities in subsection a., above, are not, other than incidentally, related to advertising, identifying, displaying, directing, or attracting attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location.
16-704 PERMITTED SIGNS
In addition to the above standards, the following signs are permitted in the applicable Zoning District.
Signs
Charter Township of Oakland VII-6 Zoning Ordinance
A. In the VLRD, LRD, LMRD, MRD, MHRD, MH and R-M Districts, for uses other than Accessory Buildings and Structures, Accessory Uses, Single-Family Dwellings, and Office Buildings for Residential Complexes, the followings sign is permitted subject to the following requirements:
B. In the OS, C, RC and RD Districts, for uses other than Accessory Buildings and Structures, and Single-Family Dwellings, following signs are permitted subject to the following requirements:
Type
Maximum Number
Maximum Sign Area
Illumination Permitted
Ground
1 per road frontage
20 square feet
Yes, subject to 16-701.E.
Wall
1 per road frontage
10% of total area of the wall to which sign is attached, not to exceed 32 square feet
Yes, subject to 16-701.E.
16-705 TEMPORARY SIGNS
Temporary signs are subject to the following regulations:
A. No such sign shall be illuminated.
B. No such sign shall be placed in or project into a public right-of-way and shall only be placed on private property with the prior permission of the property owner.
C. Any such sign location in a residential district shall not have a surface area of more than six (6) square feet per sign, with not more than one (1) such sign per lot. Any such sign in any other district shall not have a surface area of more than twelve (12) square feet per sign, with not more than one (1) such sign per lot.
D. Any temporary sign shall not be erected more than forty-five (45) days prior to the event indicated on the sign, and shall be removed within seventy-two (72) hours after the event.
E. No such sign shall be placed in such a manner as to obstruct the view of vehicle drivers when leaving or entering a streets, driveway, or parking space.
F. The painting of any such sign on the exterior surface of any building or structure is prohibited.
G. No such sign shall be placed closer than ten (10) feet to the right-of-way of any street.
Type
Maximum Number
Maximum Sign Area
Illumination Permitted
Ground
1 per parcel
20 square feet
No
Signs
Charter Township of Oakland VII-7 Zoning Ordinance
H. Every such sign shall have identified on it the name, address, and telephone number of the person who posted or had caused the posting of the sign.
16-706 SIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR A LAND USE CHANGE
An applicant requesting a zoning map change, or Planned Unit Development (PUD), or a Special Land Use shall construct and install a sign indicating a requested change of land use. The sign shall be installed no less than fifteen (15) days prior to the first scheduled public hearing at the Planning Commission or Board of Trustees. The sign shall be installed on the parcel(s) requested for rezoning and shall be placed perpendicular to the adjoining roadway and be clearly visible. The sign shall not be placed within a public right-of-way, nor shall the sign obstruct clear vision for motorists. In the event the parcel fronts on more than one roadway, signage shall be required for all adjoining roadways.
The sign shall comply with the following sign specifications:
? Block Black letters on white background.
? Size: minimum four (4) feet vertical by six (6) feet horizontal.
? Sign’s face must be exterior plywood, aluminum, or similar material.
? Wording should be as follows:
? Sign support system must be structurally sound and mounted with 4” x 4”s or “u” channel steel posts. The posts shall be set in the ground at least 30” below the surface. The bottom of the sig shall be no less than three (3) feet above the ground level.
Sign(s) required above shall be removed within:
? Seven (7) days of approval by the Township Board.
? Seven (7) days of withdrawing rezoning, PUD or Special Land Use application.
? Seven (7) days of denial of a rezoning, PUD or Special Land Use request by the Township Board.
Failure to remove sign(s) within this period may result in removal of the sign(s) by the Township, following notice and an opportunity to cure, at the owner’s expense.
Land Use Change Proposed
### Acres
For more information call:
Charter Township of Oakland
(248)651-4440
www.OaklandTownship.org
- (min. 8” high letters)
- (min. 8” high letters)
- (min. 3” high letters)
- (min. 4” high letters)
- (min. 4” high letters)
- (min. 4” high letters)
Landscaping Requirements
Charter Township of Oakland VIII-1 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE VIII: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
16-800 SCOPE AND INTENT
Regulation of landscape requirements is intended to promote the public's health, safety, and general welfare by: minimizing noise, air, and visual pollution; improving the appearance of off-street parking and other vehicular use areas; requiring buffering between land uses; regulating the appearance of property abutting public rights-of-way; protecting and preserving the appearance, character, and value of the community and its residential neighborhood areas; preventing soil erosion and soil depletion; promoting soil water retention; and reducing storm water runoff.
16-801 APPLICATION
These requirements shall apply to all uses for which site plan review is required under Article 6, Site Plan Review, and any other use so specified in this Ordinance; or the Subdivision Control Ordinance, Chapter 12, Article III of the Charter Township of Oakland Codified Ordinances, as amended. No site plan shall be approved unless said site plan shows landscaping, buffer areas, and screening consistent with the requirements set forth herein.
16-802 LANDSCAPING PLAN
A separate detailed landscape plan shall be required to be submitted as part of a site plan review (see Article 6, Site Plan). The plan shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a landscape architect registered to practice in the State of Michigan. The landscape plan shall include, describe or exhibit, but not necessarily be limited to, the following items:
A. Plans shall be a minimum scale of one inch equals fifty (50) feet.
B. A scaled drawing at a minimum of 11” X 17.”
C. Include name, address, and telephone number of the owner, developer or association, and Registered Landscape Architect.
D. Seal and registration number of registered professionals.
E. A legal description and boundary survey of the site.
F. The project name and address.
G. A north arrow and drawing scale.
H. A location map.
I. Location, type, and size of all existing plant materials and indicate whether they are to remain, be relocated, or removed and how remaining vegetation will be protected during construction.
J. All regulated natural features with appropriate delineations and inventories as required by the Natural Features Setback, Section 16-348 of this ordinance, and Tree Protection Ordinance, Ordinance Number 60, as amended, and associated existing and proposed conservation
Landscaping Requirements
Charter Township of Oakland VIII-2 Zoning Ordinance
easements.
K. The soil types on the site per the Soils Survey of Oakland County, Michigan by the United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources (Soils) Conservation Service.
L. Location and spacing of trees and shrubs proposed for use within a required landscape area in sufficient detail for a determination that the plan conforms to this Article.
M. A plant list of proposed landscape materials showing caliper sizes, root type (bare root, balled and burlapped, container size), height of material, botanical and common names, type and amount of mulch, ground cover and grasses.
N. All existing and proposed buildings, structures, easements, rights of way, setbacks, parking lots and spaces, snow depositing areas, and signage.
O. Existing and proposed public and private utility lines shall be shown with their associated easements and dimensions. Existing and proposed rights-of-way shall also be shown.
P. Existing and proposed contours must be shown not to exceed (2) two foot intervals and must extend a minimum of fifty (50) feet beyond the site boundary.
Q. Typical straight cross-section of proposed berms and swales shall be included that show slope, height or depth, width, type of groundcover, and labeled contour lines.
R. Typical planting and staking details in text and drawing form for evergreen and deciduous trees, shrubs, and groundcover. Planting details must conform to American National Standard for Tree Care Operations, ANSI A300 -most current edition.
S. Irrigation plan, if appropriate, or water outlets (hose bibbs).
T. Proposed treatment of all ground surfaces other than paved surfaces shall be indicated, including scientific and common names, type, and number of groundcover plants, and methods of planting.
U. All required walls and screening must be shown on the plan in compliance with this ordinance.
W. Typical straight cross-section including slope, height, and width of berms and type of ground cover, or height and type of construction of wall or fence, including footings.
X. Significant construction details to resolve specific site conditions, such as tree wells to preserve existing trees or culverts to maintain natural drainage patterns.
Y. Description of a landscape maintenance program including a statement that all diseased, damaged, or dead materials shall be replaced in accordance with standards of this ordinance.
16-803 MODIFICATIONS
Modifications to the standards of this Article including additional landscaping, screening, preservation of existing vegetation or rearrangement of landscaping may be required by the approving body or official, as a condition of approval in any of the following circumstances:
A. When development activity would damage existing natural systems or processes.
B. To screen mechanical equipment that was not included on an approved site plan.
Landscaping Requirements
Charter Township of Oakland VIII-3 Zoning Ordinance
C. To prevent traffic hazards or other dangers to public safety such as obstruction of fire hydrants, fire suppression services provider connections or fire protection equipment or component.
D. When the topographic features of the site create conditions so that the strict application of the provisions of this Article will result in less effective screening and landscaping than alternative landscape designs.
16-804 PLANT MATERIALS
A. Quality: Plant material and grasses shall be of generally acceptable varieties and species, free of insects and diseases, hardy to the climate, conform to the current minimum standard of the American Nursery and Landscape Association (ANLA) (American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1. current edition), and shall have proof of any required governmental regulations and/or inspections.
Plant species which are generally considered undesirable due to limited disease tolerance, low wood strength, and/or high tendencies toward splitting of wood, such as box elder, mulberry, and willows, are not permitted unless specifically authorized otherwise by the approving body or official, with review and recommendations from the Township’s Environmental Consultant or other Township Board designee.
B. Minimum Standards: Materials used to comply with this Article shall meet the following minimum standards:
1. Artificial plants or trees shall not be used.
2. Where plant material is used for hedging or screening, at least 50 percent shall be evergreen and plant materials shall be a minimum of 24 inches tall and of a size, quantity and spacing to achieve 50 percent year-round opacity at the time of planting.
3. Landscaped areas shall be covered with grass, low vegetative ground cover not to exceed 18 inches in height, or organic mulch. Non-organic materials shall not be accepted to meet this requirement. If grass or vegetative ground cover is used, it shall be planted and maintained to present a finished appearance within one growing season. If the landscaped area is wider than 10 feet, grass or low vegetative ground cover shall be used. In areas subject to erosion, erosion-reducing blankets, or suitable reinforced mulch, shall be used.
4. At planting, deciduous trees shall have a mature crown spread of greater than 15 feet, a minimum caliper of 2 inches at 6 inches above the root ball, a burlap ball size of at least 10 times the caliper size, and a clear stem of at least 5 feet.
5. At planting, evergreen trees shall be a minimum of 7 feet in height with a minimum spread of 3 feet, and a burlap ball size of at least 10 times the caliper size.
6. Existing vegetation on the property may be used to meet the requirements of this Article if it meets the size, species and opacity requirements. This determination shall be made by the approving body or official.
7. Water outlets (hose bibbs) shall be provided within 150 feet of all plant material required by this Article if a subsurface irrigation system is not provided.
Landscaping Requirements
Charter Township of Oakland VIII-4 Zoning Ordinance
C. Composition: A mixture of plant material, such as evergreen, deciduous trees and shrubs, is recommended as a protective measure against insect and disease infestation. A limited mixture of native hardy species is recommended rather than a large quantity of different species, to produce a more aesthetic, cohesive design and avoid a disorderly appearing arrangement.
D. Plant substitutions: The Township Manager or his designee may approve minor revisions to landscape plans due to seasonal planting problems and lack of plant availability but only when there is no reduction in the quality of plant material, no significant change in size or location of plant material, the new plant material is compatible with the area, and the new plant material is of the same general category (i.e., deciduous shade or evergreen trees) and the same general design characteristics (mature height, crown spread) as the material being replaced. If these criteria are not fulfilled, the approved site plan must be revised according to the requirements of this Article and Article Six of this ordinance.
E. Native and Non-Invasive Species: The use of plant material native to Michigan is highly encouraged. Plant material source shall be from local Michigan genotypes where available, otherwise of North Midwest American origin.
Selection of appropriate planting materials shall consider site characteristics, such as exposure, soil type, water availability, light availability, nutrient availability, and positioning relative to natural features, existing vegetation, and existing and proposed built structures. Material selection shall also consider the health and safety of landscape users and the public. A diversity of tree, shrub, and herbaceous groundcover shall be utilized in all landscape designs.
The use and planting of invasive species is strictly prohibited. The planting of non-native material is discouraged except in areas where the application requires specific aesthetics and maintenance such as around buildings, recreation centers, facility entrance, neighborhood entrances, and similar areas. The planting of non-native plant material must receive review and approval by the approving body or official, with review and recommendations from the Township’s Environmental Consultant or other Township Board designee.
F. No landscaping, berming, etc. shall be placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving a driveway or intersection pursuant to Section 16-308.
16-805 ESTABLISHMENT PERIOD
The developer shall install and, during the construction of the development, the developer shall maintain and preserve all landscaping and plant materials in accordance with the approved landscaping plan. Prior to planting, the developer shall provide to the Township financial assurances that are satisfactory to the Township for purposes of guaranteeing completion of the installation, establishment, preservation and maintenance of the landscaping and plant installations in accordance with the landscape plan and this Article. Such financial assurances shall be provided in the form and manner required under Section 16-606 of this ordinance.
Inspection for the acceptance of plant material will be made prior to plant installation. The developer shall permit and the Township shall perform inspections of the property to ensure compliance with the landscape plan at the following times 1) after the completion of plant
Landscaping Requirements
Charter Township of Oakland VIII-5 Zoning Ordinance
installation; and 2) after the two-year period of establishment prior to release of the maintenance guarantee. The “period of establishment” referenced in this Section shall start at the completion of all the planting required for the entire project or project phase and shall extend through two (2) complete growing seasons. Plant material inspections shall be conducted by the Township’s Environmental Consultant or a designee of the Township Manager during the growing season from April through October.
During the period of establishment the developer shall be responsible for guaranteeing planted materials. All planted materials which are dead, diseased, damaged, or are dying and are in poor health as determined by the Township’s Environmental Consultant or a designee of the Township Manager shall be replaced while the two-year period is in effect and prior to release of the financial assurances required by this Section.
16-806 GREENBELTS, BUFFERS AND SCREENING
Wherever screening or a buffer is required according to this ordinance, the composition and quantity of plant material shall be chosen to achieve substantial visual screening throughout all seasons of the year. Native plant material shall be used where appropriate, and species selection shall be based on site characteristics and availability. The suitability of plant material shall be determined by the approving body or official, with review and recommendations from the Township’s Environmental Consultant or other Township Board designee.
Any conflicting residential or non-residential land use shall provide a buffer between the two adjacent land uses. The buffer shall consist of the following:
A. A landscaped buffer or greenbelt at least 15 feet wide.
B. One tree for each 20 feet or fraction thereof of abutting land. At least 50% of the trees within the conflicting land use buffer shall be evergreen. Arrangement of trees in clusters or groupings is encouraged, but in no case shall trees be more than 50 feet apart.
C. A hedge, berm, wall, fence or combination thereof forming a continuous screen at least 4 feet high. All gasoline or service stations shall employ opaque walls as the continuous screen.
16-807 BERMS
Due to the loss of soil ecological and structural integrity during grading, berms are generally discouraged. Layered groupings of evergreen trees, canopy and sub-canopy deciduous trees, shrubs, and herbaceous groundcover are encouraged as an alternative to excessive grading. Where berms are necessary, all of the following standards shall apply:
A. Berms shall be non-uniform, undulating, and vary in width, form, aesthetics and function.
B. Berms shall be landscaped with a combination of trees, shrubs, herbaceous groundcover, or sod and maintained in a healthy growing condition with consideration to seasonal conditions.
C. Berms shall be constructed of loam soils free of construction debris and covered with six (6) inches minimum of topsoil.
D. Berms shall be designed for non-erosive drainage at the top and toe of slope and graded to blend with the surrounding landscape. The top shall be graded to be smoothly convex and
Landscaping Requirements
Charter Township of Oakland VIII-6 Zoning Ordinance
the toe graded to be smoothly concave.
E. Berm slopes shall not exceed 33% (1:3) and shall have at least 2 feet of flat area on top and shall have adequate protection to prevent erosion.
16-808 PARKING LOTS
A. The planting of trees shall be required for parking lots, and all trees, other plant material and landscaping for parking lots shall comply with requirements within this ordinance. The planting of trees shall not interfere with the safety and visibility within the parking lot.
B. All parking trees and other plant material shall be of a native species where appropriate and as determined by the approving body or official, with review and recommendations from the Township’s Environmental Consultant or other Township Board designee.
Plant selection for parking lots shall consider the mature size of the proposed species and tolerances to the stressful conditions found in parking lots. Specifically, species shall be selected that exhibit all of the following characteristics:
1. Tolerant of salt
2. Tolerant of drought and extreme temperatures,
3. Tolerant of poor, highly compacted soils
4. Tolerant of urban pollutants
5. Tolerant of inundation, if used for storm water treatment
6. Do not produce abundant fruits, nuts, or leaf litter
7. Wide spreading canopy
C. All off-street parking areas containing greater than six (6) spaces shall provide landscaping within the parking lot envelope, described as the area including the parking lot surface and extending eighteen (18) feet from the edge of the parking lot in accordance with all of the following standards:
1. Either one (1) canopy tree, expected to exhibit a mature crown spread of 30 feet or greater or both (1) evergreen tree and one (1) smaller ornamental tree shall be required for each eighteen hundred (1800) square feet of the total of the paved private driveway and parking lot surface. Placement of a substantial portion of the required landscaping outside of the parking lot is encouraged to facilitate ease in snow removal. However, at least forty (40) percent of the landscape material required shall be installed in landscape islands within the paved parking lot area.
2. Landscaped areas in and around parking lots shall be no less than ten (10) feet in any dimension and no less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area per tree. Landscaped areas shall be protected with curbing or other means to prevent overhang encroachment of vehicles.
3. Required landscaping elsewhere on the parcel shall not be counted in meeting the parking lot landscaping requirements.
Landscaping Requirements
Charter Township of Oakland VIII-7 Zoning Ordinance
4. Whenever possible, parking lot landscaping shall be designed to improve the safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, guide traffic movement, and improve the appearance of the parking area. Landscaping shall be installed such that, when mature, it does not obscure traffic signs or lighting, obstruct access to fire hydrants, interfere with adequate sight distance for motorists, nor disrupt drainage patterns on the site or adjacent properties.
5. Landscaped areas shall be covered by grass or other living ground cover: provided, however, that wood chips or similar material, at a minimum depth of three (3) inches shall be permitted for planting beds immediately surrounding plant material. All covering material must be identified on the landscape plan.
6. Planting areas shall provide a minimum of five (5) feet of horizontal clearance to accommodate vehicle overhang along parking spaces. Parking lot landscape material other than trees shall be maintained at a maximum height of three (3) feet to provide clear sight distance within the parking lot. All parking lot landscaping shall be maintained in a live, healthy growing condition with consideration to seasonal conditions.
7. Landscaped areas in and adjacent to vehicular use areas shall be protected by concrete or bituminous curbing, anchored bumper blocks, or other durable materials if approved by the Township Manager or his designee. Wood timbers which are not part of a structural retaining wall shall not be accepted to meet this requirement. Alternative barrier designs which provide improved infiltration or storage of stormwater are encouraged.
8. Planting bed size and location shall consider snow storage capacity. Large (greater than the fifty (50) square feet minimum) and random planting beds are encouraged to allow for adequate root growth, snow storage and preservation of existing trees. As an alternative to standard mounded parking islands, planting beds utilizing native vegetation and vegetated swales and basins to lessen storm water runoff and enhance infiltration are encouraged where possible.
9. The planting of trees within the parking lot envelope shall not interfere in the safety and visibility within the parking lot.
D. The plan for the off-street parking lot shall specify the landscaping to be installed, including the placement and specifications of landscape materials, and shall be subject to approval as part of the site plan. If seasonal weather conditions present practical difficulties in the installation or completion of the landscaping, the completion thereof may be deferred for not more than six (6) months.
E. The owner of the premises upon which the landscaping is located shall maintain such landscaping in good condition so as to present a thriving, neat and orderly appearance - free from refuse and debris. All diseased and dead material shall be replaced within one (1) year or the next appropriate planting period, whichever comes first.
F. To avoid damage to infrastructure and property, the following tree species are not recommended for use in or adjacent to parking lots or locations with restrictive paved areas due to their large surface roots:
Landscaping Requirements
Charter Township of Oakland VIII-8 Zoning Ordinance
Scientific Name
Common Name
Acer platanoides
Norway maple
Acer rubrum
Red maple
Acer saccharinum
Silver maple
Betula nigra
River birch
Celtis spp.
Hackberry
Fagus spp.
Beech
Liquidambar styraciflua
Sweetgum
Magnolia grandiflora
Southern magnolia
Platanus x acerifolia
London planetree
Platanus occidentalis
American sycamore
Quercus palustris
Pin oak
Salix babylonica
Weeping willow
Ulmus americana
American elm
16-809 PROTECTION OF EXISTING TREES
A. If existing plant material is labeled "To Remain" on site plans by the applicant or required by the approving body or official, protective techniques, such as, but not limited to, fencing or barriers placed around the perimeter of the plant material, outside of the critical root zone, shall be installed during construction. No vehicle or other construction equipment shall be parked or stored within the critical root zone of any plant material intended to be saved. Other protective techniques may be used, provided such techniques are approved by the approving body or official, with review and recommendations from the Township’s Environmental Consultant or other Township Board designee.
B. In the event that existing healthy trees which are used to meet the minimum requirements of this ordinance, or those labeled to remain are cut down, destroyed, damaged, or excavated within the critical root zone, as determined by the approving body or official, with review and recommendations from the Township’s Environmental Consultant or other Township Board designee, the applicant shall replace them with trees that meet ordinance requirements
Parking
Charter Township of Oakland IX-1 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE IX: PARKING
16-900 GENERAL PROVISIONS
16-900.01 REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING-GENERAL
Off-street parking required in conjunction with all land and building uses shall be provided as herein prescribed:
A. Any area once designated as required off-street parking shall never be changed to any other use unless and until equally required facilities are provided elsewhere. Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this ordinance in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than would hereinafter be required for such building or use.
B. Two (2) or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking, in which case the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses computed separately. However, the Township Board may approve cases of dual functioning (or shared parking) of off-street parking where operating hours do not overlap.
C. Required off-street parking shall be for the use of occupants, employees, visitors, and patrons of the principal and any accessory uses(s) for which the parking exists, and shall be limited in use to the parking of vehicles. The storage of merchandise, temporary outdoor sales in parking areas, motor vehicles for sale, or the repair of vehicles is prohibited in parking areas.
D. Off-street parking, whether public or private, for non-residential uses shall be either on the same lot or within three hundred (300) feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot, without crossing any major street.
E. Single family detached off-street parking space shall only consist of a driveway, and shall be located on the premises it is intended to serve and not closer than three (3) feet from any street side lot line.
16-901 RESERVED
16-902 NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES REQUIRED
16-902.01 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the number of spaces required in this section. Parking shall not exceed nor be less than the Required Spaces per Unit of Measure for new uses. In accordance with this section, the Township Board upon recommendation of the Planning Commission may permit the improvement of fewer spaces, provided the applicant demonstrates that adequate parking will be provided, excessive parking will be avoided, and snow storage is accommodated. If this option is approved, the provisions of Section 16-902 B. shall apply.
Parking
Charter Township of Oakland IX-2 Zoning Ordinance
B. A portion of the required parking area may be deferred until some future date, provided that adequate space on the property is reserved for future parking, and provided that the reserved area is used as open landscaped space until parking is constructed. A permit shall be required prior to construction of a deferred parking area.
C. For uses not specifically listed, off-street parking shall be provided as required for the most similar use, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may reference industry standards to establish such requirements.
D. When calculations determining the number of required parking spaces result in a fractional space, any fraction up to and including ½ shall be disregarded and fractions over ½ shall require one (1) additional parking space.
E. Barrier free spaces and loading spaces shall count toward the required number of spaces.
F. For nonresidential uses in the OS District and C District, one (1) bicycle rack capable of locking at least five (5) bicycles shall be provided within one hundred (100) feet of a building’s main entrance for every five thousand (5,000) square feet of building footprint or part thereof.
16-902.02 WAIVERS
A. A reduction not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the number of spaces required may be permitted by the Township Board upon recommendation of the Planning Commission for a new or expanding nonresidential use that dedicates carpool spaces, vanpools, transit passes, covered bicycle spaces or lockers, and similar alternative means of transportation, for its employees, and where the Township Board finds that such reduction will not result in inadequate parking area.
B. A reduction not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the number of spaces required may be permitted by the Township Board upon recommendation of the Planning Commission for off-street parking lots which incorporate low impact design measures such as, but not limited to, porous pavement, rain gardens, and zero run-off and where the Township Board finds that such reduction will not result in inadequate parking area.
C. In no event shall the total reduction of parking spaces exceed twenty (20) percent.
16-902.03 REQUIRED SPACES PER UNIT OF MEASURE
Use
Minimum Parking Per Unit of Measure
A. Residential Uses
1. Accessory Dwelling
1 space per unit
2. Boarding House
2 spaces for the principal dwelling use, plus 1 off-street space per rental unit
3. Dwelling, Single- and Two-Family
2 spaces per unit
4. Dwelling, Multiple-Family
2 spaces per unit
5. Manufactured Housing Community
2 spaces per dwelling, plus 1 off-street space per 10 dwelling units
Parking
Charter Township of Oakland IX-3 Zoning Ordinance
6. Senior Housing – Independent Living
1 space per dwelling unit, plus 1 space per employee
7. Senior Housing – Assisted Living
1 space per 2 dwelling units, plus 1 space per employee
B. Institutional and Related Uses
1. Airport
1 space per each five aircraft parking spaces
2. Cemetery
1 space per employee of largest shift, plus 1 space for each 3 seats of seating capacity in any facility for interment services
3. Educational Facility
1 space per employee of largest shift, plus 1 space for each classroom and 1 space for each 4 seats of seating capacity in any auditorium or gymnasium
4. Hospitals, Clinics and
Urgent Care
1 space per employee in the largest shift plus 1 space for each 3 beds dedicated to in-patient care and 1 space for each 1,000 square feet of area dedicated to out-patient services
5. Library
Applicant shall demonstrate parking demand, but not less than 1 space per 500 square feet of gross floor area
6. Convalescent Center / Home for the Aged
1 space per employee in the largest shift plus 1 space for each 4 beds
7. Place of Public Assembly
1 space per 4 seats of legal capacity
8. Trade and Industrial School
Applicant shall demonstrate parking demand, but not less than 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
C. Commercial Uses
1. Automobile Gasoline Station
1 space per 150 square feet dedicated to retail activity, plus 1 space at each fuel pump, plus 1 stacking space per fuel nozzle
2. Automobile Repair, all types
1 space per employee of largest shift, plus 5 spaces per service bay
3. Automobile Wash, self-serve
3 stacking spaces per bay, plus 1 space per 350 square feet of retail/office space, not including car wash bays.
Parking
Charter Township of Oakland IX-4 Zoning Ordinance
4. Bed and Breakfast
2 spaces for the principal dwelling use, plus 1 off-street space per rental room
5. Day Care, Group and Commercial
2 spaces for the principal dwelling use, if applicable, plus 1 space per employee of largest shift, plus 1 space per 4 clients
6. Drive-through Business
6 stacking spaces per drive-through lane with window service or 4 stacking spaces for drive-through ATM, in addition to any spaces required for the non-drive-through uses
7. Dry Cleaning and Laundry Establishment, all types
1 space per 350 square feet of retail space, plus 1 space per each 3 coin-operated machines, if applicable, and 1 space for each employee of the largest shift
8. Eating and Drinking Establishment
1 space per 3 seats of legal capacity
9. Home Occupation
2 spaces for the principal dwelling use
10. Hotel and Motel
1 space per rental room
11. Mixed Use Development
1.2 spaces for any dwelling unit, plus parking for any nonresidential uses as provided herein
12. Mortuary
1 space per employee of largest shift, plus 1 space per 2 seats of legal capacity
13. Multi-tenant Commercial Establishment
Applicant shall demonstrate parking demand, but not less than 1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
14. Open Air Business
1 space per 350 square feet of indoor space devoted to retail activity, plus 1 space for each 2,000 square feet of outdoor display area.
15. Personal Service Business
1 space per 350 square feet of gross floor area
16. Recreation Facility, Commercial
Applicant shall demonstrate parking demand
17. Recreation Facility, Outdoor
Applicant shall demonstrate parking demand
18. Retail Sales dealing primarily in consumable and convenience goods
1 space per 150 square feet of gross floor area up to 50,000 square feet of gross floor area plus 1 space for each 350 square feet of gross floor area in excess of 50,000 square feet.
19. Retail Sales dealing primarily in durable goods
1 space per 250 square feet of gross floor area up to 10,000 square feet, plus 1 space for each 350 square feet of gross floor area in excess of 10,000 square feet.
Parking
Charter Township of Oakland IX-5 Zoning Ordinance
20. Service Establishment Accessory to a Principal Use
Applicant shall demonstrate parking demand
21. Showroom
1 space per 450 square feet of gross floor area
D. Office and Service Uses
1. Medical Office
1 space for each employee of the largest shift plus 1 space per 200 square feet gross floor area
2. Office Building
1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
3. Professional Service Establishment
1 space per 450 square feet of gross floor area
4. Veterinary Hospital
1 space per 300 square feet of gross floor area
E. Industrial, Storage and Related Uses
1. Contractor’s Establishment
1 space per employee of the largest shift plus 1 space for each 500 square feet of any retail and/or showroom space
2. Manufacturing, Compounding, or Processing
1 space per employee of largest shift plus 1 space per 2,000 square feet of gross floor area
3. Municipal Uses - Utilities
Applicant shall demonstrate parking demand
4. Research and Development
1 space per employee of largest shift, plus 5 visitor spaces
5. Self-service Storage Facility
1.5 spaces per 100 storage units
6. Warehouse
5 spaces plus 1 per employee on the combination of the two largest shifts
7. Wholesale Facility
1 space per 350 square feet of sales space, plus 1 space per employee of largest shift
16-903 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PARKING
16-903.01 IN GENERAL
A. All off street parking spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes; access directly onto a street or public right-of-way shall be prohibited.
B. Maneuvering lanes for 90° parking patterns shall accommodate two-way traffic.
C. Up to twenty (20) percent of required parking spaces may be provided as spaces marked for the parking of compact vehicles only. Dimensions of such spaces shall be provided as indicated below.
D. Parking spaces and maneuvering lanes shall be provided in accordance with the requirements below.
Parking
Charter Township of Oakland IX-6 Zoning Ordinance
Parking Pattern
Minimum Maneuvering Lane Width
Parking Space Width
Parking Space Length
Compact Vehicle Space Dimensions
0° (parallel)
12 feet
8 feet
23 feet
7’x18’
30° to 53°
15 feet
9 feet
20 feet
7’x18’
54° to 74°
15 feet
9 feet
19 feet
7’x18’
75° to 90°
25 feet
9 feet
19 feet
8’x16’
16-903.02 PARKING DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
A. All off-street parking areas, maneuvering lanes, access drives, loading spaces, and private residential driveways, shall be bituminous, concrete porous pavement or approved pavers. All such areas shall be paved within eight (8) months from the date a permit is issued to install the parking area.
B. Alternative parking lot surfaces may be used that provide a pervious surface, enhance storm water quality and reduce the environmental impact of a parking lot. Such alternative surface shall be recommended for approval consideration by the Township Engineer to the Township Board based on the Township Engineering Standards.
C. New access points to off-street parking lots shall be located a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet from a street intersection and if not located on a property line as a shared driveway, shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from a property line. The area between the driveway and the property line shall be landscaped to provide a buffer between motor vehicles and the adjacent property, in accordance with the Article Eight Landscaping.
D. If provided, parking area lighting shall comply with Section 16-325 Lighting.
E. Parking areas shall have barriers such as concrete bumpers or curbs to prevent vehicles from extending over or into any public sidewalk, buffer area, walkway, right-of-way or adjacent property. Parking areas shall include striping delineating each individual parking space.
F. Shared access drives between separate parking areas shall be provided where appropriate and reasonable, as determined by the Township Board based on recommendation by the Planning Commission and the Road Commission of Oakland County.
G. Where the parking lot boundary adjoins a residential district, the parking lot shall be provided with a continuous and completely obscuring decorative real brick wall, five (5) feet in height, measured from the surface of the parking area. Such wall shall not extend into a required setback from the street lot line as established by Section 16.903.03. A residential district which is separated from the parking lot by a street shall, for purposes of this paragraph, be considered as adjoining the parking lot if the street right-of-way is of less than eighty-six (86) feet width. In its review of the site plan, the Township Board
Parking
Charter Township of Oakland IX-7 Zoning Ordinance
may approve in substitution for the required wall the use of existing and/or proposed topography (such as berms), existing and/or proposed dense vegetation, and/or other natural or man-made features that the Township Board finds will produce substantially equivalent results of screening, permanence, and durability as the otherwise required wall.
H. There shall be no parking in the required front yard of any RD district.
I. Parking structures may be built to satisfy off-street parking regulations when located in non-residential districts, subject to the area, height, bulk and placement regulations of such districts in which located.
J. Adequate barrier free parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with all applicable state and federal regulations.
K. Adequate space shall be provided within or adjacent to the parking lot for storage of snow removed from the designated spaces and aisles.
L. All off-street parking and loading areas shall be graded and drained to dispose of surface water. No surface water shall be permitted to drain onto adjoining property unless there is a common engineered drainage system shared with the adjoining property or an appropriate watershed easement has been obtained. The provisions of the Township Storm Water Management Ordinance shall be met.
16-903.03 SETBACKS FROM RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Where a parking lot abuts a residential district at the following location, a required setback shall be provided as follows:
Location of Parking Area
Required Setback
Side lot lines abut
10 feet from side lot line
Contiguous common frontage in same block
Equal to the residential required setback, or average of existing setback in common block frontage, whichever is greater
Across the street and opposite, with residential lots fronting on such street
Equivalent to the opposite residential required setback
Across the street and opposite, or contiguous to and in same block, with residential side lot lines on such street
Ten (10) feet from street lot line
Rear lot line
Ten (10) feet from rear line
Parking
Charter Township of Oakland IX-8 Zoning Ordinance
16-903.04 PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING
A. All off-street parking areas containing greater than six (6) spaces shall provide the following landscaping within the parking lot envelope, described as the area including the parking lot surface and extending eighteen (18) feet from the edge of the parking lot.
1. One (1) canopy tree or (1) evergreen tree and one (1) ornamental tree shall be required for each eighteen hundred (1800) square feet of the total of the paved driveway and parking lot surface. At least forty (40) percent of the landscape material required shall be installed in landscape islands within the paved parking lot area. All plant materials and required sizes, as time of planting shall be in accordance with the Article Eight Landscaping.
2. Landscaped areas in and around parking lots shall be no less than ten (10) feet in any dimension and no less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area per tree. Landscaped areas shall be protected with curbing or other means to prevent overhang encroachment of vehicles.
3. Required landscaping elsewhere on the parcel shall not be counted in meeting the parking lot landscaping requirements.
4. Whenever possible, parking lot landscaping shall be designed to improve the safety of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, guide traffic movement, and improve the appearance of the parking area. Landscaping shall be installed such that, when mature, it does not obscure traffic signs or lighting, obstruct access to fire hydrants, interfere with adequate sight distance for motorists, nor disrupt drainage patterns on the site or adjacent properties.
5. Landscaped areas shall be covered by grass or other living ground cover. Wood chips or similar material, a minimum depth of three (3) inches is permitted for planting beds immediately surrounding plant material. Such material should be identified on the landscape plan and/or site plan.
B. The plan for the off-street parking lot shall specify the landscaping to be installed, including the placement and specifications of landscape materials, and shall be subject to approval as part of the site plan. The parking lot shall be landscaped in accordance with the approved site plan before a certificate of occupancy is issued for use of the parking lot. However, if seasonal weather conditions present practical difficulties in the installation or completion of the landscaping, the completion thereof may be deferred for not more than six (6) months. If the landscaping is not fully installed by that time in accordance with the approved plan, the Zoning Administrator or other Township Official shall revoke the certificate of occupancy for the use of the parking lot.
C. The owner of the premises upon which the landscaping is located shall maintain such landscaping in good condition so as to present a thriving, neat and orderly appearance - free from refuse and debris. All diseased and dead material shall be replaced within one (1) year or the next appropriate planting period, whichever comes first.
Parking
Charter Township of Oakland IX-9 Zoning Ordinance
16-903.05 LOADING SPACES
A. Loading spaces shall be provided on the same property as any nonresidential use involving the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise.
B. Loading spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes; access directly onto a street or public right-of-way shall be prohibited.
C. Loading spaces shall be located within the rear yard or side yard in any Zoning District other than the RD and C Districts. Landscaping and buffering, in addition to that required in Article Eight, Landscaping, shall be provided to fully screen loading spaces from public view when located in an interior side yard, unless the Township Board determines such screening is not needed based on existing land uses, site features or topography.
D. Loading spaces shall be at least ten (10) feet in width, twenty-five (25) feet in length, and fourteen (14) feet in height.
E. Loading spaces shall be provided in accordance with the requirements below. The Township Board may approve modification of the requirements, if it finds that adequate loading and unloading space will be provided.
Square feet of Principal Permitted Building on a Property
Minimum Number of Loading Spaces Required
Up to 5,000
0
5,001 to 20,000
1
20,001 to 100,000
2
1 additional space is required per additional 50,000 square feet
F. Loading spaces shall be located so loading and unloading activities do not interfere with pedestrian or private motor vehicle movement.
Site Condominiums
Charter Township of Oakland X-1 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE X: SITE CONDOMINIUMS
16-1000 INTENT
The intent of this Article is to regulate site condominium projects to ensure compliance with this Ordinance and other applicable standards of the Township, to provide procedures and standards for review and approval or disapproval of such developments, and to ensure that each project will be consistent and compatible with other developments in the community.
16-1001 APPROVAL REQUIRED
Pursuant to the authority conferred by Section 141 of the Condominium Act, site plans for all site condominiums shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission prior to approval by the Township Board in accordance with the provisions set forth in Article VI Site Plan Review.
16-1002 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
A. Each condominium lot shall be located within a zoning district that permits the proposed use.
B. For the purpose of this ordinance, each condominium lot shall be considered equivalent to a single lot and shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which located, and the provisions of any other statutes, laws, ordinances, and/or regulations applicable to lots in subdivisions.
C. In the case of a site condominium containing single-family detached dwellings, not more than one (1) dwelling unit shall be located on a condominium lot, nor shall a dwelling unit be located on a condominium lot with any other principal structure or use. Required yards shall be measured from the boundaries of a condominium lot.
D. Each condominium lot shall front on and have direct access to a public road or a private road approved by the Township.
E. All condominium projects shall conform to the plan preparation requirements, design, layout, and improvement standards, and all other requirements established by the Township.
F. The Township Board shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees, charges and expenses, for preliminary and final site condominium review, planning review, engineering review, attorney, inspection, and other matters pertaining to this Article. The schedule of fees, charges, and expenses shall be available in the Township office and may be amended only by the Township Board.
G. No action shall be taken on an application until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full.
16-1003 SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
Site plan approval and approval of condominium documents by the Township Board, after
Site Condominiums
Charter Township of Oakland X-2 Zoning Ordinance
review and recommendation by the Planning Commission, shall be required as a condition to the right to construct, expand, or convert a site condominium project. No permits for erosion control, building construction, grading, or installation of water or sanitary facilities shall be issued for property in the site condominium development until a site plan has been approved by the Township Board and is in effect. Preliminary and final approval shall not be combined. Site Condominium review shall be considered a two (2) part process as outlined below:
A. The following information shall be submitted:
1. Preliminary Approval.
a. Each preliminary site plan submitted for review shall provide the following information:
i. Property owner’s and applicant’s name and address;
ii. Scale, north arrow, and date of plan;
iii. Location, description, dimensions, and area of the site; zoning classification; and demonstration of compliance with lot area, width, coverage and setback requirements;
iv. General topography and soils information and existing natural and man-made features to be retained or removed;
v. Location and dimensions of proposed buildings/structures; including floor area, number of floors, height, number and type of dwelling units (where applicable);
vi. Proposed streets/drives; including general alignment, right-of-way surface type, and width;
vii. Proposed parking; including location and dimensions of spaces and aisles, and surface type;
viii. Adjacent land uses, property owner, and zoning and location of adjacent buildings and drives/streets;
ix. Proposed phasing; and
x. Location and width of any easements on the site.
b. If the site plan conforms in all respects to applicable laws, ordinances and design standards, preliminary approval shall be recommended by the Planning Commission to the Township Board.
c. If the site plan fails to conform, the Planning Commission shall either recommend denial of the application, or recommend preliminary approval with conditions, provided such conditions are met before final approval to the Township Board.
d. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the Township Board shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the preliminary site plan.
e. Approval of the preliminary site condominium site plan does not constitute a
Site Condominiums
Charter Township of Oakland X-3 Zoning Ordinance
final site condominium plan, but only bestows the right on the applicant to proceed to the final site condominium plan stage.
2. Final Approval.
a. Site Plan. Following preliminary approval, the applicant shall submit a final site plan pursuant to the standards and procedures set forth in Article VI, Site Plan Review, of this Ordinance.
b. Master Deed and Bylaws. The Condominium Documents shall be reviewed with respect to all matters subject to regulation by the township including: ongoing preservation and maintenance of drainage, retention, wetland and other natural and/or common areas; maintenance of private roads, if any; and maintenance of stormwater, sanitary, and water facilities and utilities.
c. Engineering Plans. In addition to the Site Plan, the applicant shall also submit engineering plans in sufficient detail for the Township to determine compliance with applicable laws, ordinances, and design standards for construction of the project.
d. Outside Agency Approvals. The applicant shall provide proof of approvals by all county and state agencies having jurisdiction over improvements in the site condominium development. The Township shall not approve a site plan until each county and state agency having such jurisdiction has approved that portion of the final site plan this is subject to its jurisdiction.
e. Insurance and Bonds. Prior to construction of project improvements, the contractor shall procure and maintain during the life of any contract or agreement for such construction, insurance as required under Township Engineering design standards. In addition, the contractor shall furnish a two-year maintenance bond in accordance with the required agencies.
f. Required Condominium Documents. Any other condominium documents required by the Condominium Act.
16-1004 REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
A. All design standards and required improvements that apply to a subdivision under the provisions of Chapter 12, Land Divisions and Subdivisions of the Charter Township of Oakland County shall apply to any condominium development. However, nothing in this Article shall be construed as requiring a site condominium to obtain plat approval under the Land Division and Subdivision Ordinance or the Subdivision Control Act.
B. Utility standards stated in the Building Code shall apply to all condominium units proposed for location on property which is not subdivided and recorded, or property which is to be further subdivided.
C. Monument shall be set at all boundary corners and deflection points and at all road right-of-way intersection corners and deflection points. Lot irons shall be set at all condominium lot corners and deflection points of condominium lines.
D. Road rights-of-ways shall be described separately from individual condominium lots, and
Site Condominiums
Charter Township of Oakland X-4 Zoning Ordinance
shall be accurately delineated by bearings and distances on the condominium site plan. The rights-of-ways shall be for roadway purposes and for the purposes of locating, installing, maintaining, and replacing of public utilities. The Developer shall declare easements to the Township for all public water and sanitary sewer lines and appurtenances.
16-1005 INFORMATION REQUIRED PRIOR TO OCCUPANCY
Prior to issuance of any occupancy permits for any condominium unit, the applicant shall submit the following information to the Zoning Administrator:
A. A copy of the recorded Condominium Documents (including exhibits).
B. A copy of any recorded restrictive covenants.
C. A copy of the site plan on laminated photostatic copy or mylar sheet, as well as digital copies.
D. Evidence of completion of improvements associated with the proposed use including two (2) hard copies of an “as built survey”, as well as a digital copy.
16-1006 REVISION OF CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION PLAN
If a condominium subdivision plan is revised, the site plan shall be revised in accordance with Section16-608 and submitted for review approval or denial by the Planning Commission and Township Board before any building permit may be issued, where such permit is required.
16-1007 AMENDMENT OF CONDOMINIUM DOCUMENTS
Any amendment to a master deed or bylaws that affects the approved site plan or any conditions of approval of a site plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission and Township Board before any building permit may be issued, where such permit is required. The Zoning Administrator may require Planning Commission and Township Board review of an amended site plan, if in their opinion, such changes in the master deed or bylaws required corresponding changes in the approved site plan.
16-1008 RELOCATION OF BOUNDARIES
Relocation of boundaries between adjoining condominium lots, if permitted in the condominium documents, as provided in Section 48 of the Condominium Act, shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which located and shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator. These requirements shall be made a part of the bylaws and recorded as part of the master deed.
16-1009 SUBDIVISION OF CONDOMINIUM LOT
Each condominium lot resulting for a subdivision of another condominium lot, if such subdivision is permitted by the condominium documents, as provided in Section 49 of the
Site Condominiums
Charter Township of Oakland X-5 Zoning Ordinance
Condominium Act, shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which located, and shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator. These requirements shall be made a part of the condominium bylaws and recorded as part of the master deed.
Administrative
Charter Township of Oakland XI-1 Zoning Ordinance
ARTICLE XI: ADMINISTRATIVE
16-1100 GENERAL INTERPRETATION, SAVINGS AND SEVERABILITY
The provisions of this ordinance shall be interpreted as the minimum requirements for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and the physical and natural environment. In applying and interpreting this ordinance the following provisions shall apply:
A. Whenever any regulations made under authority of this ordinance require a greater or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in, or under, any other ordinance or statute, the provisions of the regulations made under authority of this ordinance shall govern.
B. Whenever the provisions of any other ordinance or statute impose other more restrictive standards than are required by any regulations made under authority of this ordinance, the provisions of such ordinance or statute shall govern.
C. This ordinance does not repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically or implicitly repealed by this ordinance, or any private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other private agreement unless repugnant hereto.
D. Interpretation of uses shall be conducted in accordance with Section 16-344.
E. All words used in the present tense shall include the future; all words in the singular number include the plural number; and all words in the plural number include the singular number.
F. Terms not defined in this ordinance shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. Also see Section 16-200.
G. Except as provided in Sections 16-1000.A and 16-1000.B, above, conflicting provisions of this ordinance shall be abrogated to, but only to, the extent of the conflict. Moreover, the provisions of this ordinance shall be construed, if possible, to be consistent with relevant present and future state regulations and statutes.
H. Section headings, catch words, and catch phrases shall in no way by their content, presence or absence limit or affect the meaning of this ordinance.
I. If any section, clause or provision of this ordinance shall be declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, void, illegal or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such section, clause or provision shall thereby be severed from and cease to be a part of this ordinance, but the remainder of this ordinance shall stand and remain in full force and effect.
J. This ordinance shall be construed to be a comprehensive amendment of the zoning ordinance of the Township adopted by the Township Board on ________________, as amended, and nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to exempt any property, building, structure or use from the application of zoning regulations to which any such property, building, structure or use would have been subject to absent the enactment of this ordinance.
K. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent or affect the prosecution or abatement of any violation of this ordinance of Charter Township of Oakland, which violation was in existence at the effective date hereof, and any penalties which have been incurred,
Administrative
Charter Township of Oakland XI-2 Zoning Ordinance
proceedings which have begun and prosecutions for violations of law occurring before the effective date of this ordinance are not affected or abated by the enactment of this ordinance.
L. Any property, use, building or structure that was unlawful or nonconforming at the effective date of this ordinance and that is also unlawful or nonconforming under this ordinance shall remain unlawful or nonconforming, as the case may be.
M. Although each zoning district permitted principal use requirements are very specific in order to ensure the public health, safety, and general welfare; reasonable flexibility is offered through the provision of a diversity of land uses throughout the Township and through such instruments as special land uses, administrative review procedures linked to the scope and scale of development and redevelopment proposals, allowance for landscape and design standards that take into consideration location and scope, and allowance for consideration of variance relief in the case of practical difficulties. A principal objective of this ordinance is to provide development tools that allow the Township Board and Planning Commission to consider appropriate innovations in land development that will serve the public health, safety, and welfare. Development tools such as planned unit developments and mixed use overlay districts may be considered and incorporated into this ordinance at such time that the Township Board determines that such tools are in a form to achieve the goal of serving the public health, safety, and welfare.
16-1101 PRIOR APPROVALS
A project approved under the terms and conditions of the prior zoning ordinance shall maintain said approval. For a site plan as part of a special land use, the rules, regulations and conditions of the original approval under the prior zoning ordinance shall remain in effect for a period as specified in Section 24.03.05(E) of the prior zoning ordinance and the lots, uses, and structures approved there under shall constitute non-conforming lots, uses and structures to the extent they or any of them are not in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance, subject to compliance with the rules, regulations and conditions of the original approval under the prior zoning ordinance. For a Planned Unit Development, Planned Residential Development, Hardship Planned Unit Development, Preservation Based Planned Development, the rules, regulations and conditions of the original approval under the prior zoning ordinance shall remain in effect for a period as specified in the approval of said project and the lots, uses, and structures approved there under shall constitute non-conforming lots, uses and structures to the extent they or any of them are not in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance, subject to compliance with the rules, regulations and conditions of the original approval under the prior zoning ordinance. If an approved plan expires under the above terms, a new plan will need to be submitted for review and approval under the terms, regulations and conditions of this ordinance. Any consent judgment entered into by the Township under the prior ordinance shall remain in full force and effect under and subject to the terms and conditions of the consent judgment.
Administrative
Charter Township of Oakland XI-3 Zoning Ordinance
16-1102 EFFECTIVE DATE
The provisions of this ordinance are hereby declared to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and the other purposes and intentions set forth in this ordinance, and this ordinance is hereby ordered to take effect eight (8) days from the date of publication, unless a notice of intent to file a petition requesting submission of this ordinance to a vote of the Township electors is filed within seven (7) days of publication. If the notice of intent is filed within seven (7) days of publication, this ordinance shall take effect thirty-one (31) days from the date of publication, unless a petition determined to be adequate by the Township Clerk is filed within thirty (30) days of publication. If such a petition has been timely filed, this ordinance shall take effect immediately upon the final determination by the Township Clerk that a majority of the registered electors in the Township have voted to approve it. A petition requesting submission of this ordinance to a vote of the electors must be signed by a number of registered Township electors equal to not less than fifteen (15) percent of the total vote cast for all candidates for governor at the last preceding general election at which a governor was elected.
Administrative
Charter Township of Oakland XI-4 Zoning Ordinance
16-1103 RECORD OF ADOPTION
This ordinance is declared to have been enacted by the Board of Trustees of the Charter Township of Oakland at a meeting called and held on the ____ day of ________, 2017 and ordered to be given publication in the manner prescribed by law. Ayes:
Nays:
Abstentions:
Absent: ______
Certification
STATE OF MICHIGAN )
) ss.
COUNTY OF OAKLAND )
I, the undersigned, the qualified and acting Clerk of the Charter Township of Oakland, Oakland County, Michigan, do certify that the foregoing is a true and complete copy of Ordinance No. _____, which was adopted by the Board of Trustees of the Charter Township of Oakland at a meeting, held on the ____ day of __________, 2017, the original of which is on file in my office.
BY: ____________________________
KAREN REILLY, Township Clerk
Charter Township of Oakland
Made and passed by the Township Board of the Charter Township of Oakland, Oakland County, Michigan on this ____ day of ____, 2017.
A. Date of public hearing: August 1, 2017, conducted by the Planning Commission.
B. Date of recommendation to adopt by the Planning Commission: August 1, 2017.
C. Date of Adoption by the Township Board:______________, 2017.
D. Date this ordinance shall take effect: ________________, 2017
Date of newspaper notice of adoption: ____________________, 2017