CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF PLYMOUTH, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published in 1995 by Order of the City Commission 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
PLYMOUTH, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Douglas A. Miller 
Mayor 
____________ 
Mayor Pro Tem Ronald G. Loiselle 
Stella Greene 
Robert L. Jones 
William McAninch 
Dennis Shrewsbury 
John F. Vos, III 
City Commission 
____________ 
Steven L. Walters 
City Manager 
____________ 
Donald C. Morgan 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Linda J. Langmesser, CMC 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Plymouth, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1982 Code, as supplemented through January 20, 1982, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLES SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Allen Z. Paul, Supervising Editor, and Ron MacLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Linda J. Langmesser, CMC, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Plymouth, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Plymouth, Michigan. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Plymouth, Michigan. 1995. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 95-10 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Plymouth, Michigan; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the City Commission of the City of Plymouth, Michigan: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances of the City of Plymouth, Michigan" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 78, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 2, 1995, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city commission may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city commission to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after January 2, 1995, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective August 25, 1995. 
    Passed and adopted by the Plymouth City Commission this 21st day of August, 1995. 
/s/ Douglas A. Miller 
      Mayor   /s/ Linda J. Langmesser, CMC 
      City Clerk   Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the city commission of the City of Plymouth, Michigan held on the 21st day of August, 1995. 
/s/ Linda J. Langmesser 
      City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 2011-01  1-17-11 Included Supp. No. 31 2011-02  1-17-11 Included Supp. No. 31 2011-03  1-17-11 Included Supp. No. 31 2008-01  3-17-08 Included Supp. No. 32 2011-04  5- 2-11 Included Supp. No. 32 2011-05  6-20-11 Included Supp. No. 32 2011-06  6-20-11 Included Supp. No. 32 06-03  9- 5-06 Included Supp. No. 33 2011-05(2)  1- 3-12 Included Supp. No. 34 2012-01  1-19-12 Omitted Supp. No. 34 2012-02  1- 3-12 Included Supp. No. 34 2012-03  2-20-12 Included Supp. No. 34 2012-04 11- 5-12 Included Supp. No. 35 2012-05 12-17-12 Included Supp. No. 35 2013-01  6-17-13 Included Supp. No. 36 2013-02  6-17-13 Included Supp. No. 36 2013-03  6- 3-13 Included Supp. No. 36 2013-04 10- 7-13 Included Supp. No. 37 2013-05 10-21-13 Included Supp. No. 37 2013-06 10-21-13 Included Supp. No. 37 2014-01  1- 6-14 Included Supp. No. 38 2014-02  1- 6-14 Included Supp. No. 38 2014-03  2-17-14 Included Supp. No. 38 2014-05  6-21-14 Included Supp. No. 39 2014-06  7-21-14 Included Supp. No. 39 2014-07 10-20-14 Included Supp. No. 40 2015-01  2-16-15 Included Supp. No. 41 2015-02  3-16-15 Included Supp. No. 41 2015-03  5- 4-15 Included Supp. No. 42 2015-04  7- 6-15 Included Supp. No. 42 16-01  4- 4-2016 Omitted Supp. No. 43 16-02  7-18-16 Included Supp. No. 43 16-03  8- 1-16 Included Supp. No. 43 16-04  8- 1-16 Included Supp. No. 43 2016-72(Res.)  8- 1-16 Included Supp. No. 43 16-06 10-17-16 Included Supp. No. 43 16-07  9- 6-16 Included Supp. No. 43 2017-01  1- 3-17 Included Supp. No. 43 2017-02  1-16-17 Included Supp. No. 44 17-04  4-17-17 Included Supp. No. 44 17-05  8- 7-17 Included Supp. No. 45 2017-01(A)  8-21-17 Included Supp. No. 45 17-06 10-16-17 Included Supp. No. 46 17-07 11- 6-17 Included Supp. No. 47 2017-09  1- 2-18 Included Supp. No. 48 2017-10  1- 2-18 Included Supp. No. 48 18-03  3- 5-18 Included Supp. No. 49 18-04  7- 2-18 Included Supp. No. 50 18-05 12- 3-18 Included Supp. No. 51 18-06 12-17-18 Included Supp. No. 51  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Plymouth, as adopted by the electors on Nov. 6, 2007. The previous charter was approved by the voters on Oct. 1, 1951. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original charter. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

PREAMBLE 
    We, the people of the City of Plymouth, mindful of the ideals and labors of our fathers in founding and developing this community, grateful for the blessings of freedom, peace, and justice in a free and democratic state and nation, and desirous of further securing these blessings to ourselves and our posterity, do hereby ordain and establish this Charter for the City of Plymouth. 
CHAPTER 1. - BOUNDARIES AND SUBDIVISION OF THE CITY 

Section 1.1. - Boundaries. 
    The corporate boundaries of the City of Plymouth shall be those as established on the date this Charter takes effect, provided that the city shall have the power to change its boundaries in a matter provided by law. The city clerk shall maintain complete records of the existing boundaries on the date this Charter takes effect and each change thereafter, which shall be available for public inspection. 
Section 1.2. - Wards. 
    The City shall consist of one ward for the purposes of elections. 
Section 1.3. - Election Precincts. 
    The election precincts of the city shall remain as they existed on the date that this Charter became law, until altered by the Commission as provided and required by state law. 
CHAPTER 2. - GENERAL MUNICIPAL POWERS 

Section 2.1. - General Powers of the City. 
    The City of Plymouth and its officers shall possess and be vested with each and all the powers, privileges, and immunities, expressed or implied, which cities and their officers are, or hereafter may be, permitted to exercise under the constitution and laws of the State of Michigan. It is the intent of the Charter Commission in framing this Charter and of the people of the city in adopting it, to include all such powers, privileges, and immunities within the scope of the powers granted to the City of Plymouth by the provisions of this Charter. The City and its officers shall have power to exercise each and all such municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of the municipal government, whether they be expressly enumerated or not; to do any act to advance the interests of the City, the good government and prosperity of the municipality and its inhabitants, and, through its regularly constituted authority, to pass and enforce all ordinances, and resolutions relating to its municipal concerns, subject to the constitution and general laws of the state and the provisions of this Charter. 
    In addition to the powers possessed by the City of Plymouth under the constitution and general laws of the State of Michigan, and those set forth in this Charter, the city shall have power with respect to, and may by ordinance or other appropriate and lawful acts, provide: 
1.  For the use, regulation, improvement, and control of the surface of its streets, alleys, and public ways, and of the space above and beneath them; 
2.  For the use, by others than the owner, of property located in streets, alleys, and public places of the City in the operation of a public utility, subject to any limitations imposed by State law; 
3.  For a plan of streets and alleys within the city and for a distance of not more than three (3) miles beyond its limits; 
4.  For the use, control, and regulation of streams, waters, and water courses within its boundaries, subject to any limitations imposed by law; 
5.  For the installation and connection of sewers and water works on and to property within the city; for assessing the cost thereof to the several properties and making the same a lien thereon; 
6.  For maintaining the peace within the city, and preventing and punishing the disturbance of any meeting which is assembled for any lawful purpose; 
7.  For the acquiring, establishment, operation, extension, and maintenance of facilities for the storage and parking of vehicles within its corporate limits, including the fixing and collection of charges for services and use thereof on a public utility basis, and for such purpose to acquire by gift, purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, the land necessary therefore; 
8.  For the acquisition of the following improvements, including the necessary lands therefore, by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease, construction or otherwise, either within or without its corporate limits and either within or without the corporate limits of the county in which it is located, viz.: City hall, police stations, fire stations, boulevards, streets, alleys, public parks, recreation grounds, municipal camps, public grounds, zoological gardens, museums, libraries, airports, cemeteries, public wharves and landings upon navigable waters, levees and embankments, watch-houses, City prisons and work houses, penal farms, institutions, hospitals, quarantine grounds, electric light and power plants and systems, gas plants and systems, waterworks plants and systems, sewage disposal plants and systems, city dumps, garbage disposal plants or facilities, pounds, community buildings, stadia, convention halls, auditoria, dormitories, hospitals, market houses and market places, office buildings for city officers and employees, public works, and public buildings of all kinds; and for the costs and expenses thereof. 
9.  For the acquisition by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease, or otherwise of private property either within or without its corporate limits, and either within or without the corporate limits of the county in which it is located, for any public use of purpose within the scope of its powers whether herein specifically mentioned or not, subject to the limitations contained in section 5.16. If condemnation proceedings are resorted to for the acquisition of private property outside the corporate limits of such city, such condemnation proceedings may be brought under the provisions of Act No. 149 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1911 (MCL 213.21 et seq., as amended or as may be amended), entitled "An Act to provide for acquisition by purchase, condemnation, and otherwise by state agencies and public corporations of private property for the use or benefit of the public and to define the terms "public corporations," "state agencies" and "private property" as used herein," or such other appropriate Acts therefore as exist or shall be made by law; 
10.  For the maintenance, development, and operation of its property, and, upon the discontinuance thereof, to lease, sell, or dispose of the same subject to any restrictions placed thereupon by law; 
11.  For regulating, restricting, and limiting the number and locations of oil and gasoline stations; 
12.  For establishing standards, to the extent permitted by state law, to govern the construction, alteration, equipment, or removal of buildings and structures within the city; the zoning of the city in the manner and for the purpose permitted by law; and, in any zoning ordinance passed or effective in the city, or independently thereof, to regulate and establish the line upon which buildings may be erected on any street, lane, or alley in said city, and to prevent such buildings being erected nearer the street than such line; 
13.  For the regulation of trades, occupations, and amusements within the city, not inconsistent with state and federal laws, and to prohibit such trades, occupations, and amusements as are detrimental to the health, morals, or welfare of its inhabitants; 
14.  For preventing injury or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city from anything which is dangerous, offensive, or unhealthful, and to prevent and abate nuisances and punish those occasioning them or neglecting or refusing to abate, discontinue, or remove the same; 
15.  For licensing, regulating, restricting, and limiting the number and locations of advertising signs or displays and billboards within the city; 
16.  For establishing, acquiring, and operating airports, either within or without its corporate limits, and for regulating all airports located within its boundaries, and, for the purpose of promoting and preserving the public peace, safety, and welfare, for the control and regulation of the use of the air above the city by aircraft of all types, subject to any limitations imposed by law. Provided, however, that the city shall not, directly or indirectly, acquire, establish, operate, construct, maintain or own an airport either within or without its boundaries, or enter into or perform any intergovernmental agreement to accomplish any of the foregoing, unless approved by the majority of the qualified electors of the city voting thereon; 
17.  For the prohibition or regulation of the use, occupancy, sanitation, and parking of house trailers within the city, to the extent permitted by state law, and the right of the city to so regulate any house trailer shall not be abrogated because of any detachment thereof from its wheels or because of placing it on, or attaching it to the ground by means of any temporary or permanent foundation, or in any manner whatsoever; 
18.  For the creation and maintenance of a juvenile advisory commission which shall consult and cooperate with the educational, recreation, judicial, and law enforcement agencies of the city, the County of Wayne, and the State of Michigan with respect to the programs, undertakings, and actions of such agencies affecting or pertaining to the youth of the city; 
19.  For the creation and maintenance of a cemetery board which shall have and perform such powers and duties with respect to the cemetery or cemeteries of the city as the Commission shall prescribe. 
Section 2.2. - Exercise of Powers. 
    All powers granted to and possessed by the City shall be exercised as provided in this Charter or by state law. Where no procedure is set forth in this Charter or in the state law for the exercise of any power granted to or possessed by the city and its officers, the Commission may provide a procedure for the exercise thereof by ordinance, or resort may be had to any applicable procedure set forth in any statute of the State of Michigan which has been enacted for the government of any political subdivision of the State or for the exercise of such powers by the state itself. 
Section 2.3. - Intergovernmental Contracts. 
    The city shall have power to join with any municipal corporation, or with any number or combination thereof, by contract, or otherwise, as may be permitted by law, for the ownership, operation, or performance, jointly, or by any one or more, on behalf of all, of any property, facility, or service which each would have the power to own, operate, or perform separately. The city shall have the right to contract with any person or with any other municipal corporation to furnish to property, outside the corporate limits of the city, for an adequate consideration, and within limitations imposed by law, any lawful municipal service which it is furnishing to property within its corporate limits. Provided, however, that the city shall not, directly or indirectly, acquire, establish, operate, construct, maintain or own an airport, either within or without its boundaries, or enter into or perform any intergovernmental agreement to accomplish any of the foregoing, unless approved by the majority of the qualified electors of the city voting thereon. 
Section 2.4. - Continuation of Rights and Liabilities. 
    The adoption and taking effect of this Charter shall not discharge, impair, or limit any right vested in or obligation incurred by the City of Plymouth at the time this Charter became law. 
CHAPTER 3. - INTERPRETIVE AND LIMITING PROVISIONS 

Section 3.1. - City Records. 
    All records of the city shall be made available to the general public in compliance with the Freedom of iNformation Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246. 
Section 3.2. - Tense. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context, all words used in this Charter indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of adoption of this Charter, but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement for which provision is made therein, either as a power, immunity, requirement, or prohibition. 
Section 3.3. - Number and Gender. 
    As used in this Charter, every word importing the singular number only, may extend to and embrace the plural number and every word importing the plural number may be applied and limited to the singular number. Every word importing the masculine gender only shall be extended and applied to the feminine as well as the masculine gender. 
Section 3.4. - Definitions. 
(a)  The word "person" may extend and be applied to bodies corporate and politic and to partnerships, associations, and joint adventures, as well as to individuals; 
(b)  The words "printed" and "printing" shall include reproductions by printing, engraving, stencil duplicating, lithographing, or any similar method of reproducing or recording language; 
(c)  Except in reference to signatures, the words "written" and "in writing" shall include printing, typewriting, and teletype and telegraphic communications; 
(d)  The words "statute" and "state law" shall mean the statutes and laws, including the Constitution of Michigan. 
(e)  The word "default" shall mean, but not be limited to, the failure of making timely payments of any monetary obligation to the city. 
Section 3.5. - Headings. 
    The chapter and section headings used in this Charter are for convenience only and shall not be considered to be a part of this Charter. 
Section 3.6. - No estoppel by Representation. 
    No official of the city shall have power to make any representation or recital of fact in, or which may be deemed to constitute a part of, any franchise, contract, document, or agreement, contrary to any public record of the city. Any such representation shall be void and of no effect as against the city. 
Section 3.7. - Effect of Illegality of Any Part of Charter. 
    Should any provision or section, or portion thereof, of this Charter be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of this Charter as a whole or of any remaining portion of such provision or section; it being hereby declared to be the intent of the Charter Commission and of the electors who voted thereon that such unconstitutionality or illegality shall not affect the validity of any part of the Charter, except that specifically affected by such holding. 
Section 3.8. - Amendments. 
    This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided in Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909 (MCL 117.1 et seq., MSA 5.2071 et seq.), as amended. Should any two or more amendments, adopted at the same election, have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions, or as otherwise provided by statute or law. 
CHAPTER 4. - GENERAL PROVISIONS AFFECTING OFFICERS OF THE CITY 

Section 4.1. - Officers to be Elected. 
    The elective officers of the City shall be seven Commissioners. Each such officer shall be elected by the vote of the electors of the city at large. 
Section 4.2. - Officers to be Appointed. 
    The appointive officers of the city shall be a City Manager, a City Attorney, a Clerk, a Treasurer, an Assessor, a Director of Public Safety, a Director of Municipal Services, the members of the Board of Review and members of other necessary boards and commissions provided for or permitted to be created by this Charter or by state law. Upon the recommendation of the City Manager, and to assure the proper administration of city affairs, the Commission may create additional appointive offices, boards, or commissions, or may combine any administrative offices, boards, or commissions in any manner not inconsistent with state law, and prescribe the duties thereof: Provided, however, That the offices of City Manager, Clerk, and Treasurer shall not be combined one with another in any manner, but each may be combined with any other City office. The creation of any additional administrative office or combination thereof shall not directly or indirectly abolish or diminish the office of City Manager, or the responsibilities of that office as set forth in this Charter. Upon the recommendation of the City Manager, any board or commission, created under authority of this section, may be abolished by the Commission. 
Section 4.3. - City Employees. 
    All personnel employed by the city, who are not elected officers or declared to be appointive officers by or under authority of this charter, shall be deemed to be employees of the city. 
Section 4.4. - Eligibility for Office in the City. 
    Except as otherwise provided below, or elsewhere in this Charter, an elector of the City shall be eligible to hold elective office, if the elector shall have been a resident of the City for a minimum of one year immediately prior to the last day for filing for the primary election. Failure of an elector to be and remain a resident of the City during the term of office to which an elector has been elected shall create a vacancy in that office. 
(a)  In the case of any appointed officer of the city to any appointed office created in this Charter or by ordinance, including without limitation any board or commission, the appointee shall be a resident of the city and shall remain a resident of the city during the term of office of the appointee, failing which the office shall be deemed vacant. 
(b)  In the case of the City Manager, City Attorney, City Clerk, City Treasurer, City Assessor, Director of Public Safety, Director of Municipal Services or other appointed officer who shall be deemed to be an employee of the city, such person may reside either in the city or reside within a distance not greater than 20 miles from the nearest boundary of the city; however if the employee is married and the employee's spouse is employed by another public employer and the employee's spouse is subject to a condition of employment or promotion which requires the spouse to reside a distance of less than 20 miles from the nearest boundary of the spouse's public employer, then the 20 miles restriction upon the residency of the city's employee shall not apply. 
(c)  Further, in the case of all public employees of the city, the commission may waive the residency requirement at the time of employment by a two-thirds vote of the commission, provided that each employee for which a residency requirement is waived at time of employment shall satisfy the residency requirement for a public employee set forth herein within one year following the date of employment and shall continue to satisfy the residency requirement set forth herein during the entire time of employment by the city, failing such compliance the employee shall be terminated from employment by the city. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, a person who is not a resident of the City but who resides within a distance not greater than 20 miles from the nearest boundary of the City and who has an interest in property located within a business district of a Downtown Development Authority created by the city pursuant to Public Act Number 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended, may be appointed as a member of the board of the governing body of that authority subject to all other requirements of state law. 
Section 4.5. - Certain Elective Officers Ineligible. 
    No person who holds or has held the office of Commissioner, by election or appointment, or both, for three consecutive terms shall be eligible to succeed themselves in such office. The holding of the office of Commissioner, either by election or by appointment, for a period of two years or more shall be deemed to be for a term. No person who holds or has held the office of Commissioner shall be eligible for appointment to any office, for which compensation is provided, or any post of employment, until one year has elapsed following the term for which they were elected, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
Section 4.6. - Appointment and Removal of Appointive Officers. 
(a)  All appointive officers of the City, [except the City Manager, the City Attorney, and members of the Board of Review and the Personnel Service Appeal Board, and other boards and commissions provided for or permitted to be created by this Charter or the general laws of the State], shall be appointed by the City Manager, by and with the advice and approval of the Commission. The City Manager shall announce each appointment to fill appointive offices of the city to the Commission at a regular or special meeting thereof. If the Commission shall not approve any such appointment at the meeting at which such announcement is made, such appointment shall be probationary for a period of thirty days, unless approved by the Commission prior to the expiration of that time. During such thirty-day period, the Commission may approve or disapprove such appointment. If the Commission shall take no action to approve or disapprove any such appointment during such thirty-day period, the appointment shall be deemed to have been approved by it. 
(b)  Each appointive officer of the city, except members of the Board of Review and other boards and commissions of the city, shall hold office for an indefinite term. 
(c)  The City Manager may remove any appointive officer of the city whose appointment has been or may be made by him/her. The city manager shall announce the removal of any appointive officer from the office held by him/her to the Commission at any regular or special meeting of the Commission. If, within five days after such announcement, such officer shall file a petition with the Mayor requesting a hearing on his/her removal, the Commission shall hear him/her at its next regular meeting which is held within not less than five nor more than thirty days following the filing of such petition. At such hearing, such officer and the City Manager may present to the Commission all facts and circumstances which are germane to the reasons for the removal of such officer from office by the City Manager. After such hearing, the Commission may sustain the removal made by the City Manager or reinstate the officer to the office held by him/her. 
(d)  The Mayor shall appoint to and remove from office the City Attorney and members of the Board of Review and the Personnel Service Appeal Board, and of other boards and commissions of the City. Such appointments and removals by the Mayor shall be made in the same manner and subject to the same procedures as are herein prescribed for the appointment and removal of appointive officers by the City Manager. 
Section 4.7. - Compensation of Appointive Officers. 
    The Commission shall fix the compensation of the City Manager, the City Attorney, and the members of the Board of Review, the Personnel Service Appeal Board, and other boards and commissions of the City. The City Manager shall fix the compensation of all other appointive officers, within and subject to budget appropriations. 
Section 4.8. - Vacancies in office. 
    Any city office shall become vacant for any one or more of the following reasons: 
(a)  The occurrence of any event or the doing of any act specified by state law to create a vacancy; 
(b)  Removal from office by the Governor of Michigan; 
(c)  The absence from the city of any officer continuously for more than sixty days without permission of the Commission; 
(d)  In the case of the Mayor and Commissioners, absence from four consecutive regular meetings of the Commission or twenty-five percent of such meetings in any fiscal year of the city, unless such absence shall be excused by the Commission at the time it occurred and the reason therefore entered in to the proceedings of the Commission; 
(e)  Assumption by the officer of any office which is incompatible with the City office held by him/her. 
Section 4.9. - Removals from Office by the Commission. 
    The Commission may remove any elective or appointive officer of the city for any one or more of the following reasons: 
(a)  When, after a hearing thereon, it shall be satisfied from sufficient evidence submitted to it that such officer has failed to perform the duties of his/her office for ninety days because of physical or mental disability. 
(b)  When it shall be satisfied from sufficient evidence submitted to it that such officer has been guilty of official misconduct, wilful neglect of, or gross inefficiency in, the performance of his/her duties as an officer of the city. The Commission shall take no action under this provision upon any charges against any officer of the city, until certified copies of such charges and of all supporting affidavits and exhibits have been personally served upon such officer and an opportunity, after at least fifteen days notice, given him/her to be heard in his/her defense. No officer who has been removed from office under authority of this provision shall be eligible to election or appointment to any city office for a period of three years from the date of such removal. Any elector of the city may prefer charges of official misconduct, wilful neglect of, or gross inefficiency in office against any appointive officer of the city. Such charges shall be made in writing and shall set forth the grounds therefore, reciting specific instances of such official misconduct, wilful neglect, or gross inefficiency, which recitals shall be supported by affidavits of persons having knowledge thereof, and shall be filed with the clerk who shall place the same before the Commission at its next regular meeting following his/her receipt thereof. After such charges have been filed with the Commission, it shall take such action thereon as it shall deem fit and may provide for and hold a hearing thereon. If any such charges be also supported by a petition, demanding that the Commission hold a hearing thereon which contains the signatures of registered electors of the city equal to or greater than ten percent of the number of votes cast in the city for the office of Governor of the State of Michigan at the last biennial fall election, the Commission shall take action thereon by calling and holding a public hearing before the Commission upon such charges. At such public hearing, all persons having an interest in the subject matter and purpose of such hearing shall be heard and may be represented by counsel, if such person so chooses. Within fifteen days after such hearing, the Commission shall make a determination upon the charges made against such officer. Such determination of the Commission shall be final. If the Commission determines that the charges were supported by competent evidence at such hearing and that the same are sufficient justification therefor, it shall remove the person complained against from the office held by him/her. 
Section 4.10. - Resignations. 
    Resignations of elective officers, the City Manager, and the City Attorney shall be made in writing and filed with the Clerk and shall be acted upon by the Commission at its next regular meeting following receipt thereof by the Clerk. Resignations of appointive officers, other than the City Manager and City Attorney, shall be made in writing to the City Manager and shall be promptly acted upon by him/her. 
Section 4.11. - Recall. 
    Any elective official may be removed from the office by the electors of the City by recall, in the manner provided by the general laws of the state. A vacancy created by the recall of any elective official shall be filled in the manner prescribed by law. The board of county canvassers in the county where the petition is filed shall conduct the canvass of the recall election. If a board of canvassers determined that a majority of the votes are in favor of recall, the board of canvassers immediately upon the determination shall certify the result to the officer with whom the recall petition was filed. Upon certification, the office is vacant. The officer with whom the recall petition was filed shall immediately upon receipt of the certification notify the Clerk. 
Section 4.12. - Filling Vacancies. 
    Except in case of recall, if a vacancy occurs in any elective office, the Mayor shall appoint within twenty-eight (28) days after such vacancy occurs, a person who possesses the qualifications required of holders of said office to fill such vacancy. After said appointment is made by the Mayor, the City Commission shall confirm and approve such appointment at its next regularly scheduled meeting. Any person so appointed to the office of Commissioner shall hold that office for the remainder of the term of the office that was vacated. In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of Commissioner within thirty days prior to a regular city election such vacancy shall not be filled by the Commission until the first meeting after its organization meeting following such election. 
    If a vacancy occurs in any appointive office, the person, board, or commission responsible for the appointment of such person under this Charter shall, within twenty-eight (28) days after such vacancy occurs, appoint a person who possesses the qualification required of holders of said office to fill such vacancy. The appointment of any such person shall be subject to and be required to comply with any and all provisions contained in this Charter which require approval by the City Commission of said appointment. 
Section 4.13. - Term of Office Cannot Be Shortened or Extended. 
    Except by procedures provided in this chapter, the terms of the elective officials of the city and of officers of the city appointed for a definite term shall not be shortened. The terms of office of the city may not be extended beyond the period for which any such officer was elected or appointed except that an elective officer of the city shall, after his/her term has expired, continue to hold office until his/her successor is elected or appointed and has qualified. 
Section 4.14. - Increase or Decrease of Compensation. 
    No salary of any elected officer shall be increased or decreased after his/her election during any fixed term of office for which he/she was elected. 
Section 4.15. - Oath of Office and Bond Requirement. 
    Every officer, elected or appointed, before entering upon the duties of the office, and each of such employees as the Commission shall designate, before entering upon employment, shall take and subscribe to the oath prescribed by the constitution of the state, and shall file the same with the Clerk. Such persons shall also furnish or fulfill the requirements for any bond which may be required by this Charter or by the Commission to give. In case of failure to comply with the provisions of this section within ten days from the date of the election, appointment, or employment, such office or employment shall thereupon become vacant, unless the Commission shall, by resolution, extend the time in which such officer or employee may qualify. 
Section 4.16. - Surety bonds. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the Commission may require any officer or employee to give or fulfill the requirements for a bond, to be approved by the Commission, conditioned upon the faithful and proper performance of the duties of the office or employment concerned, in such sum as the Commission shall determine. All such officers or employees who receive, distribute, or are responsible for City funds shall be bonded. The resignation, removal, or discharge of any officer or employee, or appointment of another person to such office or employment, shall not exonerate such officer or employee or any sureties of such officer or employee from any liability incurred by such officer, employee, or sureties. All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. Unless otherwise determined by a two-thirds vote of the Commission, bonds required by this section shall not be renewed upon the expiration of the terms for which issued, but, in each case, a new bond shall be furnished. No official bond shall be issued for a term exceeding five years. The bonds of all officers and employees shall be filed with the Clerk, except that of the Clerk, which shall be filed with the Treasurer. 
Section 4.17. - Business Dealings with City. 
(a)  Public contracts: No officer of the City of Plymouth shall be a party, directly or indirectly, to any contract between the officer and the City of Plymouth unless permitted by State law. 
(b)  Other business dealings with the city : Any officer of the City of Plymouth who intends to have business dealing with the city, other than by way of a public contract either directly or indirectly, whereby the officer may acquire from the City of Plymouth an income or benefits other than that provided as remuneration for the officer's official duties, shall file with the City Clerk a statement, under oath, setting forth the nature of the Officer's interest therein and that his/her or her participation therein is to the general welfare and benefit of the City of Plymouth. Such statement shall be forwarded to the Commission, placed on the regular agenda of the Commission, and voted upon for approval. Any such approval shall require a two-thirds affirmative vote by the Commission. 
(c)  Voidable contract or obligation: In the event this Section is violated, any contract or obligation entered into or assumed on the part of the City of Plymouth shall be voidable. 
Section 4.18. - Giving of Surety Bonds Forbidden. 
    No officer shall stand as surety on any bond to the city or give any bail for any other person which may be required by the Charter or any ordinance of the City. Any officer of the City who violates the provisions of this paragraph shall be guilty of misconduct in office. 
Section 4.19. - Delivery of Office and Its Effects by Officer or Employee to His/Her Successor. 
    Whenever any officer or employee shall resign, or be removed from office, or the term of office for which he/she has been elected or appointed has expired, he/she shall, immediately, deliver to his/her successor in the office or to his/her superior, all books, papers, moneys, and effects in his/her custody which were obtained as a part of, or were necessary to the performance of his/her duties as such officer or employee. 
CHAPTER 5. - THE CITY COMMISSION 

Section 5.1. - City Governing Body. 
    All legislative or policy forming powers of the city shall be vested in, exercised, and determined by a City Commission consisting of the Mayor and the six Commissioners of the city. In all cases where the word Commission is used in this Charter, the same shall mean the City Commission of the City of Plymouth and shall be synonymous with any term employed in any state or federal law referring to legislative or governing bodies of cities. The Commission shall not grant or surrender the powers herein granted to any person, firm, association, or corporation. 
Section 5.2. - Nomination, Election, and Terms of Office. 
    At each regular city election there shall be elected four Commissioners from the city at large. Each Commissioner shall hold office for a term of four years, except that the person elected to the office of Commissioner at each regular city election who receives the least number of votes shall hold office for a term of two years. Such terms of office shall commence on and date from the Monday next following the date of the regular city election at which they are elected. 
Section 5.3. - Judge of Qualifications of Members. 
    The Commission shall be the judge of whether its members meet the qualification and eligibility requirements proscribed by this Charter and state law to be a member of the Commission. This would be subject only to review by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Section 5.4. - Remuneration of Members of the Commission. 
    The compensation of the Mayor and City Commission members shall be determined by the Local Officers Compensation Commission and in accordance with the Local Officers Compensation Commission Ordinance, or as amended, as permitted by state law. 
Section 5.5. - Selection of Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem. 
    The Commission shall, at its first regular meeting following each regular biennial city election, select one of its members to serve as Mayor and one to serve as Mayor Pro Tem. The selection of Mayor and Mayor Pro-tem shall be based on a majority vote of the City Commission. The Mayor Pro-tem who was in office prior to the regular biennial election shall be the first person to have his/her name placed into nomination for Mayor, provided that he/she is still seated on the Commission following the regular biennial election. The person who received the highest number of votes in the regular biennial election shall be the first person to have his/her name placed into nomination for Mayor Pro-tem. If the person nominated for the office of Mayor or Mayor Pro-tem declines the nomination or if there is a vacancy in the office of Mayor Pro-tem or if the sitting Mayor Pro-tem did not carry over at the regular biennial election, then the floor shall be open for nominations for that office. If the person nominated for the office of Mayor or Mayor Pro-tem does not receive a majority of votes from the members of the City Commission then the chair shall accept additional nominations for the office of Mayor or Mayor Pro-tem. Once a nomination is placed on the floor, a vote of the City Commission shall be taken. Once a nominated person receives a majority vote from the City Commission he/she shall take the office of Mayor or Mayor Pro-tem in accordance with this Charter. The Mayor Pro Tem shall perform the duties of the Mayor when, on account of absence from the City, disability, or otherwise, the Mayor is temporarily unable to perform the duties of his/her office, and shall succeed to the office of Mayor in case of vacancy in that office. The Mayor Pro Tem shall preside over the meetings of the Commission during the absence of the Mayor, and at the call of the Mayor. In the event that a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor Pro Tem, through advancement to the office of Mayor, the Commission shall appoint one of its elected members to fill such vacancy. Until such time as the Commission shall so appoint a Mayor Pro Tem, the line of succession of persons who shall act as Mayor, shall be Commissioners according to their seniority in their present terms of office and, among Commissioners of equal seniority, according to the number of votes received by them at the time of their election to office. 
Section 5.6. - Duties of the Mayor. 
    Insofar as required by law, and for all ceremonial purposes, the Mayor shall be recognized as the executive head of the city and shall preside over all meetings of the Commission and preserve order thereat and shall have and exercise all powers granted to Mayors of cities by state law and by this Charter. 
Section 5.7. - Meetings of the commission. 
(a)  The Commission shall provide by resolution for the time and place of its regular meetings and shall hold at least two regular meetings each month: Provided, That no change shall be made in the time or place of its regular meetings, until after not less than ten days following publication of notice of such change. If any time set for the holding of a regular meeting of the Commission shall be a holiday, then such regular meeting shall be held at the same time and place on the next secular day which is not a holiday. The business of the City Commission shall be conducted at public meetings held in compliance with the open meetings act (MCL  15.261-275). 
(b)  Special meetings shall be called by the Clerk on request of the Mayor or any two Commission members. Written notice stating each matter to be considered at a special meeting shall be given each Commission member and the Mayor, as provided by Commission rules, unless the entire Commission and the Mayor are present and waive notice. 
(c)  Four members of the Commission shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at all meetings of the Commission, but in the absence of a quorum, any number less than a quorum may adjourn any regular or special meeting to a later date. 
(d)  The Commission shall determine its own procedural rules and order of business and shall keep a journal in the English language of all its proceedings which shall be signed by the Clerk, and by the Mayor after approval thereof by the Commission. The vote upon the passage of all ordinances, and upon the adoption of all resolutions shall be taken by "Yes" or "No" votes and entered upon the record, except that where the vote is unanimous, it shall only be necessary to so state. 
(e)  Each Commissioner shall be required to attend all meetings of the Commission. The Commission may compel the attendance of its members and other officers and department heads of the city, and the president or chair of each board of the city government, at its meetings, and may enforce fines for nonattendance in such amount and manner as may, by ordinance, be prescribed. Any member of the Commission, or other officer of the city, who refuses to attend such meetings, for reasons other than confining illness, or to conduct himself in an orderly manner thereat shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. The Police Chief, or such other person as the Commission shall designate, shall serve as the Sergeant-at-Arms of the Commission in the enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
(f)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, each commissioner present shall vote on each question before the Commission for a determination unless excused therefrom by a vote of at least a majority, plus one member of the members of the Commission present, or unless prohibited by applicable state law. 
Section 5.8. - Public Health And Safety. 
    Through the established departments and agencies of the City government, together with any such departments or agencies as may be created under authority of this Charter, the Commission shall provide for public peace, health, recreation, and for the safety of persons and property. 
Section 5.9. - Licenses. 
    The Commission shall, by ordinance, prescribe the terms and conditions upon which licenses may be granted, suspended, or revoked, and may require and exact payment of such reasonable sums for licenses of persons receiving such licenses from the city, as it may deem proper. 
Section 5.10. - Publication. 
    The Commission shall determine the method of publication of all notices, ordinances, and proceedings for which a mode of publication is not prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
Section 5.11. - Cemetery Regulations. 
    The Commission shall have power to enact all ordinances deemed necessary for the establishment, maintenance and protection of cemeteries, together with improvements thereon and appurtenances thereto, owned or hereafter acquired by the city either within or without its corporate limits. The Commission shall, by ordinance provide a plan for the platting, sale, and perpetual care of all lots, plots, and lands within its cemeteries. All ordinances pertaining to public health and welfare in the regulation and protection of public cemeteries shall apply equally to all cemeteries within the city belonging to or under the control of any church or religious society, or any corporation, company, or association. The city may cause any bodies buried within the city, in violation of any state law or ordinance of the city, made in respect to such burials, to be taken up and reburied in such a manner as shall conform to the ordinance of the city. 
Section 5.12. - Streets, Alleys and Public Places. 
    The City shall have and exercise the reasonable control of its streets, alleys, and public places. Except insofar as limited by State law and the provisions of this Charter, the Commission shall have power to establish, vacate, use, control, and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges, and public places, whether such public places be located within or without the limits of the City, and the space above and beneath them. Such power shall include, but not be limited to, the proper policing and supervision thereof; the licensing and regulation, or the prohibition, of the placing of signs, awnings, awning posts, and other things which are of such nature as to impede or make dangerous the use of such streets, alleys and public places of the City; and the licensing and regulation of the construction and use of openings in its streets, alleys and sidewalks thereof, and all vaults, structures, and excavations under the same. When the Commission shall deem it advisable to vacate, discontinue, or abolish any public place, street, or alley, or any part thereof, it shall, by resolution, so declare and, in such resolution, shall appoint a time, not less than thirty days thereafter when the Commission shall meet and hear objections thereto. Notice of such hearing and of the purpose thereof shall be published by the Clerk not less than once in each of the two calendar weeks preceding such hearing in one of the newspapers published or of general circulation in the City and by posting upon not less than three official public posting boards of the City. Notices of such hearing shall be also given by the Clerk by first class mail addressed to each owner of property abutting upon such street, alley, or public place according to the last assessment roll of the City. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken hereunder, provided that the Clerk has a proof of service affidavit of posting and publication. Objections to such action of the Commission may be filed with the Clerk, in writing. If any such objection shall be filed, such public place, street, or alley, or part thereof, shall not be vacated, discontinued, or abolished, except by affirmative vote of at least five members of the Commission. Any property that could be excluded from the use of a public alley, street or public place shall not have the street, alley or public place vacated if it is the sole access to an existing garage. 
Section 5.13. - Platting of Streets and Subdivisions. 
    Lands or premises laid out, divided, and platted into lots, streets, and alleys within the City shall comply with the provisions of State law and any appropriate City ordinance and the plats thereof shall not be effective until approved by the Commission. The City shall not improve any street or alley shown on or located in any plat approved by the Commission unless such street or alley shall have been accepted by resolution of the Commission. 
Section 5.14. - Gifts and Trusts. 
    The Commission may, in its discretion, receive and hold any gift or request made to the city or any officer, board or department thereof for any lawful municipal purpose and shall apply the same in accordance with the terms and conditions, if any, of such gift. The Commission may, by contract or otherwise, if permitted by or consistent with the terms of the gift or bequest, transfer any such gift or bequest to or permit such gift or bequest to remain in the hands of any person, group of persons, or corporation to administer the same for the benefit of the city in accordance with the terms and conditions of such gift or bequest. 
Section 5.15. - Rights as to property. 
    In addition to the powers possessed by the City under the Constitution and statutes and those set forth throughout this Charter, the City shall have the power with respect to, and may, by ordinance and other lawful act of its officers provide for the following, subject to any specific limitation thereon by this Charter: 
The acquisition by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease, construction or in any manner permitted by statute, of private property of every type and nature for public use, which property may be located within or without the County of Wayne and which may be required for or incidental to the present or future exercise of purposes, powers and duties of the City, either proprietary or otherwise. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, neither this City nor any of its subdivisions shall use eminent domain to take private property without the consent of the owner to be used for private commercial, financial, retail, or industrial enterprise, except that property may be transferred or leased (1) to private entities that are public utilities or common carriers and (2) to private entities that occupy an incidental area within a public project, such as a retail establishment on the ground floor of a public building. Further, private property acquired through eminent domain without the consent of the owner shall not be dedicated, sold, leased in substantial part, or otherwise transferred to a private person, partnership, corporation or any other private entity for a period of five (5) years following the acquisition of the property by the City, except that property may be transferred or leased (1) to private entities that are public utilities or common carriers and (2) to private entities that occupy an incidental area in a public project, such as a retail establishment on the ground floor of a public building. 
Section 5.16. - City Contracts and Purchases. 
    The Commission shall be responsible for the control of letting and making of contracts and shall provide by ordinance the necessary procedures governing purchasing and making of contracts. Such ordinance shall specify an amount below which and the purposes for which purchases may be made by the city administration, either without specific authorization of the Commission or without the necessity of formal competitive bidding, or both. 
Section 5.17. - Restrictions on Powers of the Commission. 
(a)  The Commission shall not have the power to make any contract with or give any official position to any person who is in default to the city. Further, the Commission shall not have the power to sell any park, cemetery, or any part thereof, except where such park is not required under an official master plan of the city, or any property bordering on a water front, or to engage in any business enterprise requiring an investment of money in excess of ten cents per capita, unless approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon at any general or special election. 
(b)  Except in those cases where a larger majority is required by state law or the provisions of this Charter, no ordinance or resolution shall be adopted or passed, nor shall any appointment be made, nor any person removed from office, as required or permitted by this Charter, except by the affirmative vote of at least four members of the Commission. 
(c)  There shall be no standing committees of the Commission; but this provision shall not be construed to prohibit the appointment by the Mayor, with the approval of the Commission, of any temporary special committee to make or perform any investigation or act required by the Commission to be made or performed. 
Section 5.18. - Investigations. 
    The Commission, or any committee authorized by it for the purpose, shall have the power to inquire into the conduct of any department, office, or officer of the City and to make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may summon witnesses to appear before the Commission or such committee of the Commission to give information under oath pertinent to such inquiry, administer oaths, and require the production of books, papers, and other evidence. Any officer or employee of the City who shall fail or refuse to obey such summons or to produce books, papers, or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this Section, shall, on conviction thereof in any court of competent jurisdiction, be subject to a fine of not more than five-hundred dollars, or imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
CHAPTER 6. - CITY LEGISLATION 

Section 6.1. - Status of Charter. 
    This Charter shall constitute the basic law of the City of Plymouth, subject only to the Constitution and general laws of the State of Michigan and of the United States of America. 
Section 6.2. - Prior Legislation Preserved. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the City of Plymouth, which are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter and which are in force and effect on the effective date of this Charter shall continue in full force and effect until repealed or amended. 
Section 6.3. - City Legislation Defined. 
    All legislation of the City of Plymouth, other than this Charter, shall be by resolution or by ordinance. The word "resolution" as used in this Charter shall be the official action of the Commission in the form of a resolution or a motion, which does not constitute an ordinance or a step in the adoption of an ordinance. Any such action shall be limited to matters required or permitted to be done by resolution by this Charter or by state or federal law and to matters pertaining to the internal affairs or concerns of the city government. All other acts of the Commission, and all acts carrying a penalty for the violation thereof, shall be by ordinance. 
Section 6.4. - Ordinance Enacted. 
    Each ordinance shall be identified by a number and a short title. Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form. The style of all ordinances passed by the Commission shall be, "The City of Plymouth Ordains:". Except in the case of any ordinance which the Commission, with the approval of not less than five of its members, has voted to be an emergency ordinance, no ordinance shall be finally passed by the Commission until at least two weeks have elapsed following the introduction thereof. Any ordinance of the City may be repealed by reference to its number and title. The section or sections of any ordinance which is revised, altered, or amended shall be reenacted, and published at length. All ordinances, when enacted shall be immediately recorded by the Clerk in a book to be called "The Ordinance Book;" and it shall be the duty of the Mayor and Clerk to authenticate such record by their official signatures thereon. 
Section 6.5. - Publication of Ordinances. 
    Each ordinance passed by the Commission shall be published at least once after its adoption by the Commission before it shall become operative. The date upon which an ordinance shall become operative, shall be specifically provided in the ordinance itself. When the ordinance imposes a penalty, unless such ordinance be declared to be an emergency ordinance by the Commission, such operative date shall not be less than twenty-one days from the date of its passage. Publication of any ordinance as required herein may be accomplished by including the ordinance, after its final passage, as a part of the published proceedings of the Commission. 
Section 6.6. - Penalties. 
    Each person who violates any provision of this Charter shall be subject to punishment by fine or imprisonment, or by both fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court having jurisdiction. The Commission may provide in ordinances passed by it for the punishment of violations of the provisions thereof by fine or imprisonment, or by both fine and imprisonment. No punishment for the violation of any City ordinance, any provisions of this Charter or for the commission by any officer of the City of any act declared by this Charter to constitute misconduct in office, shall exceed a fine of five hundred dollars, or imprisonment for more than ninety days, or both, in the discretion of the court having jurisdiction. 
Section 6.7. - Time Limit for Prosecution of Ordinance Violations. 
    Prosecutions for violations of the ordinances of the City shall be commenced within two (2) years after the commission of the offense unless a different period of limitation is prescribed by state law. 
Section 6.8. - Proceedings for Prosecution of Ordinance Violations. 
    Except as the same may be inconsistent with or otherwise provided in this Charter, all proceedings relative to the arrest, custody, and trial of persons accused of the violation of the provisions of the laws and ordinances of the city, shall be governed by, and conform to, as nearly as may be, the provisions of law relating to the proceedings in criminal cases cognizable by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Section 6.9. - Technical Codes. 
    The Commission may adopt, as a city ordinance, any provision of state law or any detailed technical code or set of regulations which has been promulgated by the State of Michigan, or by departments, boards, or agencies thereof, or by any organization or association which is organized and conducted for the purpose of developing any such code or set of regulations, by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance and without publishing such technical code or set of regulations in full: Provided, that such code or set of regulations is fully identified in said ordinance and that the purpose of said code or set of regulations shall be published with the adopting ordinance and that printed copies thereof are kept in the office of the Clerk, available for distribution to the public at all times. Such publication shall contain notice to the effect that a complete copy of said code or set of regulations is available for public use and inspection in the office of the Clerk. 
Section 6.10. - Compilation or codification. 
(a)  Copies of all ordinances enacted and amendments to the City Charter adopted after the effective date of this Charter shall be available at the office of the Clerk. 
(b)  After adoption of this Charter and any amendments thereto, this Charter and any amendments thereto and all City ordinances shall be available for public inspection in the office of the Clerk. 
(c)  Copies of ordinances and of any compilation, code, or codes referred to in this chapter may be certified by the Clerk, and, when so certified, shall be competent evidence in all courts and legally established tribunals as to the matters contained therein. 
Section 6.11. - Initiative and Referendum. 
    An ordinance may be initiated, or a referendum on an ordinance enacted by the Commission may be had, by a petition, as hereinafter provided. 
Section 6.12. - Petitions. 
    A petition initiating an ordinance, or requesting a referendum on an ordinance, shall be signed by not less than fifteen percent of the number of electors of the City who voted for governor of the State of Michigan at the last fall election held in the state. Before being circulated for signatures, all such petitions shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney. No such petition need be on one paper but may be the aggregate of two or more petition papers. Each signer of a petition shall sign his/her name in ink or indelible pencil, and shall place thereon, after his/her name, the date and place of his/her residence by street and number, or by other customary designation. To each petition paper there shall be attached a sworn affidavit that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that it was made in the presence of the affiant. Such petition shall be filed with the Clerk, who shall, within ten days, canvass the signatures thereon to determine the sufficiency thereof. No signature on any petition initiating an ordinance or requesting a referendum on an ordinance shall be counted in the canvass thereof which was signed more than six months prior to the date on which such petition was filed with the Clerk, or in case the date following such signature has been altered in any manner. If any such petition shall be found to contain an insufficient number of signatures of registered electors of the City, or to be improper as to form or not to be in compliance with the provisions of this section, the Clerk shall notify the person filing such petition forthwith, and ten days from such notification shall be allowed for the filing of supplemental petition papers. When found sufficient and proper, the Clerk shall certify such fact on the petition of not less than one paper thereof, indicating the date and time of such certification, and shall present the petition to the Commission at its next regular meeting. 
Section 6.13. - Commission Procedures. 
    Upon receiving a petition initiating an ordinance or requesting a referendum on an ordinance from the Clerk, the Commission shall, within thirty days, either: 
(a)  If it be an initiatory petition, adopt the ordinance as submitted in the petition, or determine to submit the proposal to the electors of the City and provide for the holding of the election thereon; or 
(b)  If it be a referendary petition, repeal the ordinance to which the petition refers or determine to submit the proposal to the electors of the City and provide for the holding of the election thereon. 
Section 6.14. - Submission to Electors. 
    Should the Commission decide to submit the proposal to the electors in either case, it shall be submitted at an election to be held not less than forty days, nor more than ninety days, after the date of action thereon by the Commission: Provided, That, if any election, other than a school election, is to be held, in the city, for any purpose whatsoever, within one hundred and twenty days after such action by the Commission, such proposal shall be submitted to the electors of the city at such election. If such proposal must be submitted at a special election, and no such election may be held in the city because of any limitation thereof imposed by law, then such proposition shall be submitted to the electors of the city at the next election other than a school election, held in the city for any purpose whatsoever. The result shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon, except in cases where otherwise required by the constitution or laws of the State of Michigan. 
Section 6.15. - Ordinance Suspended. 
    The certification by the Clerk of the sufficiency of a petition for referendum within thirty days after the passage of the ordinance, to which such petition refers, shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in question pending repeal by the Commission or final determination by the electors, as the case may be. An ordinance adopted through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed by the Commission for a period of two years after the date of the election at which it was adopted. Should two or more ordinances, adopted at the same election, have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the highest vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
CHAPTER 7. - THE ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE 

Section 7.1. - Administrative Officers. 
    The administrative officers of the City shall be a City Manager, a City Attorney, a Clerk, a Treasurer, an Assessor, a Director of Public Safety, a Director of Municipal Services and the members of the Board of Review and members of such other boards and commissions and such other appointive officers as shall be provided for or permitted to be created by this Charter. The Commission and its members, shall deal with the administrative officers and employees of the City, except the City Attorney, the Clerk when acting in the capacity as Clerk of the Commission, and boards and commissions of the City, solely through the City Manager and neither the Commission nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the City Manager as to the performance of their duties, either publicly or privately. Any violation of the provisions of this section by a Commissioner shall constitute misconduct in office. 
Section 7.2. - The City Manager. 
    The Commission shall designate a qualified person to perform the duties of City Manager. He/she shall be selected for designation by the Commission on the basis of training and ability alone and shall serve at the pleasure of and be subject to removal by the Commission at any time without limitation as to hearing or other procedures which may be required by this Charter for the removal of officers. With the consent and approval of the Commission the City Manager may designate an administrative officer or employee of the City to act as City Manager if he/she is temporarily absent from the City or unable to perform the duties of his/her office. While so acting, such person shall possess and exercise all of the powers and responsibilities of the office of City Manager. No person who holds or who has held any elective City office shall be eligible for appointment as City Manager or acting City Manager, until two years have elapsed following the expiration of the term for which he/she was elected. 
Section 7.3. - Functions of City Manager. 
    The City Manager shall carry out the policies formulated by the Commission. In conformity with the provisions of this Charter, he/she shall be charged with and be responsible to the Commission for the supervision and management of all the services, works, and undertakings of the City, except as otherwise provided in this Charter. He/she shall be responsible to the Commission for: 
(a)  The administration of the affairs of the city; 
(b)  The coordination, supervision, and active control of the departments, institutions, and agencies of the City government created by or under authority of this Charter; 
(c)  The enforcement and execution of the laws of the state and the ordinances and resolutions of the Commission within the city and upon all public property owned or subject to the jurisdiction of the city, regardless of where located; 
(d)  The preservation and promotion of public health, safety, and welfare; the prevention, suppression, and abatement of public nuisances; and the enforcement of the police power of the city; 
(e)  The preparation of the annual budget proposal of the city and the administration of the annual budget adopted by the Commission. 
Section 7.4. - Powers of the City Manager. 
    In order to carry out and perform the functions of his/her office, the City Manager shall have the following powers and duties, which shall be exercised under the general supervision of the Commission: 
(a)  To attend all meetings of the Commission unless otherwise directed by the Commission, with the right to take part in all discussions, but without the right to vote, and to recommend to that body from time to time such measures as he/she shall deem necessary or expedient for it to adopt; 
(b)  To furnish the Commission with any necessary information respecting the departments of the City government under his/her control; 
(c)  To prepare the annual budget document and administer the annual budget of the City in the manner and with such supporting schedules and data as may be required by this Charter and the ordinances and resolutions of the Commission; 
(d)  To keep the Commission advised of the financial condition and needs of the City; 
(e)  To prepare and submit to the Commission such reports as may be required by that body and to prepare and present to the Commission an annual report, which shall consolidate the special reports of the several departments; 
(f)  To perform the duties and responsibilities as personnel director with respect to all City employees, subject to the provisions of this Charter and general ordinances of the Commission; 
(g)  To have responsible charge, management, and supervision of all public improvements, works, undertakings, utilities, and properties of the City; 
(h)  To see that the terms and conditions of all public utility franchises, of all contracts to which the City is a party, and of all trusts in favor of the City are faithfully kept and performed; 
(i)  To perform the duties of purchasing agent of the City, and, under authority of the Commission, to sign all contracts and instruments required for the exercise of such function; 
(j)  To perform and assume such other duties and responsibilities as may be prescribed by this Charter or required of him/her by the ordinances, resolutions, and directions of the Commission. 
Section 7.5. - Functions of the Clerk. 
(a)  The Clerk shall be the clerk of the Commission and shall attend all its meetings and keep a permanent journal, in the English language, of every session of the Commission; 
(b)  He/she shall keep a record of all ordinances, resolutions, and actions of the Commission, which record shall be public; 
(c)  He/she shall have power to administer all oaths required for municipal purposes by State law, this Charter and the ordinances of the city; 
(d)  He/she shall be custodian of all papers, documents, bonds, and records pertaining to the City of Plymouth, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for by this Charter; 
(e)  He/she shall be custodian of the city seal and shall affix it to all documents and instruments requiring the seal of the city, and shall attest the same; 
(f)  He/she shall give ample notice to the proper officials of the city of the expiration or termination of any franchise, contract or agreement to which the city is a party, and to city officers personally of the expiration of the terms of their respective offices and of any official bonds required of them; 
(g)  He/she shall certify by his/her signature all ordinances and resolutions enacted or passed by the Commission and perform any other duties required by him/her by state or federal law, this Charter, the City Manager, or the ordinances of the city; 
(h)  He/she shall be the recording clerk of the boards of the city, unless otherwise provided in this Charter, and shall attend all their meetings and keep a permanent journal, in the English language, of every session thereof; 
(i)  He/she shall issue and shall have power to suspend or revoke, as provided by ordinance, all licenses required to be issued by the ordinances of the city; 
(j)  He/she shall be the chief elections officer of the city; 
(k)  He/she shall keep and be the custodian of the books of account of assets, receipts, and expenditures of all departments of the city; 
(l)  Subject to the approval of the City Manager he/she shall prescribe a method of keeping accounts for all departments and offices of the city, which method shall be uniform, as near as practicable, and shall conform to the laws of the state; 
(m)  He/she shall examine and verify all accounts and claims against the city, except claims for unliquidated damages. He/she shall not sign any draft, check, or warrant, until he/she has verified the correctness of the account for which the same is issued. He/she shall not allow the payment of any account, unless the money has been appropriated therefore; nor shall he/she sign any account against the city, unless sufficient money is in the fund against which it is drawn; 
(n)  He/she may examine and verify all books of account of the Treasurer at such times as he/she deems necessary. At the end of each fiscal year, and at any other time upon the direction of the Commission, he/she shall examine and verify all books of account kept by each officer, board, or department of the city; 
(o)  Under authority of the Commission, to sign or countersign, as the case may be, all contracts, deeds, or other public documents on behalf of the City; 
(p)  To publish and post all notices, proceedings, and other matters required to be published or posted, or both, under this Charter or state law. 
Section 7.6. - Functions of the Treasurer. 
(a)  The Treasurer shall have custody of all moneys of the city, the Clerk's bond, unless he/she is covered by a blanket bond, and all evidences of value belonging to the City, or held in trust by the City; 
(b)  He/she shall keep a journal of all such moneys, bonds, and evidences of value, and all disbursements, sales, and transfers thereof; 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, he/she shall receive all moneys belonging to and receivable by the city, that may be collected by any officials or employees of the city, including license fees, taxes, assessments, and all other charges belonging to and payable to the city, and shall in all cases, give a receipt therefore; 
(d)  He/she shall keep and deposit all moneys or funds of the city in such manner and only in such places as the Commission may determine and shall report the same forthwith in detail to the Clerk; 
(e)  He/she shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him/her by state or federal law, this Charter, the ordinances of the city, or by the City Manager. 
Section 7.7. - Deputies of Clerk and Treasurer. 
    The Clerk and the Treasurer may appoint their own deputies subject to the written confirmation of the City Manager. The Clerk and the Treasurer may terminate the status of their deputies at their pleasure, upon written notice to the City Manager. Such deputies shall, in each case, possess all the powers and authorities of their superior officers, except as the same may be from time to time limited by their superiors or by the City Manager. 
Section 7.8. - Functions of the Assessor. 
(a)  The Assessor shall possess all the powers vested in and shall be charged with all the duties imposed upon, assessing officers by state law; 
(b)  He/she shall make and prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in the manner prescribed by this Charter, the ordinances of the city, or by state law; 
(c)  He/she shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him/her by state law, this Charter, the ordinances of the City, or by the City Manager. 
Section 7.9. - Functions of the city attorney. 
    The City Attorney shall be the corporate counsel of the City. He/she shall give his/her opinion in writing when requested to do so by the Commission, or the City Manager. He/she shall act as attorney for the city in all actions or hearings in the courts and before all legally constituted tribunals or commissions whenever the city is a party thereto or requires legal representation. The normal duties of the office of the City Attorney shall be the preparation or passing upon, in writing, before adoption or execution, the form of all ordinances, contracts, franchises, bonds, or other instruments in which the city is concerned, and the prosecution of all violations of the ordinances of the city. However, if the Commission shall so desire, the duties of the City Attorney as corporate counsel for the city, and the duties of the City Attorney as prosecutor for the city may be bifurcated and assigned to more than one attorney so retained by the city. The salary, as set by the Commission, shall be in contemplation of such normal duties of the office of City Attorney. The Commission may pay additional special compensation as agreed to by the Commission and the City Attorney before the service for which such special compensation is to be paid has been rendered. 
Section 7.10. - Special Legal Counsel. 
    The Commission may retain and compensate special legal counsel in relation to any special project, undertaking, or litigation. Such counsel may be employed to work independently in the special matter, or in cooperation with, or as assistant to the City Attorney. 
Section 7.11. - City Police. 
    The police force of the city shall have and exercise all the immunities, privileges, and powers of police officers under the common law and statutes of the state for the preservation of quiet, good order, and for the safety of persons and property in the city. They shall arrest upon view, and with or without process, any person found in the act of committing any offense against the laws of the State or the ordinances of the city amounting to a breach of the peace and shall forthwith take such person before the proper magistrate or court for examination or trial. The Police Chief and members of the police force of the city shall make and sign complaints to the proper officers and magistrates against any person known or believed by them to be guilty of any violation of the ordinances of the city or the penal laws of the state. 
Section 7.12. - Firefighting and Prevention. 
    Under the direction of the City Manager, the fire fighting and prevention forces for the city shall have and exercise all immunities, privileges, and powers of fire officials under common law and statutes of the state for the preservation of the public safety of persons and property. 
Section 7.13. - Purchasing Agent. 
    The City Manager, as the Purchasing Agent of the City, may require from the proper officials, at such times as contracts for supplies are to be let, memoranda of the quantity and kind of supplies to be paid for from appropriations of any department or agency of the City. Upon the certification, in writing, that the funds are available in the proper appropriations, such goods may be purchased and shall be paid for from the funds in the proper department for that purpose: Provided, however, That this required procedure shall not prejudice or prevent the said Purchasing Agent from purchasing goods for cash to the credit of the store or inventory account, to be furnished the several departments on requisition. Goods so furnished are to be paid for by the department furnished therewith by warrant made payable to the credit of the store account. The Purchasing Agent shall not furnish any agency of the city, unless there be to the credit of such department or agency an available appropriation balance, in excess of all unpaid obligations, sufficient to pay for such supplies. Before making any purchase or sale to an account in excess an amount established by the Commission, the Purchasing Agent shall give opportunity for competitive bidding thereon, for which all proposals shall be upon similar specifications, and under such rules and regulations as the Commission shall establish. 
Section 7.14. - Functions of other administrative officers. 
    The duties of all administrative officers, not otherwise provided for herein, shall be those established by ordinance or resolution and an administrative plan proposed by the City Manager and approved by the Commission. 
Section 7.15. - Employees group benefits. 
    The Commission shall have the power to make available to the administrative officers and employees of the City and its departments, boards, and agencies: Federal Social Security, if available; recognized standard plans of group life, hospital, health and accident insurance; and pension or other retirement plans. 
CHAPTER 8. - BUDGET PROCEDURE AND GENERAL FINANCE 

Section 8.1. - Fiscal Year. 
    The fiscal and budget year of the City shall begin on the first day of July. 
Section 8.2. - Budget Procedure. 
    On or before the 15th day of February in each year, each City officer and department head shall submit to the City Manager an itemized estimate of the expenditures for the next fiscal year for the department or activities under his/her control. The City Manager shall prepare a complete itemized budget proposal for the next fiscal year of the City and shall submit it to the Commission at the first regular meeting thereof in April preceding the fiscal year. 
Section 8.3. - Budget Document. 
    The budget proposal shall present a complete financial plan for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall include at least the following information: 
(a)  Detailed estimates of all proposed expenditures for each department and office of the city, showing the expenditures for corresponding items for the current and last preceding year, with reasons for increases and decreases recommended, as compared with appropriations for the current year; 
(b)  Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the city showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unissued, and the condition of sinking funds, if any; 
(c)  Detailed estimates of all anticipated income of the city from sources other than taxes and borrowing, with a comparative statement of the amounts received by the city from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding and current fiscal years; 
(d)  A statement of the estimated balance, as the case may be, for the end of the current fiscal year; 
(e)  An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current and delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bond issues which, together with income from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures; 
(f)  Such other supporting schedules as the Commission may deem necessary. 
Section 8.4. - Budget Hearing. 
    A public hearing on the budget shall be held before its final adoption, at such time and place as the Commission shall direct, and notice of such public hearing shall be published at least one week in advance thereof by the Clerk. A copy of the proposed budget shall be on file and available to the public for inspection during office hours at the office of the Clerk for a period of not less than one week prior to such public hearing. Public notice should be pursuant to provisions of MCL 141.411 et. seq. and other applicable law. 
Section 8.5. - Adoption of Budget Tax Limit. 
    No later than the second regular meeting of the Commission in the month of June, the Commission shall, by resolution, adopt the budget for the next fiscal year and shall in such resolution make an appropriation of the money needed for municipal purposes during the ensuing fiscal year of the city and provide for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxes upon real and personal property for Municipal Purposes, which levy shall not exceed one and one-half percent (15 mills) of the taxable valuation of all real and personal property in the city: Provided, that such levy may be increased from time to time for one-year periods by a majority of the electors of the city voting at the election at which the proposition to do so shall be so submitted, but such increase shall be limited to an amount which will not cause the total levy under authority of this section to exceed two percent of the assessed value of the real and personal property in the city for the year in which such increase shall be authorized, subject to the provisions of state law relative to the assessment and levy of taxes for the payment of the principal of, or the interest on, bonds or other evidence of indebtedness issued by the city. 
Section 8.6. - Funds for Public Improvements. 
    The Commission may establish and maintain a fund or funds for the purpose of appropriating, providing, setting aside, and accumulating moneys to be used for acquiring, extending, altering, or repairing public improvements which the city is authorized by law to acquire, alter, or enlarge. Moneys so appropriated, set aside, or accumulated shall not be transferred, encumbered, or otherwise disposed of, except for the purpose for which they were appropriated, set aside, or accumulated, unless approved by a vote of five members of the commission, after a public hearing thereon. In no event shall any moneys, which are so set aside or appropriated, be so transferred, encumbered, or otherwise disposed of, except for the purpose of acquiring, extending, altering, or repairing public improvements. Notice shall be given of each such public hearing by publication in one of the newspapers which are published or of general circulation in the city and by posting on three or more of the official designated public posting boards of the city. Such notice shall be so published and posted not less than seven days before the date of such public hearing. 
Section 8.7. - Transfer of Operating Appropriations. 
    After the budget has been adopted, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred for payment during the fiscal year to which such budget applies, except pursuant to an appropriation therefore. The Commission may, however, transfer any unencumbered operating appropriation balance, or any portion thereof, from one city operating fund or account to another, upon the written recommendation of the City Manager. The balance in any budget appropriation, except such as may be appropriated for the payment of any debt of the city, which has not been encumbered at the end of each fiscal year shall revert, at the option of the Commission, to either or both the fund created by section 8.6 of this chapter or to the operating fund from which the appropriations were authorized. Funds so reverted to the appropriate operating fund shall be subject to the allocations made in the budget of the next fiscal year. 
Section 8.8. - Budget Control. 
    At the beginning of each quarterly period during the fiscal year, and more often if required by the Commission, the City Manager shall submit to the Commission data showing the relation between the estimated and actual income and expenses to date. If it shall appear that the income of the city is less than anticipated, the Commission shall, except as to amounts required for debt and interest charges, revise or amend the budget as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the income of the city, by adoption of a resolution thereon. 
Section 8.9. - Depository. 
    The Commission shall designate the depository or depositories for the city funds, and shall provide for the regular deposit of all city moneys. The Commission shall provide for such security for city deposits as is authorized or permitted by the general laws of the state. 
Section 8.10. - Claims Against City. 
    All claims against the City for materials, services, or for any other reason or purpose shall be filed with the Clerk, or other such person as designated by the City Manager and approved by the City Commission, who shall verify the correctness thereof and prepare a schedule of such claims with supporting data indicating the authority for each such claim and the budget fund or account against which it is to be charged, if authorized. The Clerk, or other such person as designated by the City Manager and approved by the City Commission, shall present each such schedule of claims, to the auditing committee composed of two Commissioners appointed by the Mayor. The auditing committee shall review each such claim, and schedule of claims, received by it from the Clerk, or other such person as designated by the City Manager and approved by the City Commission, and present its recommendations, if any, to the Commission. No claim against the city shall be finally approved unless and until payment has been authorized by the Commission as herein provided. 
Section 8.11. - Notice to City of Claim for Injuries. 
    To the extent permitted by law, the city shall not be liable in damages for injury sustained by any person, either to his/her person or property, by reason of the negligence of the city, its officers or employees, or by reason of any defective highway, public work, public service improvement, or facility of the city, or by reason of any obstruction, ice, snow, or other encumbrance thereon, unless, within sixty days after such injury shall have occurred, such person, or his/her representative, shall serve or cause to be served upon the Clerk, a notice, in writing, stating that the person receiving such injury intends to hold the city liable for such damages as may have been sustained by him/her. Such notice shall set forth substantially the time and place of such injury, the manner in which it occurred, the nature of the act or defect complained of, the extent of such injury as far as the same has become known, the names and addresses of the witnesses known at the time to the claimant. No person shall bring any action against the city for any damages to person or property arising out of any of the reasons or circumstances aforesaid, unless brought within the period limited by law from the time such injury was sustained, nor unless he/she shall have first presented to the clerk his/her claim in writing and under oath, setting forth particularly the nature and extent of such injury and the amount of damages claimed by reason thereof. Such claim shall be presented to the Commission by the Clerk and the Commission shall be given an opportunity to act thereon, either by allowing or refusing to allow the claim. It may, subject to applicable statutes and court rules, be a sufficient bar and answer in any court to any action or proceeding for the collection of any demand or claim against the city, under this section, that the notice of injury and the verified proof of claim, as in this section required, were not presented and filed within the time and in the manner as herein provided. 
Section 8.12. - Withdrawal of Funds. 
    Unless otherwise provided by this Charter, all funds drawn from the treasury shall be drawn pursuant to the authority and appropriation of the Commission and by checks signed by the Treasurer and counter-signed by either the Clerk or other officer properly designated by the City Commission. Each such check shall specify the fund or funds thereof from which it is payable and shall be paid from no other fund or funds. 
Section 8.13. - Independent Audit. 
    An independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the City government at least annually or more frequently if deemed necessary by the Commission. Such audit shall be made by certified public accountants and shall be completed and filed with the Michigan Department of Treasury consistent with statutory time requirements. The results of such audit shall be made public in such manner as the Commission may determine. 
Section 8.14. - Municipal borrowing power. 
    Subject to the applicable provisions of state law and this Charter, the Commission, by proper ordinance or resolution may authorize from time to time the borrowing of money on the credit of the city and issuing of bonds therefore, for any purpose or purposes within the scope of its powers. The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not at any time exceed the limitation imposed by applicable state statute. The Commission may borrow money and issue the bonds of the city therefore in anticipation of the payment of special assessments, which bonds shall be either solely an obligation of the special assessment district, or both an obligation of the special assessment district and a general obligation of the city. All collection on special assessment rolls shall be set apart in a special fund and shall be used for the purpose for which they were levied and for the payment of the principal and interest on any bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of such special assessment. If there be any deficiency in the special assessment fund to meet the payment of any such principal and interest, moneys shall be advanced from the general funds of the city to meet such deficiency and shall be replaced in such general fund when the special assessment fund shall be sufficient therefore. 
Section 8.15. - Unissued Bonds. 
    No unissued bonds of the city shall be issued or sold to secure funds for any purpose other than that for which they were specifically authorized. 
CHAPTER 9. - GENERAL TAXATION 

Section 9.1. - Power to Tax. 
    In order to carry out the purposes, powers, and duties of the city government, established by this Charter, the city may assess, levy, and collect ad valorem taxes, rents, and tolls. 
Section 9.2. - Subjects of Taxation. 
    The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county, and school purposes under the general law. Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, City taxes shall be levied, collected, and returned in the manner provided by state law. 
Section 9.3. - Exemptions. 
    No exemptions from ad valorem taxations shall be allowed, except such as are expressly required or permitted to be made by State law. In the case of exemptions made to persons who, in the opinion of the Assessor and Board of Review, by reason of poverty, are unable to contribute towards the public charges, the Assessor or Board of Review may require, as a condition to the grant of exemption, a trust deed or assignment to the city of all or any part of the real or personal property or insurance of the beneficiary of such exemption. Each such trust deed or assignment shall be prepared by the City Attorney. Such trust deed or assignment shall not deprive the grantor thereof of his/her right to enjoy the use, occupancy, and profits of the property so deeded or assigned, but shall give to the city, in the event that the fee to such property is transferred to another, in any manner whatsoever, such an interest therein as will provide for and secure to the city the payment of an amount equal to all taxes which were or would have been assessed and levied against such property by the city, but for such exemption or exemptions and which remain unpaid at the time the city exercises its rights under the terms of such deed or assignment. Such deed shall be in proper form for and shall be recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds of the County of Wayne. 
Section 9.4. - Assessment. 
    The Assessor shall place a value, in accordance with state law, upon all property, both real and personal, in the City, which is subject to taxation in accordance with established assessment rules, techniques, and procedures. 
Section 9.5. - Time for Making Assessment Rolls. 
    Prior to the first meeting of the Board of Review in each year, the Assessor shall make and complete an assessment roll in the manner and form provided in the general tax law of the state. In each case where the assessed valuation of any property is increased or decreased, as compared with the valuation of such property upon the assessment roll for the previous year, or added to the roll, the Assessor shall give notice to the owners thereof, according to the records of his/her office, by first class mail placed in the Plymouth, Michigan, post office not later than noon of the Saturday preceding the meeting of the Board of Review: Provided, that the failure to so mail any such notice or notices or the failure of any person to receive any such notice shall not invalidate any such assessment roll. No such notice shall be mailed as herein required where a uniform increase or decrease in valuations is made under any plan of compensating for any general city-wide change in economic conditions. 
Section 9.6. - Board of Review. 
    The Board of Review shall be comprised of three persons who are residents of the city. Such three members serve for three year terms, with one such member of the board appointed to serve a full term of three years each year. Since the members of the Board of Review are appointed officers of the City, and not elected officers, the compensation of the Board of Review shall be set by the City of Plymouth City Commission consistent with applicable state law. 
Section 9.7. - Meeting of Board of Review. 
    The Board of Review shall meet on the first Wednesday following the first Monday in March in each year at such place as shall be designated by the Commission, and shall continue in session for two consecutive days, and as much longer as may be necessary, for the purpose of considering and correcting the roll. The Board shall remain in session during such hours as the Commission may designate, but not less than six hours on each of said two days: Provided, That the Board of Review shall on one of the days that it shall remain in session, convene at 3:00 o'clock, in the afternoon, and remain in session continuously, until 9:00 o'clock, p.m. The Board of Review shall hold a meeting on the third Monday of March, and, at that meeting, shall complete the review of the assessment roll submitted to it and shall endorse and approve the same as provided and required by law. 
Section 9.8. - Notice of meetings. 
    The Clerk shall give notice to the public of the time and place of each meeting of the Board of Review by publication in a newspaper which is published or has a general circulation in the City and by posting such notice on three or more of the official designated public posting boards of the City, at least once, not less than two weeks immediately preceding such meeting. 
Section 9.9. - Organization and functions of the board of review. 
    On the first day of its first meeting in each year, the Board of Review shall elect one of its members chair. The Assessor shall be secretary of the board and shall attend its meetings. It shall be the duty of the Assessor to keep a permanent record of all the proceedings of the board and to enter therein all resolutions and decisions of the board. The Assessor shall have the privilege of participating in all proceedings and discussions of the board, but shall not have the right to vote. The members of said board shall take the constitutional oath of office which shall be filed with the Clerk. A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum. For the purpose of reviewing and correcting assessments, the Board of Review shall have the same power and perform like duties in all respects as are by the general tax law conferred upon and required of boards of review in townships, in reviewing assessments for township, state, and county taxes. It shall hear the complaints of all persons considering themselves aggrieved by assessments, and, if it shall appear that any person or property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the roll, the board shall correct the roll in such manner as in its judgment will make the valuation thereof relatively just and equal. To that end, said Board may examine, on oath, the person making such application, or any other person, concerning the matter. Any member of said board may administer such oath. In all cases, the assessment roll shall be reviewed according to the facts existing on the assessment day of the year for which such roll is made and no change of the status of any property after said day shall be considered by the board in making its decisions. Except as otherwise provided by state law, no person other than the Board of Review shall make or authorize any change upon or additions or corrections to the assessment roll. 
Section 9.10. - Endorsement of Roll-Validity. 
    After the board shall have completed its review of the assessment roll, a majority of its members shall immediately endorse thereon and sign a statement to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the city for the year in which it has been prepared. The omission of such endorsement shall not affect the validity of such roll. Upon the completion of said roll and from and after midnight ending the last day of the meeting of the Board of Review, the same shall be the assessment roll of the city for county, school, and city taxes and for any other taxes on real and personal property that may be authorized by law and shall be conclusively presumed by all courts and tribunals to be valid and shall not be set aside except for causes set forth in the general laws of the state. 
Section 9.11. - City Tax Roll. 
    After the last day for the meeting of the Board of Review, the Assessor shall prepare a copy of the assessment roll to be known as the "City Tax Roll", and, upon receiving the certification of the amount to be raised, as provided in the succeeding section, and subject to the process of county and state equalization, the Assessor shall proceed to spread the amounts of the general city tax according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth in said assessment roll. For convenience, the city tax roll may be divided into volumes. Assessments and other lawful charges authorized by the Commission to be spread against or charged to property or persons upon such roll shall be so spread and charged as directed by the Commission. 
Section 9.12. - Clerk to Certify Levy. 
    Within three days after the Commission has adopted the budget for the ensuing year, the Clerk shall certify to the Assessor the total amount which the Commission determines shall be raised by general tax, together with such other assessments and other lawful charges as the Commission shall authorize to be spread against or charged to property and persons appearing upon such roll. 
Section 9.13. - Tax Roll Certified for Collection. 
    After extending the taxes aforesaid and not later than the third Monday of June in each year, the Assessor shall certify said tax roll, and annex the Assessor's warrant thereto, directing and requiring the Treasurer to collect from the several persons named in said roll the several sums mentioned therein opposite their respective names as a tax or assessment, and granting to the Treasurer, for the purpose of collecting the taxes, assessments, and charges on such roll, all the power and immunities possessed by treasurers for the collection of taxes under the general laws of the state. 
Section 9.14. - Tax Lien on Property. 
    The city taxes thus assessed against personal property shall become at once a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed, and the amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall on the third Monday of June become a lien upon such real property, and the lien for such amounts and for all interest and other charges thereon shall continue until payment thereof. All personal taxes shall also be a first lien, prior, superior, and paramount, upon all personal property of the persons so assessed from and after the third Monday of June in each year and shall so remain until paid, which said tax liens upon said personal property whatsoever, whether created by chattel mortgage, execution, levy, judgment, or otherwise, and whether arising before or after the assessment of said personal property taxes, and no transfer of personal property assessed for taxes thereon shall operate to divest or destroy such lien except where such personal property is actually sold in the regular course of retail trade. 
Section 9.15. - Personal property-Change of Situs. 
    If the Treasurer finds or reasonably believes that any person, who is or may be liable for taxes upon personal property, the taxable situs of which was in the city on tax day, designs to depart from the city; or to remove therefrom personal property, which is or may be liable for taxation; or to conceal property therein; or to do any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partly ineffectual, the proceedings to collect such tax, unless proceedings therefore be brought without delay, the Treasurer shall cause notice of such finding to be given such person, together with a demand for the immediate payment of such tax. Thereupon, such tax shall become immediately due and payable and the Treasurer shall have and exercise all the powers, privileges, and prerogatives granted by law to township and city treasurers for the collection thereof. If the exact amount of any such tax has not, at the time of such finding, been determined because the same has not, at the time, been spread upon any tax roll or tax rolls, the Treasurer shall estimate the amount of the tax upon such personal property and such estimate shall be deemed to be the amount of tax upon such property which, together with other taxes which have accrued thereon, shall become payable as hereinabove provided. The tax so estimated by the Treasurer shall, upon the giving of the notice herein provided for, become a lien upon the property liable for such tax. Such lien shall be of the same type and legal effect as the lien upon personal property provided in section 9.14 of this chapter. If such estimate of the Treasurer shall be in excess of the amount of tax spread against such property upon the tax roll or tax rolls aforesaid, he/she shall refund such excess upon demand of the person from whom collected, or his/her legal representative. If such person furnishes evidence satisfactory to the Treasurer, by bond or otherwise, that he/she will duly pay the tax or taxes to which the Treasurer's finding relates, then such tax or taxes shall not be payable prior to the time otherwise taxed for the payment thereof. 
Section 9.16. - Notification of Taxes Due. 
    The Treasurer shall not be required to make personal demand for the payment of taxes, but notice shall be given to the taxpayers of the City, by forwarding a statement of taxes due by first class mail, addressed to the several owners of the property upon which taxes are assessed according to the names of such owners and their addresses as indicated on the tax roll, which notice shall be deemed sufficient for the payment of all taxes on said roll. Failure on the part of the Treasurer to give said notice shall not invalidate the taxes on said tax roll nor release any person or property assessed from the penalty provided in this chapter in case of non-payment of the same. 
Section 9.17. - Tax Payment Schedule. 
    City taxes shall be due on the first day of July of the year when levied. All taxes paid on or before the tenth day of August of such year shall be collected by the Treasurer without the addition of any fee for collection. There shall be added to all taxes remaining unpaid after the said tenth day of August, a collection fee as may be allowed by State law. All taxes not paid on or before the tenth day of September of such year shall be subject to a penalty of one percent for each and every month or fraction of a month which the same remain unpaid until the tax roll is returned to the county treasurer, as provided by state law. Such penalties and collection fees shall be collectable in the same manner as the taxes, assessments, and charges to which they are added. All such collection fees, and all penalties shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
Section 9.18. - State, county, and school taxes. 
    For the purpose of assessing and collecting taxes in the city for state, county, and school purposes, the city shall be considered the same as a township, and all provisions of state law relative to the collection of such taxes and fees to be paid therefore, the accounting therefore to the appropriate taxing units, and the returning of delinquent taxes to the county treasurer shall apply to the performance thereof by the Treasurer, who shall perform the same duties and have the same powers as township treasurers under state law. In the event that school taxes or any part thereof are collected at the same time as city taxes, they shall be collected subject to the same privileges and conditions as city taxes under the provisions of this Charter. 
Section 9.19. - Lien for Taxes, Assessments, and Charges. 
    All taxes, assessments, and charges levied or spread in any such tax rolls shall be and remain a lien upon the property until paid. 
Section 9.20. - Apportioning of Tax on Portion of Taxed Item. 
    Any person owning an undivided share or other part of any parcel of real property, assessed in one description, may pay the taxes assessed against such description or may pay the share or part owed by him/her by paying an amount having the same relation to the whole tax as the value of the part on which payment is made bears to the value of the whole description, and the receipt given and the record of the receiving officer shall show that such payment was made and the claimed interest upon which it was made. 
Section 9.21. - Tax Roll to County Treasurer. 
    All taxes, charges, special assessments, collection fees, interest, and penalties on the city tax roll which remain unpaid on the first day of March following the date when said roll was received by the Treasurer shall, on that date become delinquent and shall be returned to the county treasurer at the time and in the same manner and with like effect as returns by township treasurers of township, school, and county taxes. Such returns shall be made upon a delinquent tax roll to be prepared by the Treasurer and shall include all the additional charges and interest which shall, in such return, be added to the amount assessed in said tax roll against each description. The taxes, assessments, charges, and interest, thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to the county treasurer are collected under the provisions of the general laws of the state and shall be and remain a lien upon the lands against which they are assessed, until paid. 
Section 9.22. - Protection of a City Lien. 
    The city shall have power insofar as the exercise thereof shall not conflict with or contravene the provisions of any general law of the state, to acquire by purchase any premises within the city at any tax or other public sale, or by direct purchase from the State of Michigan, or the fee owner, when the purchase of such property is necessary to protect the lien of the city for taxes or special assessments, or both, on said premises and may hold, lease, or sell the same. Any such procedure exercised by the city in the protection of its tax lien shall be deemed to be for a public purpose. 
CHAPTER 10. - ELECTIONS 

Section 10.1. - Qualifications of Electors. 
    Each person who has the constitutional and statutory qualifications of an elector in the State of Michigan, or who will have such qualifications at the next ensuing regular or special city election, shall be entitled to register as an elector of the city of Plymouth in the election precinct in which he/she resides. 
Section 10.2. - Election Procedure. 
    The general election laws of the state shall apply to and control, as near as may be, all procedures relating to registration and City elections, except as such general laws relate to political parties or partisan procedures, or require more than one publication of notice and except as otherwise provided by this Charter. 
Section 10.3. - Regular City Elections. 
    A nonpartisan regular city election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November in every odd numbered year. 
Section 10.4. - Special Elections. 
    Special city elections shall be held when called by resolution of the Commission, adopted at least seventy days in advance of such election, or when required by this Charter or the general laws of the state. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. No more than two special city elections shall be held in any one calendar year unless required by State law. 
Section 10.5. - Primary Elections. 
    Nonpartisan city primary elections shall be held, if necessary, on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in August of the odd numbered year. 
Section 10.6. - Election Commission. 
    An Election Commission, consisting of the Clerk, the Mayor and the City Attorney, is hereby created. The Clerk shall be chair. The election commission shall have charge of all activities and duties required of it by state law and this Charter relating to the conduct of elections in the City. The compensation of all election personnel shall be determined in advance by the City Commission. In any case where election procedure is in doubt, the election commission shall prescribe the procedure to follow. Should only one (1) of said officers be in attendance on the day appointed for a meeting of the board, the officer in attendance shall appoint a qualified and registered elector of the City Of Plymouth to act in the absentees' stead, during the period of non-attendance. 
Section 10.7. - Notice of City Election. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, notice of the time and place of holding any city election and of the officers to be elected and the questions to be voted upon, shall be given by the Clerk in the same manner and at the same times as provided by law for the giving of notices of election by township clerks in the case of state elections, except that no second publication of notice of any election shall be required. 
Section 10.8. - Voting Hours. 
    The polls of all city elections shall be opened and closed at the time prescribed by law for the opening and closing of polls. 
Section 10.9. - Nomination Petitions. 
    Persons desiring to qualify as candidates for any office under this Charter shall file an official petition therefore with the Clerk signed by not less than forty (40) or more than one-hundred (100) registered electors of the city. Such petitions shall be filed with the Clerk, along with such affidavit of identity that may be required by State law, not later than 4:00 p.m. on the fifteenth Tuesday prior to the odd year primary election. 
( Res. No. 2016-72, 8-1-16 ) 
Note- Res. No. 2016-72, adopted Aug. 1, 2016 , amended section 10.9 of the Charter by requiring that nominating petitions be filed by the fifteenth Tuesday prior to the primary election in order to conform to state law. 
Section 10.10. - Approval of Petitions. 
    The Clerk shall accept for filing only nomination petitions on official blanks containing the required number of signatures for candidates having those qualifications required for elective City officers by this Charter. The Clerk shall, within five days after the final filing date, determine the sufficiency of the signatures of each petition filed, and if he/she finds that any petition does not contain the required number of signatures of registered electors, he/she shall immediately notify the candidate in writing of the insufficiency of his/her petition. Each petition which is found by the Clerk to contain the required number of signatures of registered electors for candidates shall be marked "In Order" with the date thereof, and he/she shall immediately so notify the candidate whose name appears thereon, in writing. Within 3 days after the last day on which the candidate for a city office may withdraw by written notice, the City Clerk shall deliver to the county clerk of the county in which the city is located a list setting forth the name and address of each candidate for a city office. Written notice shall be served on the City Clerk not later than 4:00 p.m. of the third day after the last day for filing the petition unless the third day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which case the withdrawal may be served on the City Clerk up to 4:00 p.m. on the next secular day. 
Section 10.11. - Form of Ballots. 
    The names of all persons nominated for election to each city office shall be placed upon the city ballot for the election of qualified persons to fill such offices. The form of the ballot used in any city election shall conform, as nearly as may be, to that prescribed by or in accordance with state law for nonpartisan elections. The names of qualified nominees for each office shall be rotated on the ballots. In all other respects, the printing and numbering of ballots for city primaries and elections shall conform to the requirements of the general election laws of the state. The Clerk shall prepare ballots for printing and copies of each ballot shall be on file in the office of the Clerk for at least twenty days before the date of the election at which it is to be used. 
Section 10.12. - Canvass of Votes. 
    A 4-member Board of Canvassers is hereby established according to state law and shall have all of the powers granted to and duties required by law performed by the city board of canvassers. These members are responsible to canvass the votes cast at all city elections. They shall meet on the day following the election at a specified time designated by the Election Commission and determine the vote upon all questions and propositions, and declare whether the same have been adopted or rejected and what persons have been nominated for election or elected. The board shall elect one of their members chair and one vice chair. Any 3 members shall constitute a quorum but no action shall become effective unless 1 member from each political party represented concurs therein. The City Clerk shall be the clerk of the Board of City Canvassers. Any temporary appointee to the board of canvassers must possess all the qualifications required for regular membership on that board. The clerk of the Board of Canvassers shall present the canvassers election results to the City Commission at their regular meeting following the scheduled election. 
Section 10.13. - Tie Vote. 
    In case it shall appear that two or more persons have an equal number of votes for the same office for which but one person is to be nominated or elected and the same shall be the highest number of votes cast therefor, the board of canvassers, after notice to each of such candidates of a time and place therefor, shall determine the successful candidate by lot and shall declare and certify the same accordingly. Such determination, however, shall not preclude the right of a defeated candidate to a recount of the votes cast as provided for by state law. 
Section 10.14. - Recount. 
    A recount of the votes cast at any city election for any office, or upon any proposition may be had in accordance with the election laws of the state. Unless otherwise provided by State law, a petition for the recount of votes cast at any city primary or election shall be filed with the Clerk within six days after the Board of Canvassers has canvassed the votes cast at such primary or election. Any counter petition shall be filed within forty-eight hours thereafter. 
CHAPTER 11. - UTILITY FRANCHISE AND MUNICIPAL OWNERSHIP 

Section 11.1. - Public Utility Franchises. 
    All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this Charter, whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the city: 
(a)  To repeal the same for misuse or nonuse, or for failure to comply with the provisions thereof; 
(b)  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency; 
(c)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products, and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(d)  To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(e)  To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Commission to be conducive to the health, safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public; 
(f)  To require the public utility to which any franchise is granted to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, and public places of the city, by the city, and other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefore: Provided, That in the absence of agreement, upon application by the public utility, the Commission shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefore; 
(g)  To pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of the streets, alleys, bridges, and public places of the city, as shall arise from its use thereof and to protect and save the city harmless from all damages arising from said use. 
Section 11.2. - Franchise and Contracts. 
    Every ordinance or resolution granting any franchise or right to occupy or use the streets, highways, bridges, or public places in the city for any purpose shall be complete in the form in which it is finally passed, and remain on file with the Clerk for public inspection for at least thirty days before the final passage or adoption thereof, or approval for referral to the electorate. No exclusive or irrevocable franchise shall be granted by the city, unless such proposition shall have first received the affirmative vote of at least three-fifths of the electors of the city voting thereon at a regular or special election. No such franchise ordinance, or resolution, shall be approved by the Commission for referral to the electorate until a public hearing has been held thereon, nor until the grantee named therein has filed with the Clerk his/her unconditional acceptance of all terms of such franchise. No special election for such purpose shall be ordered by the Commission, unless the expense of holding such election, as determined by the Commission, shall have first been paid to the Treasurer by the grantee. A franchise ordinance, or ordinance granting or authorizing the granting of a license to use or occupy the streets of the City for public utility purposes which is subject to revocation at the will of the city, may be enacted by the Commission without referral to the voters, but shall not be enacted nor become operative unless it shall have been complete in the form in which it is finally enacted and remain on file with the Clerk for public inspection for at least four weeks before the final enactment thereof. 
Section 11.3. - General Powers Respecting Municipal Utilities and Services. 
    The city shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all the powers granted to cities by the constitution and general laws of the State of Michigan to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair, and maintain, either within or without its corporate limits, airports, landing fields, and aeronautical facilities, hospitals, and public utilities, including, but not by the way of limitation, public utilities for treating and supplying water, and for supplying light, heat, power, gas, sewage treatment, and garbage disposal facilities, or any of them, to the city and its inhabitants; and also to sell and deliver water, light, heat, power, gas, and other public utility services, without its corporate limits to an amount not exceeding the limitations set by the state constitution. The power to supply, as herein possessed and reserved, shall include the power to extract and process water, electricity, or gas from natural resources, to manufacture the same, or to purchase the same from others. Provided, however, that the City shall not, directly or indirectly, acquire, establish, operate, construct, maintain or own an airport, either within or without its boundaries, or enter into or perform any intergovernmental agreement to accomplish any of the foregoing, unless approved by the majority of the qualified electors of the city voting thereon. 
Section 11.4. - Management of Utilities of the City. 
    The Commission shall provide by ordinance for the management, maintenance, improvement, and operation of the utilities of the city, which management and operation shall be under the general supervision and responsibility of the City Manager. 
Section 11.5. - Utility Charges. 
    The Commission shall fix the rates to be charged for all public utility services under its control. When any person, firm, or corporation, shall fail or refuse to pay to the city any sums due on utility bills, such service upon which such delinquency exists may be shut off or discontinued by the proper authority or department of the city and suit may be instituted by the city for the collection of the same in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
Section 11.6. - Lien for Delinquent Utility Charges. 
    Except as otherwise provided, or limited by state law, the city shall have as security for the collection of all charges, a lien upon the premises to which such utility services were supplied. Such lien shall become effective immediately upon the distribution or supplying of such utility service or services to such premises. All unpaid charges for utility services furnished to any such premises, which, on the 31st day of March of each year, have remained unpaid for a period of three months, or more, shall be reported by the Clerk to the Commission at the first meeting thereof in the month of April. The Commission thereupon shall order the publication in a newspaper published in the city, of notice to all owners of property within the city that all unpaid utility charges which have remained unpaid for a period of three months or more prior to the 31st day of March, and which have not been paid by the 30th day of April, shall be assessed upon the city's tax roll against the premises to which the utility services, for which the unpaid charges accrued, were supplied or furnished; and that such charges shall be collected in the same manner as the city taxes on said tax roll. All such utility charges, which remain unpaid on the 30th day of April, shall be transferred to the city's tax roll and assessed against the premises to which the utility service, for which the unpaid charges accrued, was supplied or furnished, and shall be collected with, and in the same manner as, city taxes. If the same have remained delinquent and unpaid after the expiration of the time limited in the Treasurer's warrant for the collection of taxes levied in said tax roll, such charges shall be returned to the County Treasurer to be collected in the same manner as the lien created by city taxes on the delinquent tax roll of the city. In the event that any provision of this section shall prove to be incomplete or inadequate for the carrying out of the purposes thereof, the Commission shall provide by ordinance such additional procedures as may be required for the collection of public utility charges, and, for such purpose, shall have all the powers granted to cities by applicable state law. 
Section 11.7. - Disposal of Plants. 
    Except for purposes permitted by law, the city shall not sell, exchange, lease, or in any other way alien or dispose of the property easements, income, equipment, privileges, or assets belonging to and appertaining to any utility which it may own or acquire, unless and except such proposition shall first have been submitted to the qualified electors of the city at a special city election called for that purpose in the manner provided in this Charter, and approved by a three-fifths majority vote of the electors of the city voting thereon. All contracts, negotiations, licenses, grants, leases, or other forms of transfer in violation of this provision shall be void and of no effect. The provisions of this section shall not, however, apply to the sale or exchange of any article or equipment of any city-owned utility which is worn out or useless, or which is being or has been replaced by new and improved machinery or equipment. 
CHAPTER 12. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 12.1. - City May Perform Public Work. 
    The Commission shall have power to do any public work or make any public improvement by the employment of the necessary labor and the purchase of the necessary supplies and material with separate accounting as to each improvement so made or to do such work by contract. The Commission shall also have power to do any public work or make any public improvement under any legally constituted plan under which labor is furnished by any other governmental unit, department, or agency of the United States, or the State of Michigan, or which is wholly or in part financed by them or either of them. 
Section 12.2. - Petitions for Local Or Public Improvements. 
    Petitions for the making of public improvements within the city shall be received by the Clerk and may be considered by the Commission at any time. All such petitions received by the Clerk during any calendar year in which the improvements petitioned for have not already been made shall be considered or reconsidered by the Commission during the month of January following the close of such calendar year. 
Section 12.3. - General Powers Relative to Special Assessments. 
    The Commission shall have the power to determine the necessity of any local or public improvement, and to determine that the whole or any part of the expense shall be defrayed by special assessment upon the property especially benefited. The Commission shall not be limited in the making of local or public improvements to those for which petitions have been filed. Unless the cost of a public improvement is to be borne, in whole or in part, by special assessments upon the property in the city to be benefited thereby, the balance of this chapter shall not apply thereto or be required therefore. 
Section 12.4. - Financing public improvements. 
    No contract or expenditure, except for the necessary procedures and resolutions of the Commission and for the expense of preparing necessary profiles, plans, specifications, and estimates of cost, shall be made for any public improvement, the cost of which is to be paid by special assessment upon the property benefited thereby, until the Commission has passed a resolution determining to proceed with such public improvement as hereinafter provided and required. 
Section 12.5. - Cost of Acquiring Property Added. 
    Whenever any property is acquired by condemnation or otherwise, for the purpose of any public improvement, the cost thereof, and of the proceedings required to acquire such property, may be added to the cost of such improvement. 
Section 12.6. - Survey and Report. 
    Before the Commission shall consider the making of any public improvement, the same shall be referred to the City Manager directing him/her to submit a report which shall include necessary plans, profiles, specifications, estimates of cost, and estimate of the life of the improvement, a description of the recommended assessment district or districts, and such other pertinent information as will permit the Commission to decide the cost, extent, and necessity of the improvement proposed, and what part or portion thereof should be paid by special assessment upon the property benefited and what part, if any, should be paid by the city at large. 
Section 12.7. - Determination on the Project. 
    After the City Manager has presented the report hereinbefore required and after the Commission has reviewed said report, a resolution may be passed determining the necessity of the improvement; setting forth the nature thereof; prescribing what part or proportion of the cost of such improvement shall be paid by special assessment upon the property benefited, and what part, if any, shall be paid by the city at large; designating the limits of the recommended special assessment district to be affected; the manner in which the benefits to be derived by property located in such district, through the making of such improvement, shall be measured and assessed, and placing such resolution and the report of the City Manager on file in the office of the Clerk for public examination. 
Section 12.8. - Public Hearing on Necessity of Improvement. 
    The Commission shall not determine to proceed with the making of any public improvement, until the report thereon has been submitted to the Commission by the City Manager, nor until after a public hearing thereon has been held by the Commission. No such public hearing shall be held by the Commission until after the report of the City Manager and the resolution of the Commission determining the necessity of the improvement shall have been on file in the office of the Clerk for at least seven days. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing and of the purpose thereof shall be published by the Clerk in a newspaper which is printed or of general circulation in the city and by posting upon three or more of the official designated public posting boards of the city, not less than ten days prior to the date thereof. 
Section 12.9. - Objections to Improvements. 
    If at, or prior to, the hearing of the Commission on the making of any public improvement, the owners of fifty percent or more of the privately owned real property or more than fifty percent of the number of owners of privately owned real property, which is to be assessed for any improvement shall object in writing to the proposed improvement, the improvement shall not be made by proceedings authorized by this chapter without the affirmative vote of not less than five members of the Commission. 
Section 12.10. - Determination by the Commission. 
    At the public hearing on the proposed improvement, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard upon the question of the necessity of the improvement, after which the Commission may determine to proceed with the improvement without change, modify the scope of the public improvement or the assessment therefore, or both, as they shall deem to be in the best interest of the city as a whole, or abandon the improvement. If the determination of the Commission shall be to proceed with the improvement in any manner, a resolution shall be passed approving the necessary profiles, plans, specifications, and estimates of cost, and directing the Assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the Commission's determination and report the same to them for confirmation, which special assessment roll may be ordered to be made, either forthwith, or after the completion of the public improvement so ordered. 
Section 12.11. - Special Assessment Roll. 
    The Assessor shall make a special assessment roll of all lots and parcels of land within the designated district benefited or to be benefited by the proposed improvement and assess to each lot or parcel of land the amount which each such lot or parcel of land, together with the improvements thereon is deemed to be, or capable of being, benefited by the improvement to which such special assessment roll relates, together with the amount to be collected at the time of the collection of each installment of deferred special assessment, if the decision of the Commission shall be to collect the cost of such improvement in installments. The amount spread in each case shall be based upon the estimates of cost of the City Manager as approved by the Commission: Provided, That in the event that the special assessment roll is ordered to be made after the completion of the improvement ordered to be made by the Commission, the amount so spread shall be based upon the actual cost of the improvement. 
Section 12.12. - Assessor to File Assessment Roll with Clerk. 
    When the Assessor shall have completed such assessment roll, he/she shall file the same with the Clerk for presentation to the Commission for review and confirmation. 
Section 12.13. - Meeting to Review Special Assessment Roll. 
    Upon receipt of such special assessment roll, the Commission, by resolution, shall accept such assessment roll and order it to be filed in the Office of the Clerk for public examination; shall fix the time and place the Commission will meet to review such special assessment roll, and direct the Clerk to publish a notice of a public hearing thereon. Such notice shall be made by publication at least ten days prior to the holding of the hearing, in a newspaper which is published or of general circulation in the city and by posting upon three or more of the official designated public posting boards of the city. 
Section 12.14. - Changes and Corrections in Assessment Roll. 
    The Commission shall meet at the time and place designated in the notice thereof for the review of such special assessment roll. At such meeting, or adjourned meeting thereof, all interested persons or parties shall present their objections or other comments, if any, to the special assessment roll for such improvement. After such hearing, the Commission may adopt the special assessment roll as submitted by the Assessor; may correct said roll as to any special assessment, or description of any lot or parcel of land, or other errors appearing therein, may order a new assessment roll to be made, in which event the same proceedings shall be followed in making a new roll as in the making of the original roll; or may abandon the making of such improvement. If, after hearing all objections and making a record of such changes in the roll, as the Commission deems justified, the Commission is satisfied with said special assessment roll, as submitted by the Assessor, or as corrected by it, it shall thereupon pass a resolution confirming such roll. Such resolution shall, further, command the Treasurer to collect the various sums appearing thereon, or to spread the same upon the tax rolls of the city for the full amounts, or, if the Commission provides for the collection of the costs of such improvement in installments, upon successive tax rolls of the city, in the annual installments ordered. Such roll shall have the date of confirmation endorsed thereon and shall, from that date, be final and conclusive for the purpose of the improvement to which it applies, subject only to adjustment to conform to the actual cost of the improvement, as provided in section 12.20 of this Charter. 
Section 12.15. - Poverty Provisions. 
    In any instance where, in the opinion of the Commission, because of poverty, the owner of any property which is assessed to defray any part of the cost of making any public improvement benefiting such property, is unable to contribute toward the cost thereof, the Commission may provide that the special assessment against such property for such improvement shall be spread upon the assessment roll therefore, but shall not be respread upon any tax roll or delinquent special assessment or tax roll. As a consideration for such provision by the Commission, and to assure the city of the ultimate payment of such assessment, the beneficiary of such provision shall execute and deliver to the city a trust deed or assignment of the property benefited by such public improvement and subject to such special assessment. Each such trust deed or assignment shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney. Such trust deed or assignment shall not deprive the grantor thereof of his/her right to enjoy the use, occupancy, and profits of the property so deeded or assigned. It shall, however, give to the City, in the event that the fee to such property is transferred to another, in any manner whatsoever, such an interest therein as will provide for and secure to the city the payment of an amount equal to all special assessments which are assessed and levied against such property by the city for public improvements and remain unpaid at the time the city exercises its rights under the terms of such deed or assignment, together with all interest thereon which shall have accumulated since such special assessment or assessments were spread upon such roll or rolls, from the date of such roll or rolls to the date that the same are paid. Such deed shall be in proper form for recording and shall be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of the County of Wayne. 
Section 12.16. - Deviation from Plans and Specifications. 
    No deviation from original plans or specifications, as adopted, shall be permitted by an officer or employee of the city without authority of the Commission by resolution. A copy of the resolution authorizing such change or deviation shall be certified by the Clerk and attached to the original plans and specifications on file in his/her office. 
Section 12.17. - Collection of Special Assessments. 
    Except as the Commission shall order any special assessment or installments thereof to be spread upon and collected with any tax roll of the City, all special assessments, except such installments thereof as the Commission shall make payable at a future time, as provided in this chapter, shall be due and payable upon confirmation of the special assessment roll. Within ten days after such special assessment roll has been certified by the Commission, the Clerk shall deliver such roll to the Treasurer for the collection of the several sums assessed thereon. 
Section 12.18. - Partial payments-When Due. 
    The Commission may provide for the payment of special assessments in annual installments. Such annual installments shall not exceed ten in number, the first installment being due upon confirmation of the roll and deferred installments being due annually thereafter or, in the discretion of the Commission, may be spread upon and made part of each annual city tax roll, until all annual installments have been spread. Interest shall be charged on all installments, from and after a date fixed by the Commission, at a rate not to exceed nine per cent per annum. The whole or any number of deferred installments, with interest accrued thereon, to the date of payment, may be paid in advance of the due dates as established therefore. 
Section 12.19. - Delinquent Special Assessments. 
    Special assessments, from the date of the confirmation of the roll for the public improvement to which they apply, and all interest and collection fees and penalty charges thereon shall be and remain a lien upon the property assessed of the same character and effect as the lien created by general law for state and county taxes, and by this Charter for city taxes, until paid. Special assessments and the interest accrued thereon and any installments thereof which are collected on the city tax rolls shall be subject to the same collection fees and penalty charges as are provided under this Charter for city taxes collected on the same rolls. The lands upon which any delinquent special assessments, collection fees, and penalty charges and interest charges, are a lien, shall be subject to sale, the same as are the lands upon which delinquent city taxes are a lien and subject to sale. 
Section 12.20. - Additional assessments, refunds. 
    The City Manager shall, within sixty days after the completion of each public improvement compile the actual cost thereof and certify the same to the Treasurer, who shall adjust the special assessment roll to correspond therewith. When any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to meet the costs of the improvement for which it was made, the Commission shall make an additional pro rata assessment, but the total amount assessed shall not exceed the value of benefits received by any lot or parcel of land. Should the assessment prove larger than necessary by five percent or less, the Commission may place the excess in City treasury. If more than five percent, the excess shall be refunded pro rata according to assessments. In either case, the Commission may provide by resolution that the amount of any such excess may be allowed as a credit on the last installment where such installment still remains unpaid at the time the final cost of the improvement is determined. 
Section 12.21. - Sidewalks. 
    The Commission shall have the power to require the owners of lots and premises to build, rebuild, and repair, sidewalks in the public streets adjacent to and abutting upon such lots and premises, and to keep them in repair at all times, and to construct and lay the same upon such lines and grades, and of such width, materials, and manner of construction, and within such time as the Commission shall, by ordinance or resolution, prescribe, the expense thereof to be paid by such owner or occupant. The Commission may also provide that, if any owner or occupant shall fail or refuse to build, rebuild, or repair any such sidewalk as provided by the Commission in such ordinance or resolution, the Commission may proceed to order the building, rebuilding, or repairing of such sidewalk and charge the same to the owner or occupant as a special assessment collectable as provided in this Charter for the collection of special assessments against single lots or premises. The Commission, may, by the affirmative vote of not less than five of its members, pay such part of the expense of building or rebuilding any sidewalk as they may deem proper from the general funds of the city. 
Section 12.22. - Assessments on Single Lots. 
    When any expense shall be incurred by the city for sidewalks or upon or in respect to any separate or single lot, parcel of land or lands, or premises, which by the provisions of this Charter the Commission is authorized to charge and collect as a special assessment against the same, which is not of the class of special assessments required to be made pro rata upon several lots or parcels of land in a special assessment district, an account of the labor or services for which such expense was incurred, verified by the City Manager, with a description of the lot, and the name of the owner or person, if known, chargeable therewith, shall be reported to the Commission in such manner as it prescribes. The Commission shall determine what amount or part of the cost of any such expense shall be charged, and the person, if known, against whom, and the premises upon which, the same shall be levied as a special assessment. As often as the Commission shall deem it expedient, it shall require all of the several amounts so reported and determined, and the several persons chargeable therewith respectively to be notified by the Clerk either by first class mail, sent to their last known address as shown on the assessment roll of the city or by publication in a newspaper which is published or of general circulation in the city and by posting upon three or more of the official designated public posting boards of the city. Such notice shall state the basis of the assessment, the cost thereof, and shall give a reasonable time, which shall not be less than thirty days, in which payment shall be made. In all cases where payment is not made within the time limit, the same shall be reported by the clerk to the Assessor who shall spread such amounts against the several persons or descriptions of real property chargeable therewith on the next tax roll for the collection of City taxes. The provisions of the preceding sections of this chapter, with reference to special assessments generally, and the proceedings necessary to be had before making the improvement shall not apply to assessments to cover the expenses incurred in respect to that class of improvements contemplated in this section. 
Section 12.23. - Additional Procedures. 
    In any case where the provisions of this chapter may prove to be insufficient to carry into full effect the making of any special assessment, and the financing thereof, the Commission shall provide by ordinance any additional steps or procedures required to effect the improvement by special assessment procedures. 
Section 12.24. - Special Assessment Accounts. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, moneys raised by special assessment to defray the cost of any local improvement shall be held in a special fund to pay such cost or to repay any money borrowed or advanced therefore. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each special assessment account must be used only for the purposes of the improvement project for which the assessment was levied. 
Section 12.25. - Nuisances. 
    The Commission may, by ordinance, declare acts or conditions which are or may be dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of the city to constitute hazards or nuisances, and shall, in such ordinance or ordinances, provide for the abatement thereof and may also provide that the costs of such abatement be charged against the real property on which the hazard or nuisance is located and the owner thereof, as a special assessment. 
Section 12.26. - Hazards constituting nuisances. 
    When any lot, building, or structure within the city, because of accumulation of refuse, or debris, the uncontrolled growing of noxious weeds, or of age or dilapidation, or because of any other condition or happening, becomes, in the opinion of the Commission, a public hazard or nuisance which is dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of the city or of those residing or habitually going near such lot, building, or structure, the Commission may, after investigation, give notice by publication or by First Class mail addressed to the last known address of the owner of the building or structure itself, specifying the nature of the nuisance and requiring such owner to alter, repair, tear down, abate or remove the nuisance promptly or within a time to be specified by the Commission, which shall be commensurate with the nature of the nuisance. If, at the expiration of the time limit in said notice, the owner has not complied with the requirements thereof, or in any case where the owner of the land or of the building or structure itself is not known, the Commission may order such hazard or nuisance abated by the proper department or agency of the city which is qualified to do the work required, or may do the work by contract or by hire. The cost of such abatement may be assessed against the real property, upon which such hazard or nuisance is located, by special assessment. The Commission shall determine the person, if known, against whom, and the premises upon which the same shall be levied as a special assessment: and as often as the Commission shall deem it expedient, it shall require all of the several amounts so reported and determined, and the several lots or premises and the persons chargeable therewith, respectively, to be notified by the Clerk, either by First Class mail sent to their last known address as shown on the assessment roll of the City or by publication. Such notice shall state the basis of the assessment, the cost thereof, and shall give a reasonable time, which shall not be less than thirty days, in which payment shall be made. In all cases where payment is not made within the time limit, the same shall be reported by the Clerk to the Assessor who shall spread such amounts charged against the several persons or descriptions of real property chargeable therewith on the next tax roll for the collection of city taxes. 
Section 12.27. - Reassessment for Benefits. 
    Whenever the Commission shall deem any special assessment invalid or defective for any reason whatever, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall have adjudged such assessment to be illegal for any reason whatsoever, in whole or in part, the Commission shall have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made, whether the improvement or any part thereof has been completed or not, and whether any part of the assessment has been collected or not. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be made in the same manner as provided for the original assessment, except that it shall not be necessary for the Commission to again determine the necessity of the improvement or to hold a hearing thereon. If any portion of the original assessment shall have been collected and not refunded, it shall be applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment shall, to that extent, be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed shall have been collected, the balance shall be refunded to the person making such payment. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of amendments to the 2007 Charter. 
Ord. No. Date Section  Section 
this Charter 2016-72 (Res.)  8- 1-16 10.9  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Code designated and cited. 
    This codification of ordinances shall be known and cited as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Plymouth, Michigan" or the "Plymouth City Code." 
(Code 1982,  1.5) 
Codification authority, MCL 117.5b, MSA 5.2084(2). 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Charter. The word "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Plymouth, Michigan, adopted November 7, 1950, and shall include any amendment to such Charter. 
    City. The word "city" shall denote the municipality of Plymouth, Michigan. 
    City commission. The words "city commission" or "commission" shall mean the governing body of the City of Plymouth. 
    Code. The expressions "Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances of the City of Plymouth, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1, and as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision and by adoption of new chapters, articles, divisions, or sections. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is a Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be excluded; and when the time is expressed in hours, the whole of Sunday or a legal holiday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded. 
    County. The term "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Wayne in the State of Michigan. 
    Gender. Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders. 
    General terms. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited. 
    Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise expressly declared in the ordinance granting the authority. 
    MCL, MSA. The abbreviations "MCL" and "MSA" refer to the Michigan Compiled Laws and Michigan Statutes Annotated, respectively, as amended. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. Words in the singular shall include the plural, and the words in the plural shall include the singular, where appropriate unless otherwise necessary. 
    Officer, department, board, commission or other agency. Whenever any officer, department, board, commission, or other agency is referred to by title only, such reference shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Plymouth, Michigan." Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer, department or other city agency of the city is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, reference to such officer, department or agency shall mean and include such officer, department or agency or deputy or authorized subordinate. 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Person. The word "person" and its derivatives and the word "whoever" shall include a natural person, partnership, association, legal entity or a corporate body or any body of persons corporate or incorporate. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person" or "whoever," as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof. 
    Shall/may. Whenever the word "shall" appears in this Code it shall be considered mandatory and not directory, except as otherwise provided. "May" is permissive. 
    State. The term "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Michigan. 
    Tense. Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present and past. 
(Code 1982,  1.8-1.10) 
Rules of construction, MCL 8.3 et seq., MSA 2.212 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation per state acts. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, or by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the interpretation of this Code as those governing the interpretation of the Public Acts of Michigan. 
Sec. 1-4. - Application to territorial boundaries only. 
    All provisions of this Code are limited in application to the territorial boundaries of the municipal corporation although such provisions may not be so limited specifically. 
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines and headings. 
    Headings and catchlines used in this Code other than the chapter, article, division, and section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
(Code 1982,  1.6) 
Sec. 1-5.1. - History notes. 
    The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. 
Sec. 1-6. - References and notes. 
    Charter references, cross references, state law references, history notes and editor's notes are by way of explanation only and should not be deemed a part of the text of any section. 
Sec. 1-7. - Application to future legislation. 
    All of the provisions of this chapter, not incompatible with future legislation, shall apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this Code unless otherwise specifically provided. 
Sec. 1-8. - Rule of severability. 
    Each chapter, article, division or section or, whenever divisible, subsection of this Code is hereby declared to be severable, and the invalidity of any chapter, article, division, section or divisible subsection, shall not be construed to affect the validity of any other chapter, article, division, section or subsection of this Code. 
(Code 1982,  1.13) 
Sec. 1-9. - Reference to other sections. 
    Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision. 
Sec. 1-10. - References to offices. 
    Reference to a public office shall be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of the City of Plymouth, exercising the powers, duties or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary. 
Sec. 1-11. - Certain provisions saved from repeal. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of the Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance levying taxes. 
(3)  Any ordinance appropriating money. 
(4)  Any ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money. 
(5)  Any ordinance establishing utility rates. 
(6)  Any ordinance establishing franchises or granting special rights to certain persons. 
(7)  Any ordinance authorizing public improvements. 
(8)  Any ordinance authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property. 
(9)  Any ordinance annexing or detaching territory. 
(10)  Any ordinance granting or accepting easements, plats or dedication of land to public use. 
(11)  Ordinance Number 93-4 which amends the downtown development authority ordinance and the tax increment financing plan. 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(13)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades in the city. 
(14)  Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers or employees. 
(15)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets. 
(16)  Any ordinance pertaining to zoning. 
(17)  Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1982,  1.4) 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-13. - General penalties and sanctions for violations of Code and city ordinances; continuing violations: injunctive relief. 
(a)  A violation of the following ordinances may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor violation or as a municipal civil infraction according to the discretion of the authorized city official charged with enforcement of such ordinance: 
(1)  Sections 18-56, et seq., being the Michigan Building Code, effective date July 31, 2001, or as subsequently amended by the Michigan Bureau of Construction Codes, and any accumulative supplements thereto, as published by the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, Bureau of Construction Codes; 
(2)  Sections 18-81, et seq., being the Michigan Electrical Code, effective date July 31, 2001, or as subsequently amended by the Michigan Bureau of Construction Codes, and any accumulative supplements thereto, as published by the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, Bureau of Construction Codes; 
(3)  Sections 18-106, et seq., being the Michigan Mechanical Code, effective date July 31, 2001, or as subsequently amended by the Michigan Bureau of Construction Codes, and any accumulative supplements thereto, as published by the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, Bureau of Construction Codes; 
(4)  Sections 18-186, et seq., being the Michigan Plumbing Code, effective date July 31, 2001, or as subsequently amended by the Michigan Bureau of Construction Codes, and any accumulative supplements thereto, as published by the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, Bureau of Construction Codes; 
(5)  Sections 18-211, et seq., being the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 and any amendments thereto and Supplemental Standards. 
(6)  Sections 18-286, et seq., being the regulation of swimming pools, and any amendments thereto; 
(7)  Sections 18-371, et seq., being the regulation of fences and walls, and any amendments thereto; 
(8)  Sections 18-401, et seq., being the housing code of the city, and any amendments thereto; 
(9)  Sections 18-601, et seq., being the regulation of moving and demolition of buildings and structures, and any amendments thereto; 
(10)  Sections 18-636, et seq., being the creation of the Kellogg Park Historic District and the regulation of structures therein, and any amendments thereto; 
(11)  Sections 18-711, et seq., being the regulation of trees, licensing of arborists, control of noxious weeds and administration of the city tree board, and any amendments thereto; 
(12)  Sections 18-776, et seq., being the establishment of special flood hazard areas and the regulation of development therein, and any amendments thereto; 
(13)  Sections 22-1, et seq., being the regulation and licensing of the conduct of businesses and fees for licenses, and any amendments thereto; 
(14)  Sections 22-91, et seq., being the regulation and licensing of the conduct of drive-in restaurants and fees for licenses, and any amendments thereto; 
(15)  Sections 22-121, et seq., being the regulation and licensing of the conduct of massage establishments and personnel and fees for licenses, and any amendments thereto; 
(16)  Sections 22-166, et seq., being the regulation and licensing of canvassers and peddlers and fees for licenses, and any amendments thereto; 
(17)  Sections 22-201, et seq., being the regulation and licensing of dance schools and public dances and fees for licenses, and any amendments thereto; 
(18)  Sections 22-226, et seq., being the regulation and licensing of precious metals and gem dealers and fees for licenses, and any amendments thereto; 
(19)  Sections 22-256, et seq., being the regulation and licensing of taxicabs and drivers and fees for licenses, and any amendments thereto; 
(20)  Sections 34-26, et seq., being the prevention and elimination of blight, including any amendments thereto; 
(21)  Sections 34-51, et seq., being the prohibition of public nuisances, dangerous structures, loud noise, and dense smoke, and any amendments thereto; 
(22)  Sections 34-126, et seq., being the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control, General Rules and Regulations pursuant to Act No. 347 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972, and any amendments thereto; 
(23)  Sections 38-56, et seq., being the BOCA National Fire Prevention Code of 1993, and any amendments thereto; 
(24)  Sections 42-36, et seq., being the prohibition of discrimination in housing, and any amendments thereto; 
(25)  Sections 54-1, et seq., being miscellaneous offenses against public peace, public safety, public morals, persons, or property, affecting governmental functions or involving minors, and any amendments thereto; 
(26)  Sections 58-1, et seq., being the regulation and licensing of solid waste disposal and businesses and fees for licenses, and any amendments thereto; 
(27)  Sections 62-1, et seq., being the regulation of streets and sidewalks, and any amendments thereto; 
(28)  Sections 74-26, et seq., being the regulation of public water, public sewers and wastewater discharge control, and any amendments thereto; 
(29)  Sections 78-1, et seq., being the Zoning Ordinance, and any amendments thereto; 
(30)  Sections 10-1, et seq., being the regulation and licensing of mechanical or electrical amusement devices, theaters, tent shows and meetings, mechanical amusement rides, circuses, pool rooms and bowling alleys and fees for licenses, and any amendments thereto. 
(b)  Unless a violation of this City Code or any ordinance of the city is specifically designated in the City Code or ordinance as a municipal civil infraction, the violation shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor. 
(c)  The penalty for a misdemeanor violation shall be a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) (plus costs of prosecution), or imprisonment not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both, for the violation of this City Code or any ordinance. 
(d)  The sanction for a violation of a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this City Code or any ordinance, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended, and other applicable laws. 
(1)  Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal civil infraction violation by this Code or any ordinance, the civil fine for a violation shall be fifty dollars ($50.00), plus costs and other sanction, for each infraction. 
(2)  Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a person of any requirement or provision of this City Code or any ordinance. As used in this section, "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision (i) committed by a person within any one year period (unless some other period is specifically provided by this City Code or any ordinance) and (ii) for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. Unless otherwise specifically provided by this City Code or any ordinance for a particular municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows: 
a.  The fine for any repeat offense which is a second offense shall be no less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), plus costs and other sanction. 
b.  The fine for any repeat offense which is a third offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus costs and other sanction. 
(e)  A "violation" includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense by this City Code or any ordinance; and any omission or failure to act where the act is required by this City Code or any ordinance. 
(f)  Each day on which any violation of this City Code or any ordinance continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. 
(g)  In addition to any other remedies available at law, the city may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this City Code or any city ordinance. 
(Code 1982,  1.12; Ord. No. 96-01,  2, 3-11-96; Ord. No. 01-5,  1, 7-2-01; Ord. No. 2002-4,  1, 5-20-02; Ord. No. 2006-2,  1, 7-17-06) 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i, MSA 5.2082. 
Sec. 1-14. - Notice. 
(a)  Notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections, dangerous structures, abating nuisances or any other act, the expense of which if performed by the city, may be assessed against the premises under the provisions of this Code, shall be served: 
(1)  By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving such notice at his residence, office or place of business with some person of suitable age and discretion; 
(2)  By mailing such notice by certified or registered mail to such owner at his last known address; or 
(3)  If the owner is unknown, by posting such notice in some conspicuous place on the premises at least five days before the act or action concerning which the notice is given is required or is to occur. 
(b)  No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal, or tear down any official notice or placard posted by any city officer, unless permission is given by the officer to remove the notice. 
(Code 1982,  1.11) 
Sec. 1-15. - Responsibility for violations. 
    Whenever any act is prohibited by this Code, by an amendment thereof, or by any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, such prohibition shall extend to and include the causing, securing, aiding, or abetting of another person to do such act. 
(Code 1982,  1.7) 
Sec. 1-16. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Plymouth, Michigan, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired, subject to subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  If a new section not then existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Plymouth, Michigan, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which said section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired, subject to subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Any ordinance which repeals or amends this Code shall set out in full the sections or subsections to be repealed or amended and shall indicate matter to be omitted by enclosing it in brackets or by strikeout type and shall indicate new matter by underscoring or by italics. 
(Code 1982,  1.2) 
Sec. 1-17. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Plymouth to be misrepresented thereby. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; planning,  18-26 et seq.; administration and enforcement of fence regulations,  18-316 et seq.; administration of the Kellogg Park historic district,  18-671 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22; cemeteries, ch. 26; community development, ch. 30; environment, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection and emergency services, ch. 38; human relations, ch. 42; law enforcement, ch. 46; multichannel service providers, ch. 50; offenses affecting governmental functions,  54-31 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 74; zoning, ch. 78; administration and enforcement of zoning regulations,  78-591 et seq. 
State Law reference- Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq., MSA 4.1700(71) et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq., MSA 4.1800(11) et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq., MSA 4.1801(1) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - ETHICS 

Sec. 2-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to set forth standards of conduct for the officers and employees of the City of Plymouth. This division also provides references to certain state statutes that regulate the conduct of officers and employees of local government. This division provides for penalties for violations of this division. 
( Ord. No. 17-05, 8-7-17 ) 
Sec. 2-2. - Definitions. 
    Employee means a person employed by the City of Plymouth, whether on a full-time or part-time basis. 
    Family member means any of the following: 
(1)  The spouse of an officer or employee; or 
(2)  The following relatives of an officer or employee, or the officer's or employee's spouse: child, step-child, grandchild, parent, grandparent, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister, including relationships arising from adoption; or 
(3)  The spouse of any of the relatives listed in (2) above. 
    Financial interest in a contract, action or decision means that the officer or employee: 
(1)  Is dealing on behalf of himself; or 
(2)  Is a partner, member or employee of the co-partnership or other unincorporated association involved; or 
(3)  Is the owner of more than one percent of the total outstanding stock of any class where such stock is not listed on a stock exchange or is the owner of stock with a present total market value in excess of $25,000.00 where such corporation's stock is listed on a stock exchange or of which he is a director, officer or employee of the corporation involved; or 
(4)  Is the beneficiary or trustee of any trust involved; or 
(5)  Will receive a financial or other material benefit from such contract, action or decision which is greater than that which will be received by the public in general; or 
(6)  Has a family member who has a financial interest in such contract, action or decision. 
    Gift means any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, travel, lodging, and honoraria for speaking engagements related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an officer or employee. 
    Government contract means a contract in which the city acquires goods or services, or both, from another person or entity, but the term does not include a contract pursuant to which a person serves as an employee or appointed officer of the city. 
    Governmental decision means a determination, action, vote, or disposition upon a motion, proposal, recommendation, resolution, ordinance, or measure on which a vote by the four members of a legislative or governing body of a public entity is required and by which a public entity formulates or effectuates public policy. 
    Officer or official means a person who holds office, by election or appointment within the city regardless of whether the officer is compensated for service in his or her official capacity. 
    Official action means a decision, recommendation, approval, disapproval or other action or failure to act which involves the use of discretionary authority. 
    Personal interest in a contract, action or decision means that the officer or employee, or a family member of such officer or employee, will be affected either positively or negatively by such contract, action or decision to an extent which is materially greater than the effect on the public in general. 
    Recognizance means a person promises a court, on the record, to do some particular act, i.e. to appear before the court; to keep the peace; or to pay a debt. 
    Surety means that a person agrees to pay money or to do any other act in the event that the principal fails to do so. The principal is the person who is primarily liable to pay the money or to do the act. The surety incurs the liability for the benefit of the principal and does so without sharing in the consideration. Should the principal fail to perform as promised, the surety must do so. 
( Ord. No. 17-05, 8-7-17 ) 
Sec. 2-3. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  An officer or employee shall not divulge to an unauthorized person confidential information acquired in the course of his or her duties in advance of the time prescribed for its authorized release to the public. 
(b)  An officer or employee shall not represent his or her personal opinion as that of the city, its administration or the department for which he or she works. 
(c)  An officer or employee shall use City personnel resources, property, and funds under the officer or employee's official care and control judiciously and solely in accordance with prescribed policies and procedures, and not for personal gain or benefit. 
(d)  An officer or employee shall not knowingly violate the City Charter or any law or ordinance, or any city policy or procedure in the course of his or her official duties. 
(e)  An officer or employee shall not engage in a business transaction in which the officer or employee may profit from his or her official position or authority, or benefit financially from confidential information which the officer or employee has obtained or may obtain by reason of his or her position or authority. Instruction which is not done during regularly-scheduled working hours, except for authorized leave time, shall not be considered a business transaction pursuant to this subsection if the instructor does not have any direct dealing with or influence on the employing or contracting facility associated with his or her course of employment with the city. 
(f)  An officer or employee shall not engage in or accept employment or render services for a private or public interest when that employment or service is incompatible or in conflict with the discharge of the officer or employee's official duties, or when that employment may tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the performance of official duties. 
(g)  Prohibited appearances; exception. 
(1)  City officers and employees may not represent private interests before any city department, agency, or board. 
Example: A city commissioner may not represent a client of her law firm before a city department in a contract dispute between the city and the client, who is a city contractor. 
(2)  City officials and employees may not represent private interests in actions that conflict with the city's interests, in litigation where the city is involved, or in court proceedings where the complainant is the city or a city agency. 
Example: A member of the Downtown Development Authority may not personally represent police officers in workers compensation claims against the city. 
(3)  Board or commission members may not represent their own business, clients, neighborhood association, or other private interests before their own board or commission, the city department or division regulated or supervised by the board. 
Example: A member of the planning commission may not appear before the planning commission to present and/or advocate for site plan approval for a new commercial building. 
(4)  Exception: City officials and employees may appear in their own behalf before a city agency. 
Example: A member of the Zoning Board of Appeals may appeal the denial of a building permit for a fence she seeks to build in her back yard. However, she is disqualified from participating in the appeal as a member of the board. 
(g)  An officer or employee shall not participate in the negotiation or execution of contracts, making of loans, granting of subsidies, fixing of rates, issuance of permits or certificates, or other regulation or supervision relating to a business entity or person in which the officer or employee has a financial or personal interest. 
(1)  Whenever an employee has a financial or personal interest in a contract, action or decision, he or she shall so advise his or her supervisor and shall refrain from participation to whatever extent is necessary to avoid a conflict of interest. 
(2)  Whenever an officer or official expects or intends to have a financial or personal interest in a city contract, decision or action, he or she shall file with the city clerk a statement, under oath, setting forth the nature of the interest therein and that such participation therein is to the general welfare of the city. If the interest is in a contract, the statement shall also disclose: the name of each party involved; the terms (including duration and financial consideration between parties, facilities or services of the public entity included in the contract); the nature and degree of assignment of employees of the city for fulfillment of the contract; and the nature of any pecuniary interest. Such statement shall be transmitted to the city commission and entered in the proceedings of the next regular meeting. Confirmation of such contract, decision or action shall be made by a two-thirds vote of the city commission. 
(3)  Whenever a member of a city board or commission has a financial or personal interest in a contract, action or decision, he or she shall so advise his or her board or commission and request to abstain from voting on such contract, action or decision. Whenever a member of a city board or commission has reason to believe that another member has a financial or personal interest in a contract, action or decision, the member shall raise a point of order with the chairperson, who shall then request the member in question to respond. If the interest is in a contract, he or she shall file a statement, under oath, setting forth the name of each party involved; the terms (including duration and financial consideration between parties, facilities or services of the public entity included in the contract); the nature and degree of assignment of employees of the city for fulfillment of the contract; the nature of any pecuniary interest and that such participation therein is to the general welfare of the city. If the board or commission concurs with the member that he or she has a financial or personal interest in the matter being considered, then the board or commission shall vote to allow the member to abstain, and such action shall require the member to abstain during votes on the applicable matter. The procedure for considering whether a member should be required allowed to abstain shall be as follows: 
As soon as a motion has been made and supported, on which an affected member or other member has a question about a conflict of interest, that member should raise a point of order with the chairperson, indicating the nature of the question. The chairperson should then request the affected member to make a disclosure or other statement about the question. The affected member or any other member may then move to excuse the affected member from voting on the question. If the affected board or commission member wishes to make a disclosure and request to be excused from voting, the member should raise a point of order, advise the chairperson and the other members that the member would like to make a disclosure, make the disclosure, and move for a vote on being excused from voting on the question. 
The motion to excuse does not require a second, but it is debatable. After discussion, if any, the chairperson shall state the motion in the following general form: "SHALL MEMBER ________ BE EXCUSED FROM VOTING ON THE CURRENT MOTION, ON THE BASIS THAT HE/SHE HAS A CONFLICT OF INTEREST (OR OTHER REASON)?" The member who is the subject of the motion is required to vote on the motion to excuse, and an affirmative vote of at least a majority plus one is required to pass the motion. A member excused from voting on a question shall be required to abstain. 
(i)  An officer or employee shall not give recognizance or give or become surety on behalf of a third party when that third party is dealing with the city. 
(j)  An officer or employee shall not solicit or accept a gift of money, goods, services, or other thing of value for the benefit of a person or organization which tends to influence the manner in which that officer or employee or another officer or employee performs official duties, or under circumstances in which the officer's or employee's official position may tend to coerce the person being solicited. 
(k)  An officer or employee shall not coerce, attempt to coerce or command another officer or employee to pay, lend or contribute anything of value to a political party, committee, organization, or person for the benefit of a person seeking or holding elective office, or for the purpose of supporting or opposing any proposed law or ballot issue. 
(l)  An officer or employee shall not discriminate based upon religion, race, color, national origin, age, sex (including pregnancy and conditions related to pregnancy), height, weight, marital status, disability, genetic information, sexual orientation, transgender status, veteran status or political affiliation. 
( Ord. No. 17-05, 8-7-17 ; Ord. No. 18-04 , 7-2-18) 
Sec. 2-4. - Filing and disposition of complaints. 
(a)  As deemed appropriate in its discretion, the city commission shall: 
(1)  Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint against an officer or employee, investigate, conduct hearings and deliberations, conduct or issue referrals for disciplinary hearings and refer violations of section 2-3 or state or federal criminal statutes to the attention of the appropriate attorney with a request for the filing of the appropriate criminal prosecution or civil infraction enforcement. 
(2)  Receive information from the public pertaining to its investigations and seek additional information and documents from officers and employees of the City of Plymouth. 
(3)  Request the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all officers and employees of the city to cooperate with the city commission during the course of its investigations. Failure or refusal to cooperate with requests by the city commission shall constitute grounds for discipline or discharge of appointed officers and employees of the city. 
(b)  Ethics complaints shall be processed as follows: 
(1)  Complaints alleging a violation of this ordinance shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(2)  Within three business days after the receipt by the clerk of a complaint, the clerk shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her together with a copy of the complaint. Within three business days after receipt by the clerk of a complaint, the clerk shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice of confirmation of receipt of the complaint together with a copy of the complaint to the complainant. The notices sent to the respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time, and place of the city commission's hearing to determine the sufficiency of the complaint and to establish whether probable cause exists that the respondent named in the complaint violated section 2-3. The clerk shall also concurrently send copies of the foregoing complaint and notices to the members of the city commission. 
(3)  The city commission shall conduct a hearing to review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of section 2-3, to determine whether there is a reasonable basis to believe that the respondent has violated section 2-3 based on the evidence presented by the complainant and any additional evidence provided to the city commission at the hearing pursuant to its investigatory powers. The complainant and respondent may be represented by counsel at the hearing. Within a reasonable period of time after the completion of the hearing which may be conducted in one or more sessions at the discretion of the city commission, the city commission shall issue notice to the complainant and the respondent of the city commission's ruling on the sufficiency of the complaint and, if necessary, as to whether they find that there is a reasonable basis to believe that the respondent has violated section 2-3. If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of section 2-3 and the city commission finds that there is a reasonable basis to believe that the respondent has violated section 2-3, then the clerk shall notify in writing the attorney designated by the city commission and shall transmit to the attorney the complaint and all additional documents in the custody of the city commission concerning the alleged violation, with the city commission's request for the filing of appropriate criminal or civil proceedings. The clerk shall also provide these documents to the respondent's appointing authority within the city with the city commission's request for the commencement of appropriate disciplinary action consistent with any applicable collective bargaining agreement, civil service commission rules, employment contracts, or employment regulations of the city. 
(4)  Sections 2b-2e of the State Ethics Act, MCL 15.341 et seq, set forth protections for officers and employees who act as whistleblowers regarding the conduct of the city's officers and employees. Additional whistleblower protections are set forth in the Whistleblowers' Protection Act, 1980 PA 469, MCL 15.361 et seq. 
(5)  Any person who files a complaint alleging a violation of this division knowing that material information provided therein is not true or that information provided therein was made in reckless disregard for the truth may be subject to a fine of up to $500.00 as well as the reasonable costs incurred by the city in investigating the complaint and the reasonable costs incurred by the respondent in responding to the complaint. 
(6)  A complaint must be filed with the clerk within two years of the date the offense is alleged to have occurred. 
Note: Plymouth City Charter  6.7 states that prosecutions for violations of city ordinances shall be commenced within two years after the commission of the offense unless a different period is prescribed by state law. 
( Ord. No. 17-05, 8-7-17 ) 
Sec. 2-5. - Sanctions. 
(a)  Sanctions shall not be construed to diminish or impair the rights of an officer or employee under any collective bargaining agreement, nor the city's obligation to comply with such collective bargaining agreements. 
(b)  State statutes cited in this ordinance contain criminal penalties and civil remedies that apply, as provided in those statutes, to the conduct regulated by those statutes. 
(c)  A violation of this division may be punished as a civil infraction by a fine of up to $500.00. 
(d)  In addition to any other penalty, whether criminal or civil, an employee or officer who intentionally violates this ordinance may be subject to disciplinary action including censure, reprimand, removal, dismissal or discharge. Removal of appointive officers is governed by the Plymouth City Charter  4.6 and 4.9 and removal of elective officers is governed by Plymouth City Charter  4.9. 
( Ord. No. 17-05, 8-7-17 ) 
Secs. 2-6-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-26-2-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 2-36. - General authority. 
    The city manager shall see that all laws, ordinances, rules, regulations adopted by the city commission and the provisions of this Code, are properly enforced. He shall attend all meetings of the city commission, regular and special. During the absence or disability of the manager an acting manager shall be appointed in accordance with section 7.2 of the Charter. 
(Code 1982,  1.51) 
Sec. 2-37. - Administrative officers. 
    All administrative officers are responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of their respective departments and offices, and all activities assigned to them. He shall employ or appoint all officers and employees except as otherwise provided by the city Charter. 
(Code 1982,  1.52) 
Sec. 2-38. - Vacancies. 
    In case of vacancy in office or during the absence of any administrative officer, the city manager may designate an interim acting head or perform personally the functions of the office, until such vacancy is filled in accordance with the Charter. 
(Code 1982,  1.53) 
Secs. 2-39-2-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-51. - Generally. 
    All departments of the city shall comply with the following: 
(1)  All department heads shall keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular fields and shall inaugurate, with the approval of the city manager in the case of departments responsible to him or in the case of other departments, with the approval of the officer or body to whom the department head is responsible, such new practices as appear to be of benefit to the service and to the public. 
(2)  Reports of the activities of each department shall be made to the manager as he shall direct. 
(3)  Each department head shall be responsible for the preservation of all public records under his jurisdiction and shall provide a system of filing and indexing the same. No public records, reports, correspondence or other data relative to the business of any department shall be destroyed or removed permanently from the files without the knowledge and approval of the city commission and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1982,  1.54) 
Sec. 2-52. - Department of building safety and inspection. 
    The building safety and inspection department shall be responsible for the enforcement of the zoning, building, housing, heating, electrical and plumbing codes, ordinances and regulations of the city, and such other provisions of this Code as shall be specified herein. References in this Code to "building department" and "building inspector" shall mean the department of building safety and inspection. 
(Code 1982,  1.91) 
Secs. 2-53-2-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-76. - Vacancies. 
    Unless otherwise provided, any vacancy occurring in the membership of any board or commission shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the manner provided for original appointment. 
(Code 1982,  1.101) 
Sec. 2-77. - Removal. 
    The appointing authority may remove any member of any board or commission for cause, but any member shall be entitled to a public hearing on such removal, on written demand filed with the appointing authority within ten days after notice of removal has been given to such member. 
(Code 1982,  1.102) 
Sec. 2-78. - Compensation. 
    Unless otherwise provided, all members of boards and commissions shall serve without compensation as members thereof. 
(Code 1982,  1.103) 
Secs. 2-79-2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOUSING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-91. - Construction. 
    The Plymouth Housing Commission, heretofore created pursuant to Act No. 18 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (Ex. Sess.) (MCL 125.651 et seq., MSA 5.3011 et seq.), as amended, is hereby continued. 
(Code 1982,  1.121) 
Sec. 2-92. - Members, term, appointment. 
    In accordance with section 4 of Act No. 18 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (Ex. Sess.) (MCL 125.651 et seq., MSA 5.3011 et seq.), as amended, the housing commission shall consist of five members appointed by the city manager. Each member shall serve for a term of five years and until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. Members of the first commission shall be appointed for staggered terms. Members shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for any actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1982,  1.122) 
Sec. 2-93. - Housing director. 
    The housing commission, with the approval of the mayor and city commission, shall appoint a housing director, who shall serve as the administrative head of the housing commission and who shall be an appointive officer of the city and subject to the general provisions affecting officers of the city as provided by the city Charter. The salary of the housing director, as well as the salaries of all other personnel working under the supervision of the housing director, shall be reviewed by the city administration and the city commission so as to ensure consistency with salaries and fringe benefits received by other city employees. 
(Code 1982,  1.123) 
Sec. 2-94. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LOCAL OFFICERS COMPENSATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-95. - Local officers compensation commission, creation, membership, terms, vacancies. 
    A local officers compensation commission is created which shall determine the salaries of each local elected official. The commission shall consist of five members in a city of 20,000 population or less and seven members in a city of over 20,000 population. The members shall be registered electors of the city, appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by a majority of the members elected and serving in the legislative body. In the case of a five-member commission, the terms of office shall be five years, except that of the members first appointed, one each shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four, and five years. In the case of a seven-member commission, the terms of office shall be seven years, except that of the members first appointed, one each shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four, five, six, and seven years. The first members shall be appointed within 30 days after the effective date of this division [September 1, 1998]. Members other than the first members shall be appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. A member or employee of the legislative, judicial, or executive branch of government or a member of the immediate family of a member or employee of the legislative, judicial, or executive branch of government shall not be a member of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 98-3,  1, 8-3-98) 
Sec. 2-96. - Determination of salaries; expense allowances or reimbursements. 
    The commission shall determine the salary of each local elected official. The determination shall be the salary unless the legislative body, by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members elected to and serving on the legislative body, rejects it. The determination of the commission shall be effective 30 days following its filing with the city clerk unless rejected by the legislative body. If the determination is rejected, the existing salary shall prevail. The expense allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials in addition to salary shall be for expenses incurred in the course of city business and accounted for to the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-3,  1, 8-3-98) 
Sec. 2-97. - Meeting of commission; quorum; concurrence of majority; chairperson; session days; compensation. 
    The commission shall meet for not more than 15 session days in each odd numbered year and shall make its determination within 45 calendar days after its first meeting. A majority of the members of the commission constitutes a quorum for conducting the business of the commission. The commission shall not take action or make a determination without a concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and serving on the commission. The commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members. As used in this section, "session day" means a calendar day on which the commission meets and a quorum is present. The members of the commission shall not receive compensation, but shall be entitled to actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 98-3,  1, 8-3-98) 
Sec. 2-98. - Open meetings. 
    The business which the commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting of the commission held in compliance with Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, being sections 15.261 to 15.275 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. Public notice of the time, date, and place of the meeting of the commission shall be given in the manner required by Act No, 267 of the Public Acts of 1976. 
(Ord. No. 98-3,  1, 8-3-98) 
Sec. 2-99. - Freedom of information. 
    A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the commission in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with Act No, 442 of the Public Acts of 1976, being sections 15.231 to 15.246 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
(Ord. No. 98-3,  1, 8-3-98) 
Sec. 2-100. - Implementation; changes in procedure for establishing compensation. 
    The governing body shall implement this section by resolution. After one year following the date the ordinance goes into effect the procedure for establishing the compensation of elected officials may be changed by charter amendment or revision. 
(Ord. No. 98-3,  1, 8-3-98) 
Sec. 2-101. - Referendum on ordinance. 
    Not more than 60 days after the effective date of this division, a petition for a referendum on the ordinance may be filed pursuant to the procedure provided in the charter or otherwise by filing a petition with the city clerk containing the signatures of at least five percent of the registered electors of the city on the effective date of the ordinance. The election shall be conducted in the same manner as an election on a charter amendment. If a petition for referendum is filed, a determination of the commission shall not be effective until the ordinance has been approved by the electors. 
(Ord. No. 98-3,  1, 8-3-98) 
Secs. 2-102-2-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq., MSA 5.3188(1) et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-116-2-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASES, CONTRACTS AND SALES 

Sec. 2-126. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent or city purchasing agent means the purchasing agent of the city. 
    Contractual services means and includes all telephone, gas, water, electric light and power service; towel and cleaning service; insurance; leases for all grounds, buildings, offices or other spaces required by the using agencies; and the rental, repair or maintenance of equipment, machinery and other city-owned personal property. The term shall not include professional and other contractual services which are in their nature unique and not subject to competition. 
    Supplies means and includes all supplies, materials and equipment. 
    Using agency means any department, agency, commission, bureau or other unit in the city government using supplies or procuring contractual services as provided for in this division. 
(Code 1982,  1.201) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 2-127. - Establishment of office of purchases. 
    There is hereby established in the department of assessor-treasurer an office of purchases. 
(Code 1982,  1.202) 
Sec. 2-128. - City purchasing agent. 
    The city purchasing agent shall be the head, and have general supervision of the office of purchases. The agent shall perform all duties required of a department head by law, and shall have the powers and duties prescribed by this division. 
(1)  Scope of purchasing authority. The agent shall have the power and it shall be his duty to purchase or contract for all supplies and contractual services needed by any using agency which derives its support wholly or in part from the city, in accordance with purchasing procedures as prescribed by this division and such rules and regulations as the agent shall adopt for the internal management and operation of the office of purchasing and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the chief administrator and the city commission. 
a.  Exceptions prohibited. The authority of the agent to negotiate all purchases for all using agencies shall not be abridged by excepting any particular using agency. 
b.  Unauthorized purchases. Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any city officer or officers to order the purchase of any supplies or make any contract within the purview of this division other than through the department of purchasing, and any purchase ordered or contract made contrary to the provisions hereof shall not be approved by the city officials, and the city shall not be bound thereby. 
(2)  Other powers and duties. In addition to the purchasing authority conferred in subsection (1) of this section and in addition to any other powers and duties conferred by this chapter the agent shall: 
a.  Minimum expenditures. Act to procure for the city the highest quality in supplies and contractual services at least expense to the city. 
b.  Encourage competition. Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases and sales. 
c.  Rules and regulations. Establish, and amend when necessary, all rules and regulations authorized by this division and any others necessary to its operation. 
d.  Purchasing analysis. Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products, and secure for the city the benefits of research done in the field of purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions, national technical societies, trade associations having national recognition, and by private businesses and organizations. 
e.  Forms. Prescribe and maintain such forms as he shall find reasonably necessary to the operation of this division. 
f.  Vendors' catalog file. Prepare, adopt and maintain a vendors' catalog file. Such catalog shall be filed according to materials and shall contain descriptions of vendors' commodities, prices and discounts. 
g.  Bulk purchase. Exploit the possibilities of buying in bulk so as to take full advantage of discounts. 
h.  Federal tax exemptions. Act so as to procure for the city all federal tax exemptions to which it is entitled. 
i.  Cooperation with city clerk. Cooperate with the city clerk so as to secure for the city the maximum efficiency in budgeting and accounting. 
j.  Disqualification of bidders. Have the authority to report to the city manager vendors who default on their quotations, who fail to follow specifications, or who provide inferior quality. The city manager may disqualify irresponsible bidders from receiving any business from the municipality for a stated period of time. 
(Code 1982,  1.203) 
Sec. 2-129. - Capacity of agent. 
    The agent shall enforce the written specifications adopted. 
(1)  Agent's duties. It shall be the duty of the agent: 
a.  Classification. To classify all the supplies used by the various branches of the city government. 
b.  Standardization. To adopt as standards the minimum number of qualities, sizes, and varieties of supplies consistent with the successful operation of the city government. 
c.  Specifications. To prepare and adopt written specifications of all such standard supplies. 
(2)  Effect of adoption. After its adoption, each standard specification shall, until revised or rescinded, apply alike in terms and effect to every future purchase and contract for the supply described in such specification. The agent, with the approval of the city manager, shall have the authority to exempt any using agency of the city for use of the supply described in such standard specification. 
(3)  Consultation with using agencies. The agent shall consult with the heads and other officials of the using agencies to determine their precise requirements and shall endeavor to prescribe those standards which meet the needs of the majority of such agencies. 
(4)  Nature of specifications. All specifications shall be definite and certain and shall permit competition. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to noncompetitive types and kinds of supplies. 
(Code 1982,  1.204) 
Sec. 2-130. - Requisition and estimates. 
    All using agencies, either by or with the authorization of the head of the department under which the using agency operates, shall file with the agent detailed requisitions or estimates of their requirements in supplies and contractual services in such manner, at such time, and for such future periods as the agent shall prescribe. 
(1)  Unforeseen requirements. A using agency shall not be prevented from filing, in the same manner, with the agent at any time a requisition or estimate for any supplies and contractual services, the need for which was not foreseen when the detailed estimates were filed. 
(2)  Revisory power in agent. The agent shall examine each requisition or estimate and shall have the authority to revise it as to quantity, quality, or estimated cost; but revision as to quality shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications established pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1982,  1.205) 
Sec. 2-131. - Encumbrance of funds. 
    Except in cases of emergency, the agent shall not issue any order for delivery on a contract or open market purchase until the city clerk shall have certified, after preaudit, that there is to the credit of the using agencies concerned a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance, in excess of all unpaid obligations, to defray the amount of such order. 
(Code 1982,  1.206) 
Sec. 2-132. - Prohibition of interest. 
    Any purchase order or contract within the purview of this division in which the agent, or any officer or employee of the city is financially interested, directly or indirectly, shall be void, except that before the execution of a purchase order or contract the commission shall have the authority to waive compliance with this section when it finds such action to be in the best interests of the city. 
(Code 1982,  1.207) 
Sec. 2-133. - Competitive bidding required. 
    All purchases of, and contracts for supplies and contractual services, and all sales of personal property which has become obsolete and unusable shall, except as specifically provided in this division, be based wherever possible on competitive bids. 
(Code 1982,  1.208) 
Sec. 2-134. - Formal contract procedures. 
    All supplies and contractual services, except as otherwise provided herein, when the estimated cost thereof shall exceed $5,000.00 shall be purchased by formal, written contract from the lowest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting proposals. All sales of personal property which has become obsolete and unusable, when the estimated value shall exceed $5,000.00, shall be sold by formal written contract to the highest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting proposals. 
(1)  Notice inviting bids. 
a.  Newspaper. Notice inviting bids shall be published once in at least one official newspaper in the city and at least five days preceding the last day set for the receipt of proposals. The newspaper notice required herein shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased or sold, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, and the time and place for opening bids. 
b.  Bidders' list. The agent shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers who have requested their names to be added to a bidders' list which the agent shall maintain, by sending them a copy of such newspaper notice or such other notice as will acquaint them with the proposed purchase or sale. In any case, invitations sent to the vendors on the bidders' list shall be limited to commodities that are similar in character and ordinarily handled by the trade group to which the invitations are sent. 
(2)  Bid deposits. When deemed necessary by the agent, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of surety where the agent has required such. A successful bidder shall forfeit any surety required by the agent upon failure on his part to enter a contract within ten days after the award. 
(3)  Bid opening procedure. 
a.  Sealed. Bids shall be submitted sealed to the clerk and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. 
b.  Opening. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. 
c.  Tabulation. A tabulation of all bids received shall be posted for public inspection. 
(4)  Award of contract. 
a.  Authority in agent. The agent shall have the authority to award contracts of $1,000.00 or less and recommend to the city commission the awarding of contracts involving expenditures in excess of $1,000.00, within the purview of this division. 
b.  Lowest responsible bidder. Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. In determining the lowest responsible bidder, in addition to price, the agent shall consider: 
1.  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service required; 
2.  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference; 
3.  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
4.  The quality of performance of previous contracts or services; 
5.  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract or service; 
6.  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service; 
7.  The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies, or the contractual services to the particular use required; 
8.  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; 
9.  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
c.  Tie bids. 
1.  Local vendors. If all bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to a local bidder. 
2.  Outside vendors. Where subsection (4)c.1 of this section is not in effect, the agent shall award the contract to one of the tie bidders by drawing lots in public. 
d.  Performance bonds. The agent shall have the authority to require a performance bond, before entering a contract, in such amount as he shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. 
(5)  Prohibition against subdivision. No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1982,  1.209; Ord. No. 86-2,  1, 2, 3-17-86) 
Sec. 2-135. - Open market procedures. 
    All purchase of supplies and contractual services, and all sales of personal property which has become obsolete and unusable, when the estimated value thereof is $5,000.00 or less shall be made in the open market, without newspaper advertisement and without observing the procedure prescribed by section 2-134 for the award of formal contracts. 
(1)  Minimum number of bids. All open market purchases shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three competitive bids, and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder in accordance with the standards set forth in subsection (4)b. of section 2-134. 
(2)  Notice inviting bids. The agent shall solicit bids by: 
a.  Direct mail request to prospective vendors, or 
b.  Telephone, and/or 
c.  Public notice posted on the bulletin board of the city hall. 
(3)  Recording. The agent shall keep a record of all open market orders and the bids submitted in competition thereon, and such records shall also be open to public inspection. 
(4)  Authority in agent. The agent shall have the authority to award contracts of $1,000.00 or less, and recommend to the city commission the awarding of contracts involving expenditures in excess of $1,000.00 within the purview of this division. 
(5)  Award to other than low bidder. When the award is not given to the lowest bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for placing the order elsewhere shall be prepared by the agent and filed with the other papers relating to the transaction. 
(Code 1982,  1.210; Ord. No. 86-2,  3, 4, 3-17-86) 
Sec. 2-136. - Petty expenditures revolving fund. 
    There is hereby appropriated out of any money in the city treasury, not otherwise appropriated, $300.00, which shall be known as the petty expenditures revolving fund. From this fund may be paid purchases not in excess of $25.00 each, made by the heads of using agencies for incidentals with the approval of the agent. 
(1)  Accounting. At the end of each month, the treasurer shall render to the city manager a statement showing the actual expenditures for each using agency so made out of such petty expenditures revolving fund, and such revolving fund shall be reimbursed for such expenditures in the same manner as other expenditures of such using agencies are paid. 
(2)  Rules and regulations. The treasurer shall promulgate rules and regulations for use of the petty expenditures revolving fund. 
(Code 1982,  1.211) 
Sec. 2-137. - Emergency purchases. 
(a)  By agent. In case of an apparent emergency which requires immediate purchase of supplies or contractual services, the city manager shall be empowered to authorize the agent to secure by open market procedures as herein set forth, at the lowest obtainable price, any supplies or contractual services regardless of the amount of the expenditures. A full report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase shall be filed by the agent with the city manager. In cases of expenditures exceeding $1,000.00, a full report of the circumstances of the emergency purchase shall be filed by the city manager with the city commission, and shall be entered into the minutes of the commission and shall be open to public inspection. 
(b)  By head of departments. In case of actual emergency, and with the consent of the agent, and the approval of the city manager, if available, the head of any using agency may purchase directly any supplies whose immediate procurement is essential to prevent delays in the work of the using agency which may vitally affect the life, health or convenience of citizens. 
(1)  Recorded explanation. The head of such using agency shall send to the agent a requisition and a copy of the delivery record, together with a full written report of the circumstances of the emergency. The agent shall forward a copy of the full written report of the circumstances of the emergency to the city manager. In cases of emergency expenditures in excess of $1,000.00, the report shall be filed with the city commission as provided in subsection (a) of this subsection. 
(2)  Emergency procedure. The agent shall prescribe by rules and regulations the procedure under which emergency purchases by heads of using agencies may be made. 
(Code 1982,  1.212) 
Sec. 2-138. - Inspection. 
    The agent shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, all deliveries of purchases to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. 
(1)  Inspection by using agency. The agent shall have the authority to authorize using agencies having the staff and facilities for adequate inspection to inspect all deliveries made to such using agencies under rules and regulations which the agent shall prescribe. 
(2)  Tests. The agent shall have the authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with the specifications. In the performance of such tests, the agent shall have the authority to make use of laboratory facilities of any outside laboratory. 
(Code 1982,  1.213) 
Sec. 2-139. - Surplus stock. 
    All using agencies shall submit to the agent, at such times and in such form as he shall prescribe, reports showing stocks of all supplies which are no longer used or which have become obsolete, worn out or scrapped. 
(1)  Transfer. The agent shall have the authority to transfer surplus stock to other using agencies. 
(2)  Sale. The agent shall have the authority to sell all supplies which have become unsuitable for public use, or to exchange the same for, or trade in the same on, new supplies. 
(3)  Competitive bidding. Sales under this section shall be made to the highest responsible bidder and in conformance with section 2-134 or section 2-135, whichever is applicable. 
(Code 1982,  1.214) 
Sec. 2-140. - Cooperative purchasing. 
    The agent shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the city would be served thereby. 
(Code 1982,  1.215) 
Sec. 2-141. - Penalties. 
    Any officer or employee violating any of the provisions of this division shall be subject to warning, suspension or dismissal. 
(Code 1982,  1.216) 
Secs. 2-142-2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUDGET STABILIZATION FUND[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to create fund, MCL 141.441 et seq., MSA 5.3230(1) et seq. 

Sec. 2-151. - Created. 
    Pursuant to Act No. 30 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 141.441 et seq., MSA 5.3230(1) et seq.), as amended, the city budget stabilization fund is hereby created and hereinafter is referred to as the fund. 
(Ord. No. 91-8,  1, 7-1-91) 
Sec. 2-152. - Appropriations to fund. 
    Each fiscal year, beginning with the 1992-93 fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city commission a budget stabilization fund report showing the present balance of the fund, the maximum amount of money which may legally be in the fund, the previous fiscal year's general fund balance, and a recommendation as to the amount of surplus, if any, which should be appropriated to the fund. The city commission may appropriate all or part of the general fund surplus to the fund by resolution, adopted by a two-thirds vote, subject to the limitations provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 91-8,  2, 7-1-91) 
Sec. 2-153. - Limitations. 
    The fund shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Additional taxes shall not be imposed for the purpose of creating a surplus for appropriation to the fund. 
(2)  The money in the fund shall not exceed 15 percent of the most recent general fund budget, as originally adopted, or 15 percent of the average of the last five most recent general fund budgets, as amended, whichever is less. 
(3)  If the money in the fund exceeds the maximum amount permitted, the excess money shall be appropriated in the next general fund budget, but shall not be appropriated back to the fund. 
(4)  The money in the fund shall not be appropriated for the acquisition, construction, or alteration of a facility as part of a general capital improvements program. 
(Ord. No. 91-8,  3, 7-1-91) 
Sec. 2-154. - Investment. 
    The money in the fund may be invested as provided by law, with the earnings of the fund to be returned to the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 91-8,  4, 7-1-91) 
Sec. 2-155. - Appropriations from fund. 
(a)  Money in the fund may be appropriated, by resolution, adopted by a two-thirds vote of the city commission for the following purposes: 
(1)  Cover a general fund deficit revealed by the annual audit. 
(2)  Prevent a reduction in service levels at any time during a fiscal year, when budgeted revenues are not being collected in an amount sufficient to cover budgeted expenditures. 
(3)  Prevent a reduction in service levels, when preparing the budget for the next fiscal year it appears that estimated revenues will not be sufficient to cover estimated expenditures. 
(4)  Cover expenses arising because of a natural disaster, provided that any federal or state funds which are received to offset appropriations from the fund shall be returned to the fund. 
(b)  In determining whether revenues are not sufficient to cover expenses, a reduction in the amount of money received from any source, in comparison to the amount received in the previous fiscal year, shall be considered. 
(Ord. No. 91-8,  5, 7-1-91) 
Sec. 2-156. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consumer housing cooperative means a nonprofit corporation organized under state law for the purpose of providing dwelling accommodations for its members which the authority determines would be qualified under federal statutes and the regulations of the department of housing project with a federally-aided mortgage. 
    Federally-aided mortgage means a below market interest rate mortgage insured or purchased by the secretary of the department of housing and urban development; or a market interest rate mortgage insured by the secretary and augmented by a program of rent supplements authorized by the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1965. 
    Nonprofit housing corporation means a nonprofit housing corporation incorporated pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan General Corporation Act and the provisions of Act No. 346 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq., MSA 16.114(1) et seq.), as amended by Act No. 334 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1968 (MCL 125.1415a, MSA 16.114(15a)). 
(Code 1982,  1.231) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Secs. 2-157-2-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TAX EXEMPT HOUSING 

Sec. 2-166. - Exemption denied. 
    In accordance with Act No. 346 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq., MSA 16.114(1) et seq.), as amended by Act No. 334 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1968 (MCL 125.1415a, MSA 16.114(15a)), no nonprofit housing corporation or consumer housing cooperative as described in section 15a(1) of such Act, as amended, shall be exempt from any taxes imposed by the state or by any political subdivision, public body or taxing district in which the corporation or cooperative is located, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Code 1982,  1.232) 
Sec. 2-167. - Forest City Dillon, Inc., Project. 
(a)  Preamble. 
(1)  It is the public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low and moderate income, with such purpose and policy being enunciated in Act No. 346 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq., MSA 16.114(1) et seq.), as amended (herein called the "Act"); and 
(2)  Section 15a of the Act, being MCL 125.1415a, MSA 16.114(15a), provides for exemption from all property taxation, those housing developments for persons of low and moderate income financed with a mortgage loan made by the Michigan State Housing Development Authority (herein called the "authority"); and 
(3)  Such property tax exemption will serve to stimulate the development of housing for elderly citizens of low and moderate income; and 
(4)  The City of Plymouth will be benefited and improved by the development of such housing; and 
(5)  The city herein establishes a class of housing projects, such class being defined as housing for elderly citizens of low and moderate income; and 
(6)  Forest City Dillon, Inc., an Ohio corporation, who will form a Michigan limited partnership in which it will be a general partner (herein called "mortgagor"), proposes to erect, own and operate a housing development identified as a midrise apartment building primarily for elderly persons (herein called the "development"), on certain property located at S. Union Street and more particularly described as Lot Nos. 12 and 13, May Subdivision; Lot No. 19, Fralick's Addition; and Lot Nos. 237 to 240, both inclusive, Assessor's Plymouth Plat No. 9, in the city (herein called the "property"), which development is financed with a mortgage loan made by the authority (herein called the "mortgage loan") and which development is intended to serve persons of low and moderate income; and 
(7)  The mortgagor has agreed to pay to the city, on or before April 15 of each year, on account of the development, an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes in the amount equal to four percent of 95 percent of the contract rents (as defined by the rules pursuant to the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended) of the preceding calendar year, exclusive of the costs of fuel, electricity and the amount paid to the city during the preceding calendar year for the annual service charge, from and after the commencement of construction of the development so long as the mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the authority has any interest in the property; and 
(8)  The city commission understands that the mortgagor and the authority are relying upon the qualification of the development for exemption from all property taxes in order to establish the operational feasibility of the development; and 
(9)  Pursuant to the authority vested in the city commission by the Act and by the Charter of the city, the city commission hereby determines that the development is qualified for exemption from all property taxes as provided in the Act. 
(b)  Service charge payment. The city, acknowledging the reliance of the mortgagor and the authority on exemption from all property taxes as described above, the property and the development to be constructed on the property shall be exempt from all property taxes as provided in the Act from and after the commencement of construction of the development, and, in consideration of the foregoing and on behalf of the city, the city commission hereby agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes in the amount equal to four percent of the 95 percent of the contract rents (as defined by the rules pursuant to the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended) of the preceding calendar year exclusive of the costs of fuel, electricity and the amount paid to the city during the preceding calendar year for the annual service charge. 
(c)  Termination. This section shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the authority has any interest in the property. 
(d)  Severability. The various sections and provisions of this section shall be deemed to be severable, and should any section or provision of this section be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of this section as a whole or any section or provision hereof other than the section or provision so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Code 1982,  1.233) 
DIVISION 5. - CITY EMPLOYMENT POSITIONS AND PERSONAL SERVICE CONTRACT 

Sec. 2-168. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Full-time: means any employee working 1,950 hours per year or more. 
    New employment position means the creation of any position which does not currently exist in the City of Plymouth, which would require the staffing of any person to become an employee of the City of Plymouth. 
    Offer of employment means any offer made to any person to become an employee of the City of Plymouth. 
    Position required by a collective bargaining agreement means any position which, by way of a collective bargaining agreement, requires the City of Plymouth to fill a position pursuant to that agreement. 
    Personal service contract means and includes any and all employment contracts between the city and a person whereby the person is contractually obligated to perform any service on behalf of or for the city. The term shall not include contracts which relate to purchasing wherein personal service in an incidental term of the purchase contract. 
(Ord. No. 2000-4, 8-7-00) 
Sec. 2-169. - City commission approval of employment and personal service contracts. 
    The city manager shall obtain from the city commission advance and express approval prior to creating any new full-time employment position, filling any full-time position, whether or not required by a collective bargaining agreement or entering into any personal service contract where the contract for services is to exceed $5,000.00 in any fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 2000-4, 8-7-00) 
Sec. 2-170. - Hiring, timing, and selection of city employees. 
    The determination of hiring needs, the timing of hiring decisions, and the actual selection of city employees is and shall remain within the discretion of the city manager, unless otherwise provided for in the City Charter or Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2000-4, 8-7-00) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54. 
State Law reference- Liquor control act, MCL 436.1 et seq., MSA 18.971 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic liquor and license shall be as defined in Act No. 8 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933, Extra Session (MCL 436.1 et seq., MSA 18.971 et seq.), as amended. 
    Stand alone license means any liquor license issued by the State of Michigan Liquor Control Commission, which may exist and be used on its own (to serve liquor by the glass) and need not be combined with any other type of liquor license. 
    Non-stand alone license means any liquor license issued by the State of Michigan Liquor Control Commission which may not be used (to serve liquor by the glass) unless combined with a stand alone liquor license. 
(Code 1982,  9.241; Ord. No. 18-03 , 3-5-18) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Consumption in public. 
    No alcoholic liquor shall be consumed on the public streets, parks, or in any other public places, including any store or establishment doing business with the public not licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises; nor shall anyone who owns, operates or controls any such public establishment or store permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor therein. 
(Code 1982,  9.242) 
Sec. 6-3. - Liquor sales. 
    No licensee, by himself, or another, shall sell, furnish, give or deliver any alcoholic liquor to any person: 
(1)  Who is so intoxicated as not to be in control of all his faculties. 
(2)  On any day during the hours not permitted by state law or the state liquor control commission. 
(Code 1982,  9.243; Ord. No. 85-14,  1, 12-2-85) 
Sec. 6-4. - Rules of conduct, bars. 
    No licensee shall permit on licensed premises: 
(1)  Spirits to be consumed if licensed to sell only beer or wine or both. 
(2)  Any disorderly conduct or action which disturbs the peace and good order of the neighborhood. 
(3)  Any resorting of prostitutes or other disorderly persons. 
(4)  Any gambling, or the placing or using of any gambling apparatus or paraphernalia therein. 
(5)  Any lewd, obscene or illegal exhibition or entertainment, or other conduct likely to corrupt the public morals. 
(6)  Any employee to visit, fraternize or drink alcoholic liquor with any of the patrons. 
(7)  The obstruction of the public view by the use of drawn shades, blinds or screens, either permanent or movable. 
(8)  The use of so-called "dim-lights," and such licensee shall make use of bright lights at all times during the hours when lights may be necessary. 
(Code 1982,  9.244) 
Sec. 6-5. - Purchases by minor; furnishing. 
    No person under the age of 21 years, shall offer to buy, obtain or drink any alcoholic beverage in any beer garden, tavern, restaurant, store, or place where alcoholic beverages are sold or furnished for consumption either on or away from the premises, or in any public place. No person shall sell, give or offer any alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of 21 years in any beer garden, tavern, restaurant, store, or place where alcoholic beverages are sold or furnished for consumption either on or away from the premises, or in any public place. 
(Code 1982,  9.245) 
Sec. 6-6. - Misrepresenting age. 
    Any person under the age of 21 years, who falsely represents himself to be 21 years or over, and procures or attempts to procure the sale or furnishing to himself of any alcoholic beverage, or any person who makes false representations as to the age of another and thereby procures or attempts to procure the sale or furnishing to any person under the age of 21 years, of any alcoholic beverage, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1982,  9.246) 
Sec. 6-7. - Proof of age. 
    The person in charge of any beer garden, restaurant, tavern, store or place where alcoholic beverages are sold or furnished for consumption either on or away from the premises, shall have the right at any time to demand of any person offering to buy, buying, obtaining, or drinking any alcoholic beverage in such establishment who may appear to him to be under the age of 21 years, proof of age and identity and on failure of such person to produce same, shall refuse to serve, sell or furnish such person with any alcoholic beverage and may exclude such person from such place of business. If any such person shall refuse to leave such place of business, he shall be termed a disorderly person, and subject to the penalties provided in section 1-13 of this Code. 
(Code 1982,  9.247) 
Sec. 6-8. - Possession by minor; transporting. 
    No person under the age of 21 years shall purchase or knowingly possess or transport any alcoholic beverages, or knowingly possess, transport, or have under his control in any motor vehicle any alcoholic beverages unless such person is employed by a licensee, licensed under the provisions of Act No. 8 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933, Extra Session (MCL 436.1 et seq., MSA 18.971 et seq.), as amended, and is possessing, transporting or having alcoholic beverages in a motor vehicle under his control during regular working hours and in the course of his employment. 
(Code 1982,  9.248) 
Sec. 6-9. - Penalties, enforcement. 
(a)  A person less than 21 years of age who violates section 6-2, 6-5 or 6-8 is liable for the following civil fines and shall not be subject to the penalties prescribed in section 1-13 of this Code: 
(1)  For the first violation a fine of not more than $50.00. 
(2)  For a second violation a fine of not more than $100.00, or participation in substance abuse prevention services as defined in section 6107 of Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.6107, MSA 14.15(6107)), and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, or both. 
(3)  For a third or subsequent violation a fine of not more than $150.00, or participation in substance abuse prevention services as defined in section 6107 of Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.6107, MSA 14.15(6107)), and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, or both. 
(b)  Any person under the age of 17 years who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon apprehension, be taken to the juvenile division of the probate court and dealt with in such manner as prescribed by the laws of this state. 
(c)  Any other violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as prescribed in section 1-13 of this Code. 
(Code 1982,  9.249) 
Secs. 6-10-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES AND PERMITS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-01, adopted April 5, 2010, amended and restated former Art. II,  6-31-6-42, in its entirety. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2003-4,  1-12, adopted May 19, 2003. 

Sec. 6-31. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Liquor Management Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 6-32. - Statement of purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to allow the city to establish and administer a policy for the issuance and transfer of liquor licenses and permits which allow the service by the glass of any alcohol (beer, wine, spirits) to be consumed on the premises, to provide for the enforcement of liquor laws, regulations and ordinances, and to manage the number of on-premises retail liquor licenses in the city. 
(b)  This article shall also create the liquor license review committee (LLRC), which shall be composed of at least three members of the city commission. The purpose of the LLRC is to review applications and make recommendations to the city commission as required by this article. 
(c)  It shall be the policy of the city to notify all known existing service by the glass also known as on-premises retail type liquor license holders of proposed changes in this article via first class mail at least ten business days in advance of the city commission acting on a change. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 6-33. - Licensing policy. 
(a)  New licenses or liquor license permits, transfer of ownership of existing licenses, transfers into the city of new licenses, will be approved at the sole discretion of the city commission. This shall include liquor license permits proposed within the B-1, B-2, B-3, and ARC zoning districts within the city. 
(b)  Within the B-2, central business district, as indicated on the city zoning map, the city shall have a cap or total of not more than 16 state stand alone liquor licenses of any type of on-premises retail licenses that would allow for the service of any alcohol (beer, wine, spirits) by the glass or for consumption on premises of any establishment. This section would not apply to non-stand alone state licenses. 
(c)  Within the B-1, B-3 and ARC zoning districts within the city, as indicated on the city zoning map, the city shall have a cap or total of not more than 12 state stand alone liquor licenses of any type of on-premises retail licenses that would allow for the service of any alcohol (beer, wine, spirits) by the glass or for consumption on premises of any establishment. This section would not apply to non-stand alone state licenses. 
(d)  The city commission shall not recommend to the state liquor control commission the approval of any on-premises retail liquor license in excess of 16 within the B-2 district as outlined here. 
(e)  The city commission shall not recommend to the state liquor control commission the approval of any on-premises retail liquor license in excess of 12 within the B-1, B-3, and ARC districts as outlined here. 
(f)  The city shall conduct an annual review of all 28 on premises retail liquor licenses within B-1, B-2, B-3, and ARC zoning districts in accordance with the liquor management ordinance. This review shall be conducted by the local liquor license review committee and a recommendation shall be forwarded to the city commission. 
(g)  If the designation of a non-stand alone license changes to one of a stand alone license, no such license can be operated, sold or transferred in the city unless there is space available under the cap as defined in 6-33(b) and (c). 
(Ord. No. 2003-4, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 2011-05,  1, 2, 6-26-11; Ord. No. 17-04, 4-17-17 ; Ord. No. 18-03 , 3-5-18) 
Sec. 6-34. - Plan of operation required. 
(a)  Business operation. All new requests for permits, requests for transfers of ownership of existing licenses or requests for transfers of licenses into the city of on-premises licensees shall operate in accordance with a plan of operation approved by the city commission. 
(b)  Plan of operation. A plan of operation shall contain an operational statement outlining the proposed manner in which the establishment will be operated, including, but not limited to, the format, schedule of the hours of operation, crowd control, security, alcohol management, use of the facilities, parking provisions, plan for interior use and layout, and any other pertinent information as requested by the city or city's liquor license review committee (LLRC). 
(c)  Compliance. Licensees shall comply with all applicable state and city regulations, this general policy, and a plan of operation as approved by the city commission. Any change to a plan of operation shall be approved by the city commission prior to implementation of the change by the licensee. Failure of such compliance or variance from an approved plan is a violation of this ordinance and may result in the city commission recommending to the Michigan Liquor Control Commission that the license be revoked or not renewed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 6-35. - Review procedures. 
    Each applicant for a new license, the establishment of a new permit, the transfer into the city of a new license, or the transfer of an existing license shall make a request to the city in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Application. Each applicant must submit to the city clerk an application (on a form provided by the city), a plan of operation, plot plan of the site, a plan for interior use and exterior design, and the layout of any ancillary facilities. As part of the application, each applicant shall submit a written statement explaining in detail how their proposal meets the factors as listed in subsection 6-35(4). 
(2)  City departmental review. Upon receipt of an application and plans, the city manager will refer same to the chief of police, fire chief, planning department, building department and other city officers or employees, who shall cause a thorough review and investigation, including, but not limited to a complete history of past business experience and liquor law violations, if any, to be made of the persons and/or premises which must meet or exceed codes. The applicant shall provide all requested information to, and fully cooperate with, all city departments requesting any and all additional relevant information. The findings resulting from such review and investigation shall be reported to the city manager, who then will report same to the LLRC and the city commission. 
(3)  Public hearing/review. 
a.  Hearing. The city commission shall hold a public hearing upon a request for a new license, the establishment of a new permit, transfer of an existing license to new owners, or for the transfer of a new license into the city. 
b.  Notice. Notice of all hearings shall be provided to all property owners, residents and voters, within 300 feet of the proposed establishment, all LCC Service by the Glass-On Premises retail license holders, the Chamber of Commerce, all neighborhood associations and the Plymouth-Canton Community Schools. The applicant shall pay the cost of such notice. 
c.  Appearance. The applicant will be required to appear at the hearing before the LLRC committee or the city commission, and make a written and/or oral presentation concerning the request. 
d.  Recommendation. The LLRC shall review and may recommend approval or disapproval of all requests to the city commission. 
(4)  Review factors. In reviewing a request for a new license or permits or transfers of ownership of existing licenses or transfers into the city of new on-premises licensees, the city commission or LLRC may consider and/or weigh the following factors: 
a.  Conserve the expenditure of funds for public improvements and services to conform with the most advantageous uses of land, resources and property. 
b.  Total number of similar licenses in the city. 
c.  Input from residents and surrounding business owners. 
d.  Impact of the establishment on surrounding businesses and neighborhoods. 
e.  Whether a proposed licensed premise is part of a multi-use project with substantial new retail, office, or residential components. The size of the licensed premise relative to the overall project or development. 
f.  Crowd control. 
g.  Parking availability. 
h.  Preservation or restoration of historic buildings. 
i.  Locating in an underdeveloped area. 
j.  Concentration of drinking establishments and impact on policing requirements. 
k.  Policing requirements. 
l.  Business history. 
m.  Business experience. 
n.  LCC violation history. 
o.  Will facility be a sit down full service restaurant serving alcohol or other "bar only" type establishment. 
p.  Will restaurant have a 70-percent-30-percent sales of food over alcohol 
q.  Percent of floor area devoted to dining versus bar area. 
r.  Size of bar area. 
s.  Size of dance floor, if any. 
t.  Type or character of the establishment, e.g. dining, nightclub, hotel, dance club. 
u.  Overall benefit of the plan to the city. 
v.  Non-payment of taxes or other payment due to the city. 
w.  Any other factor(s) that may effect the health, safety and welfare or the best interests of the community. 
(5)  Approval. If after a review by the LLRC, and/or a public hearing, the city commission is satisfied that the establishment or operation will provide a benefit to the city and constitute an asset to the community, it will adopt a resolution granting approval, subject to the satisfaction of any conditions stated in the resolution. 
a.  Building-Remodeling. If the request involves a change to the physical size or layout of the establishment, when the applicant's building or remodeling is completed, it must meet all state and local regulations, and must comply with the representations made to the city commission and LLRC committee by the applicant. If such physical alteration is approved by the city commission and it is subsequently determined that the project was not substantially completed as required by the plans and specifications presented to the city, or in substantial compliance with representations made to the city, the city may recommend that the license be revoked or not be renewed for the following year. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 6-36. - Permits and transfer of ownership. 
(a)  Permits. New requests for permits for dance, entertainment, or dance and entertainment shall be reviewed by the LLRC and approved in the sole discretion of the city commission after evaluation of the factors listed in subsection 6-35(4). The city will not consider requests for topless entertainment permits. 
(b)  Transfer of ownership. Requests for transfer of ownership of existing licensed establishments shall be reviewed by the LLRC and approved or disapproved by the city commission. The city commission may hold a public hearing. If the continuation of an existing operation is contemplated, the applicant must present a plan that indicates that it will continue the existing operation as established. If there are proposed changes in the operations then the request for transfer of ownership shall be subject to the reviews outlined in subsection 6-35(4). 
(c)  Any change in existing operations from a full service sit down restaurant that serves alcohol to an establishment that features primarily alcohol would be subject to a new review as outlined in subsection 6-35(4). 
(Ord. No. 2003-4, 6, 5-19-03; Ord. No. 18-03 , 3-5-18) 
Sec. 6-37. - Annual license and permit review. 
(a)  The city commission will undertake a review of any license or permit for the purpose of making a recommendation to the Michigan Liquor Control Commission regarding renewal of said license or permit. The commission shall consider whether a licensed establishment has been operated in a manner consistent with the provisions of this article and all other applicable laws, and regulations of the city and the State of Michigan. 
(b)  Each year, the city manager shall cause an investigation to be made relative to each existing on-premises licensed establishment. The investigation shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Licensee shall submit copies of current valid licenses from appropriate county, state or federal governments to insure authorization to serve food at the establishment. 
(2)  An inspection of the premises to determine whether the licensee is in compliance with the license itself, its approved site plan and if applicable its plan of operation, as well as any conditions imposed by the city or the Michigan Liquor Control Commission or representations made by the licensee at the time of issuance or transfer of the license. 
(3)  An inspection of city records to determine whether all taxes and other monies due the city are timely paid. 
(4)  An inspection of police files or other sources of information to determine whether any activity in connection with the licensed premise is in violation of the law, disturbs the public peace and tranquility, constitutes a nuisance, or contributes to the disruption of the normal activities of those in the neighborhood of the licensed premise. 
(5)  A review to determine the existence of any of the criteria as described in section 6-39. 
(6)  A review of the operation of the licensed establishment to determine whether the business is being operated in compliance with any and all representations that may have been made by the licensee to the city or the city commission. 
(c)  Recommendations from city departments. Following receipt of a fully completed application, fees, and such other information as may be requested by the city, the city clerk shall forward the application to the police department, fire department, building department, treasurer's office, and such other departments as required by the city manager, which departments shall make their reviews and recommendations prior to consideration by the city commission. In conducting its review, the city may request other pertinent information from the licensee. The completed report shall be reviewed by the LLRC prior to being considered by the city commission. 
(d)  The local liquor license review committee shall annually review and report to the city commission its recommendations to maintain, expand or delete the total number of allowable on-premises retail licenses for establishments that serve alcohol by the glass under a variety of State of Michigan Licenses, including but not limited to; Class C, Club, B Hotel, A Hotel, Tavern, Brewpub, Micro-brewer, Resort, DDA, Economic Development, winery or other type license. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 4-5-10; Ord. No. 18-03 , 3-5-18) 
Sec. 6-38. - Revocation and non-renewal. 
(a)  Each establishment within the city for which a liquor license or permit is granted shall be operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations of the City of Plymouth and the State of Michigan. Upon any violation of this article, the commission may, after notice and hearing, request the Michigan Liquor Control Commission to revoke such license and/or permit. 
Upon any violation(s) of this article, the city will notify the licensee of the specific violation(s) and afford the licensee an opportunity to come into compliance with this article. Licensee must reach compliance in that time established by the city manager, but in no event more than ten days after notification to licensee by city of such violation. Absent compliance within that time established by the city manager, the city may hold the above mentioned hearing and request that the Michigan Liquor Control Commission not renew and/or revoke such license and/or permit. 
(b)  Before filing any objection to renewal or request for revocation of a license or permit with the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, the city shall serve the licensee with notice and proceed in accordance with this article, as amended. The city shall serve the licensee by first class mail mailed at least ten days prior to the hearing with notice of hearing, which notice shall contain, the following: 
(1)  Date, time and place of hearing. 
(2)  Notice of the proposed action. 
(3)  Reasons for the proposed action. 
(4)  Names of witnesses known at the time who will testify. 
(5)  A statement that the licensee may present evidence or any testimony that may refute or respond to the claims of adverse witnesses. 
(6)  A statement requiring the licensee to notify the city attorney's office at least three days prior to the hearing date if they intend to contest the proposed action, and to provide the names of witnesses known at the time who will testify on their behalf. 
(c)  Upon completion of the hearing, the city commission shall submit to the licensee and the Michigan Liquor Control Commission a written statement of its findings and determination. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 6-39. - Criteria for non-renewal or revocation. 
(a)  The city commission may recommend non-renewal or revocation of a license or permit originally authorized on or after July 1, 2003 to the liquor control commission upon a determination based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing that any of the following exists: 
(1)  Failure to comply with all standards, plans or agreements entered into in consideration for the issuance, transfer or continuance of the license or permit, or failure to comply with all agreements or consent judgments entered into subsequent to the issuance of the license or permit. 
(2)  Failure to comply with an approved plan of operation and other plans, specifications, or representations made or submitted to the city by the licensee. 
(3)  Violations of the state liquor laws or regulations of the liquor control commission. 
(4)  Violations of state laws or local ordinances including, but not limited to those laws or ordinances concerning the public health, safety or public welfare. 
(5)  Maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection with the licensed premises including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
a.  Failure to correct violations of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, zoning, health, fire or other applicable regulatory codes, to include the history thereof; 
b.  A pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of the licensed premises, which is a violation of the law and/or disturbs the peace, order and tranquility of the neighborhood; Including types of police, fire or medical services related to this operation. 
c.  Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed premises, including litter, debris or refuse blowing or being deposited upon adjoining properties; 
d.  Entertainment on the premises or activity in connection with the licensed premises which by its nature causes, creates or contributes to disorder, disobedience to rules, ordinance or laws, or contributes to the disruption of normal activity of those in the neighborhood of the licensed premises. 
(6)  Failure by the licensee to permit the inspection of the licensed premises by the city's agents or employees in connection with the enforcement of this article. 
(7)  Failure to pay taxes or make other payments due to the city in a timely manner. 
(b)  The city commission may recommend non-renewal or revocation of a license or permit originally authorized to operate in the city on or before June 30, 2003 to the liquor control commission upon a determination based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing that any of the following exists: 
(1)  Violations of the state liquor laws or regulations of the liquor control commission. 
(2)  Violations of state laws or local ordinances including, but not limited to those laws or ordinances concerning the public health, safety or public welfare. 
(3)  Maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection with the licensed premises including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
a.  Failure to correct violations of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, zoning, health, fire, property maintenance or other applicable regulatory codes, to include the history thereof; 
b.  A pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of the licensed premises, which is a violation of the law and/or disturbs the peace, order and tranquility of the neighborhood; 
c.  Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the licensed premises, including litter, debris or refuse blowing or being deposited upon adjoining properties; 
d.  Entertainment on the premises or activity in connection with the licensed premises which by its nature causes, creates or contributes to disorder, disobedience to rules, ordinance or laws, or contributes to the disruption of normal activity of those in the neighborhood of the licensed premises. 
(4)  Failure by the licensee to permit the inspection of the licensed premises by the city's agents or employees in connection with the enforcement of this article. 
(5)  Failure to pay taxes or make other payments due to the city in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 6-40. - Capacity limits. 
    The total capacity of each room of a licensed establishment shall be established and determined by the appropriate fire and building safety codes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 6-41. - Termination of escrowed licenses. 
    The city commission may, through resolution, request that the Michigan Liquor Control Commission terminate an on-premises license that has been placed in escrow for more than one (1) year after its expiration. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 6-42. - Fees. 
    Each applicant for a new license or permit, for transfer of an existing license or permit, for expansion of an existing establishment, and for renewal of an existing license or permit shall pay a non-refundable application investigation fee. Each applicant for renewal of a license that was originally established on or before June 30, 2003 shall be exempt from annual renewal fees; all others shall pay an annual review fee. Such fees will be in addition to any fee required by the liquor control commission and shall be set by a city commission resolution. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 4-5-10) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 22; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54. 
State Law reference- Offenses relating to public exhibitions and entertainment, MCL 750.463 et seq., MSA 28.718 et seq.; offenses concerning coin-operated devices, MCL 752.811, MSA 28.643(101). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Inspection. 
    No person licensed under or subject to the provisions of this chapter, nor his agent or any employee, shall deny any member of the city fire, police or health departments, or the building inspector, access to the premises on which the amusement licensed by or subject to this chapter is conducted, maintained, or operated for the purpose of inspection and for the enforcement of all laws and provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1982,  7.161) 
Secs. 10-2-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES 

Sec. 10-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Arcade means any place, premises, or establishment, or room set aside in a commercial establishment in which a substantial and significant portion of the business carried on involves the operation of coin-operated mechanical or electronic amusement devices, or in which six or more coin-operated mechanical or electronic devices are located. A maximum of 15 machines will be allowed at each location. Supervision by an adult at least 21 years of age or older must be provided during operating hours of an arcade. 
    Mechanical or electronic amusement device means any machine or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally by manipulating special equipment whereby a score is established, the object of which is to secure a special number or numbers or a high total score, whether a prize is offered or not, when element of skill in grabbing articles predominates over chance or luck. 
    Person, corporation, or association, shall include any person, firm, corporation or association which owns any such machine, the person, firm, corporation, or association in whose place of business any such machine is placed for use by the public; and the person, firm, corporation or association having control over such machine; provided, however, that the payment of such fee by any person, firm, corporation or association enumerated herein shall be deemed in compliance with this section of the chapter. 
(Code 1982,  7.221) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 10-27. - Gambling devices not permitted. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary to law, or that may be contrary to any future laws of the state. 
(Code 1982,  7.222) 
Sec. 10-28. - License required. 
    Any person displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any mechanical or electronic amusement device shall be required to obtain a license from the city. Application shall be made to the city upon a form to be supplied by the city clerk for that purpose. 
(Code 1982,  7.223(1)) 
Sec. 10-29. - Application. 
    The application for a license under this article shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth. 
(2)  Prior convictions of the applicant, if any. 
(3)  Place where the machine or device is to be displayed or operated, and the business conducted at that place. 
(4)  Description of the machine to be covered by the license, mechanical features, name of manufacturer, serial number. 
(5)  Name and address of the owner of the amusement device. 
(Code 1982,  7.224(1)-(4)) 
Sec. 10-30. - Qualifications for license. 
    No license shall be issued to any applicant under this article unless he is over legal age. An applicant who has been convicted of a criminal offense involving gambling, narcotics, or criminal sexual conduct shall be disqualified as an applicant if such conviction occurred within the two-year period prior to application. 
(Code 1982,  7.224(5)) 
Sec. 10-31. - Inspection. 
    Application for license under this article shall be made out in duplicate, one copy being referred to the chief of police, and the other copy to the city electrical inspector. 
(1)  The chief of police shall investigate the location wherein it is proposed to operate such machine, ascertain if the applicant is a person of good moral character, and either approve or disapprove the application. 
(2)  The electrical inspector shall inspect all wiring and connections to the machine, determine if the same complies with the electrical code of the city, and shall either approve or disapprove the application. 
(Code 1982,  7.225) 
Sec. 10-32. - License fees. 
    Every applicant for a license under this article, before being granted a license shall pay the following annual license fee for the privilege of operating or maintaining for operation each mechanical amusement device: 
(1)  Electronic and mechanical amusement devices: 
a.  $100.00 per year for first device; 
b.  $50.00 per year for each additional device. 
(2)  Arcade license: 
a.  $500.00 per year for the first year, renewable January 1 of each year; 
b.  $200.00 per year for each succeeding year. 
(3)  Transfer fee, $25.00 for each device. 
(Code 1982,  7.223(2)) 
Sec. 10-33. - Duration. 
    The licenses for devices and arcades shall be issued to the operators, and shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licenses shall be issued from January 1 to December 31, with no prorating of fees. 
(Code 1982,  7.223(2)) 
Sec. 10-34. - Notice of new machines. 
    A licensee under this article shall contact the building department when a machine coming under this article is changed so that it can be properly inspected. 
(Code 1982,  7.223(2)) 
Sec. 10-35. - Display of license. 
    The license or licenses herein provided for shall be posted permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine in the premises wherein the device is to be operated or maintained to be operated. 
(Code 1982,  7.226(1)) 
Sec. 10-36. - Transfer. 
(a)  A license issued under this article may be transferred from one machine or device to another similar machine upon application to the city clerk to such effect and the giving of a description and the serial number of the new machine or device. Not more than one machine shall be operated under one license, and the applicant or licensee shall be required to secure a license for each and every machine displayed or operated by him. 
(b)  If the licensee shall move his place of business to another location within the city, the license may be transferred to such new location upon application to the city clerk, giving the street and number of the new location. The new location shall be approved by the chief of police and the city electrical inspector in the same manner as provided in section 10-31. 
(Code 1982,  7.226) 
Sec. 10-37. - Prohibitions and restrictions. 
(a)  No person shall permit the playing of mechanical amusement devices within 300 feet of any public or parochial school building. 
(b)  Arcades shall have a minimum of 100 square feet per device. 
(c)  Arcade occupancy shall be restricted to four persons per device, plus one supervisor. 
(d)  Arcades shall furnish one off-street parking place per device, plus two off-street parking places for management personnel. 
(e)  Arcades shall furnish bike racks capable of handling three bikes per device. Bike racks shall be on private property and shall be clear of building ingress or egress. 
(Code 1982,  7.227) 
Sec. 10-38. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  Every license issued under this article is subject to the right, which is hereby expressly reserved, to revoke the same should the licensee, directly or indirectly permit the operation of any mechanical amusement device contrary to the provisions of this article, the ordinances of the city, and state law. 
(b)  Such license may be revoked by the city commission after written notice to the licensee, which notice shall specify the ordinance or law violations with which the licensee is charged, if after a hearing the licensee is found to be guilty of such violations. Ten days' notice of the hearing shall be given the licensee. At such hearing the licensee and his attorney may present and submit evidence of witnesses in his defense. 
(Code 1982,  7.228) 
Sec. 10-39. - Seizure and destruction of machine. 
    If the chief of police shall have reason to believe any mechanical or electronic amusement device is a gambling device, such machine may be seized by the police and impounded and if upon trial of the exhibitor the machine is proven to be a gambling device, such exhibitor to be found guilty, such machine shall be destroyed by the police. 
(Code 1982,  7.229) 
Sec. 10-40. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, in addition to the revocation of his license, shall be liable to a penalty as prescribed in section 1-13. 
(Code 1982,  7.230) 
Secs. 10-41-10-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - THEATERS 

Sec. 10-61. - License required. 
    No person shall operate any theater open to the public for the showing of moving pictures or for the presentation of stage plays or entertainment without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(Code 1982,  7.141) 
Sec. 10-62. - License fees. 
    The fee for a license required by this article shall be as prescribed in chapter 22. 
(Code 1982,  7.141) 
Sec. 10-63. - Compliance with applicable law; certification. 
    No license shall be issued for the operation of a theater in any building which does not conform to all the provisions of state law and this Code relating to fire prevention, health and public safety applicable to theaters and the structures in which they are operated. No license shall be issued except upon certification of the fire chief and the health officer. 
(Code 1982,  7.141) 
Secs. 10-64-10-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TENT SHOWS AND MEETINGS 

Sec. 10-86. - License required. 
    No person shall conduct or carry on any public show, exhibition, or meeting of any kind under canvas, except a circus licensed by article VI of this chapter, without first obtaining a license under this section. 
(Code 1982,  7.145) 
Sec. 10-87. - License fee. 
    The fee for any license required by this article shall be as prescribed in chapter 22. 
(Code 1982,  7.145) 
Sec. 10-88. - Investigation. 
    The city clerk shall refer each application for a license under this article to the police chief, health officer, and the fire chief for investigation and recommendation. 
(Code 1982,  7.145) 
Sec. 10-89. - Enforcement. 
    The fire chief shall assign a member of the fire department to attend any show or meeting licensed under this article for the purpose of enforcing all fire laws and Code requirements. No person conducting any such meeting shall refuse such firefighter admission. 
(Code 1982,  7.145) 
Secs. 10-90-10-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT RIDES 

Sec. 10-111. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mechanical amusement ride means any device or assembly designed to carry three or more persons which is propelled by motive power, to amuse, entertain or thrill the persons occupying seats thereon in a manner similar to devices commonly associated with a carnival, fair, amusement park or the like. This term shall not be deemed to include coin-operated cars, ships, mechanical horses, airplanes, spacecraft and similar devices designed, installed and used for the purpose of providing amusement for not more than two small children or infants at a time by providing a rocking, vibrating, or oscillating ride when limited to the confines of a stationary platform or pedestal. 
(Code 1982,  7.151(1)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 10-112. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of operating any mechanical amusement ride without first obtaining a license therefor from the city. 
(Code 1982,  7.151(2)) 
Sec. 10-113. - Exemptions. 
    The operation of any mechanical amusement ride by any charitable, fraternal or patriotic organization or school shall be exempt from paying the license fee imposed upon the operation thereof, but shall, in all other respects, be subject to the requirements of this section. The city and public schools shall be exempt from the license fee and the insurance requirement. 
(Code 1982,  7.151(3)) 
Sec. 10-114. - Insurance. 
    No license shall be issued under this article until the operator has filed with the city clerk one or more policies of insurance providing indemnity for the insured in the amounts specified herein and agreeing to pay, within the limits of such amounts, on behalf of the insured, all sums which the insured shall become obligated to pay by reason of the liability imposed upon the insured by law, for damages because of bodily injury, including death, at any time resulting therefrom, or for damages to property, or both, sustained by any person other than the employees of the insured and caused by accident and arising out of the operation of the licensed business. The minimum amount of such insurance coverage shall be: 
(1)  On account of injury to, or death of, any person in any one accident ..... $100,000.00 
(2)  On account of any one accident resulting in injury to, or death of, more than one person ..... 300,000.00 
(3)  On account of damage to property in any one accident ..... 100,000.00 
(Code 1982,  7.151(2)) 
Sec. 10-115. - Inspection. 
    No license shall be issued under this article until each ride has been inspected by the department of public works and approved. 
(Code 1982,  7.151(2)) 
Secs. 10-116-10-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - CIRCUSES 

Sec. 10-136. - License required. 
    No person shall conduct or operate any circus in the city without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(Code 1982,  7.155) 
Sec. 10-137. - License fee. 
    The fee for a license required by this article shall be as prescribed in chapter 22. 
(Code 1982,  7.155) 
Sec. 10-138. - Investigations and recommendations. 
    The city clerk shall refer each application for a circus license to the chief of police and the health officer for investigation and recommendation. 
(Code 1982,  7.155) 
Sec. 10-139. - Insurance. 
(a)  Before any circus license is issued under this article, the applicant therefor shall furnish one or more policies of insurance, issued by responsible insurance companies providing indemnity for the insured in the amounts specified herein and agreeing to pay, within the limits of such amounts, on behalf of the insured, all sums which the insured shall become obligated to pay by reason of the liability imposed upon the insured by law, for damages because of bodily injury, including death, at any time resulting therefrom, or for damages to property, or both, sustained by any person other than the employees of the insured and caused by accident and arising out of the operation of the licensed business. The minimum amount of such insurance coverage shall be: 
(1) On account of injury to, or death of, any person in any one accident $  500,000.00 (2) On account of any one accident resulting in injury to, or death of, more than one person ..... 1,000,000.00 (3) On account of damage to property in any one accident ..... 300,000.00  
(b)  A duplicate executed copy or photostatic copy of the original of such insurance policy, approved as to form by the city attorney, shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1982,  7.156) 
Secs. 10-140-10-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - POOL ROOMS AND BOWLING ALLEYS 

Sec. 10-161. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bowling establishment means any place open to the public for bowling. 
    Pool room means any place open to the public for playing pool or billiards. 
(Code 1982,  7.111) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 10-162. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of operating a pool room or bowling establishment without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(Code 1982,  7.112) 
Sec. 10-163. - Approval by chief of police. 
    No license shall be granted under this article except upon certification of the chief of police and unless a complete set of fingerprints of the applicant therefor are on file in the noncriminal identification file of the police department. 
(Code 1982,  7.112) 
Sec. 10-164. - Number of tables, alleys. 
    Each license issued under this article shall designate the number of pool or billiard tables or bowling lanes permitted thereunder. No licensee shall keep or maintain more tables or lanes than designated in such license. 
(Code 1982,  7.112) 
Sec. 10-165. - Exception. 
    This article shall not be applicable to bowling establishments or pool rooms operated and owned by public institutions, schools or churches. 
(Code 1982,  7.114) 
Sec. 10-166. - Minors. 
(a)  No person who is less than 14 years of age may remain or loiter in or about any premises licensed under this article as a pool room, nor shall any licensee permit any such minor to remain in such poolroom, unless such minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian. No person shall falsely represent himself to be 14 years or older in order to obtain admittance to or remain in any licensed pool room. 
(b)  It shall be lawful to permit minors under the age of 14 to remain in a licensed pool room or bowling establishment if the parent or guardian of such minor shall grant written permission to such minor so to do, a copy of which written permission must be kept on file by the proprietor or manager of such pool room or bowling establishment. 
(Code 1982,  7.113) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Cruelty to animals. 
    No person shall cruelly treat or abuse any animal or bird. 
(Ord. No. 99-9, 6-21-99) 
Sec. 14-2. - Poisoning animals. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any poisonous substance on any exposed public or private place where it endangers, or is likely to endanger, any animal or bird. 
(Ord. No. 99-9, 6-21-99) 
Sec. 14-3. - Birds and birds' nests. 
    No person, except a public officer acting in his official capacity, shall molest, injure, kill or capture any wild bird, or molest or disturb any wild bird's nest or the contents thereof. 
(Ord. No. 99-9, 6-21-99) 
Sec. 14-4. - Domestic animals and fowl. 
    No person shall keep or house any animals or domestic fowl within the city except dogs, cats, birds, fowl or animals commonly classified as pets. 
(Ord. No. 99-9, 6-21-99) 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2008-02, adopted April 7, 2008, amended former Art. II,  14-5-14-21, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 99-9, adopted June 21, 1999. 

Sec. 14-5. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety, comfort, and general welfare of the community through the proper control of dogs by their owners and others. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-6. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous dog shall mean and include: (a) any dog that bites or attacks a person or domestic animal without provocation; (b) any dog that bites or attacks and causes serious injury or death to another domestic animal while the domestic animal is on the property or under the control of its owner, (c) any dog with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack or to otherwise endanger the safety of people or other domestic animals; or (d) any dog deemed a dangerous dog by a court of law. 
    Dog shall mean and include any canine. 
    Kennel shall mean and include a place where more than two (2) dogs are kept. 
    Owner shall mean and include any natural person or any other legal entity having a possessory right in a dog or who harbors, cares for, exercises control over, or knowingly permits any dog to remain on its premises occupied by such person or entity. 
    Running at large shall mean and include: permitting any dog to leave the premises of its owner without being on a leash and under the control of a person physically able to control the dog or any dog on private property not enclosed, restrained, or kept in such a manner so as to prevent such dog from entering upon a street, public place, or premises of another. 
    Serious injury shall mean and include any physical injury that results in broken bones or lacerations that require sutures, cosmetic surgery, or other medical care and treatment. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-7. - Exceptions. 
    A dangerous dog does not include any of the following: 
(a)  A dog that bites or attacks a person who is trespassing on the property of the dog's owner; 
(b)  A dog that bites or attacks a person who provokes or torments the dog; 
(c)  A dog that is responding in a manner that an ordinary and reasonable person would conclude was designed to protect a person if that person is engaged in a lawful activity or is the subject of an assault; 
(d)  A dog which is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-8. - License required. 
    Every person owning, possessing, or harboring a dog of the age of four months or more, shall apply to the city clerk for a license on an annual basis. The license, if approved, shall be issued to the applicant. No license shall be issued to any applicant who fails to comply with the requirements of this article. All applications for a dog license must be filed with the city clerk within 30 days of taking of possession of real property in the city, obtaining a new dog for which a license is required, or by January 1 of each year if such dog resided within the city and currently has a valid dog license from the city. Violation of this section shall be a civil infraction subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 plus costs of prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08; Ord. No. 16-07, 9-6-16 ) 
Sec. 14-9. - Application requirements. 
    All applications for dog licenses shall contain and/or provide for the following information: 
(a)  A detailed description of the dog for whom the license is sought and shall include information regarding the breed, sex, age, color, and markings on the dog; 
(b)  The full name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
(c)  That the applicant is the owner of the dog for whom the license is sought; 
(d)  A certificate of vaccination for rabies signed by a licensed veterinary surgeon, certifying that the dog for whom the license is sought has been so immunized within the one year prior to expiration of any currently existing license; 
(e)  A detailed description of any violent and/or dangerous propensities the owner of the dog is aware of at the time the application is filed out; 
(f)  Whether the dog to be licensed has ever caused any type of injury to any person, any other animal, or property. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-10. - Fees, exemptions. 
(a)  The license fee for all dogs in accordance with this article shall be established by resolution of the city commission. 
(b)  A dog is not subject to any fee for licensing if either of the following apply: 
(1)  The dog is used as a guide or leader dog for a blind person, a hearing dog for a deaf or audibly impaired person, or a service dog for a physically limited person. 
(2)  The dog is owned by a partnership, corporation, or other legal entity who trains dogs for use as a guide or leader dog for blind persons, hearing dogs for deaf or audibly impaired persons, or service dogs for physically limited persons. 
(3)  The dog is owned and/or used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties. 
(c)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Audibly impaired means audibly impaired as defined in section 1 of Public Act No. 82 of 1982 (MCL 752.61). 
(2)  Blind person means a blind person as defined in section 1 of Public Act No. 260 of 1978 (MCL 393.351). 
(3)  Deaf person means a deaf person as defined in section 1 of Public Act No. 82 of 1971 (MCL 752.61) 
(4)  Person with disabilities means a person who is audibly impaired, blind, deaf, or otherwise physically limited. 
(d)  The licensee fee for any dog license which has not been obtained prior to January 1 of any year shall be considered delinquent and such license fee throughout the balance of each year shall be as established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-11. - License tag. 
    Upon the issuance of a dog license, the city clerk or a designee of the city clerk, shall give to the licensee a tag which shall bear the number of the license and the expiration date of the license. Such license tag must be attached to a collar of durable material and worn by the dog at all times. It shall be unlawful for anyone, other than the registered owner of the dog, to remove such license tag from the dog or for anyone to attach such a license tag to any dog for which such tag was not issued. Dog tags issued by the city are not transferable, nor may they be assigned to any other dog. It is the responsibility of the owner of any dog whose tag has expired or been lost to apply for a new tag with the city clerk in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-12. - Kennel license. 
    Any owner or keeper of a kennel shall secure from the city clerk or a designee of the city clerk a license. The chief of police, building official, or any other any authorized representative shall inspect and approve the proposed premises before any kennel license shall be issued. No kennel license shall be issued in any situation where the issuance of such a license would violate and/or be contrary to any law or ordinance regarding health, zoning, or property restrictions. A kennel license shall not be required in the case of a city licensed female dog having a litter of pups, provided that the owner of the female dog shall dispose of the pups before such offspring reach the age of four months. The license required to operate a kennel in the city must be renewed annually before January 1 of each year. The application fee for a kennel license shall be set by resolution of the city commission. All dogs kept in kennels shall be licensed individually as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-13. - Maintenance required for a kennel. 
    Any kennel operated or maintained in the city shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times and is subject to inspection by the chief of police, building official, or any other any authorized representative at any time. It shall be unlawful for any kennel operated within the city to operate in such a way as to cause harm or endanger any person of the public. Failure to comply with the section of the this article shall result in the license for operation of such kennel to be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-14. - Running at large. 
    No person owning, possessing, or harboring any dog shall allow such dog to run at large at any time. The chief of police or any authorized representative of the police department may destroy any stray dog, any apparent dangerous dog, or any dog not held by a leash found in any street, alley, commons, public space within the city, open space within the city, or in any persons yard other than that of the owner of the dog. The chief of police or any authorized representative of the police department should first make a reasonable effort to catch and impound any dog in violation of this section before destroying said dog unless doing so would place the police officer and/or the public in any apparent danger. Violation of this section shall be a civil infraction subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 plus costs of prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08; Ord. No. 16-07, 9-6-16 ) 
Sec. 14-15. - Offenses by dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful within the city to: 
(a)  Harbor or keep any dog, which, by loud and/or frequent or habitual barking, yelping, or howling, shall cause serious annoyance to the neighborhood or to people passing by on the streets of the city; 
(b)  Harbor or keep any dog which has been deemed to be a dangerous dog as set forth and described within this article, unless the dog is kept in a manner consistent with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Permit a dog to run at large as defined within this article. 
(d)  Harbor or keep any dog that is not licensed pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-16. - Judicial proceedings regarding dangerous dogs. 
(a)  Upon a sworn complaint that a dog is a dangerous animal and the dog has caused serious injury or death to a person or has caused serious injury or death to a domestic animal, a district court magistrate, district court, or other municipal court shall issue a summons to the owner ordering him or her to appear to show cause why the animal should not be destroyed. 
(b)  Upon the filing of a sworn complaint as provided in section (a), the court or magistrate shall order the owner to immediately turn the dog over to a proper animal control authority, an incorporated humane society, a licensed veterinarian, or a boarding kennel, at the owner's option, to be retained by them until a hearing is held under this section of the complaint and order. The expense of the boarding and retention of the dog is to be borne by the owner. The dog shall not be returned to the owner until it has a current rabies vaccination and a license as required by law. 
(c)  After a hearing, the magistrate or court shall order the destruction of the dog, at the expense of the owner, if the dog is found to be a dangerous dog that caused serious injury or death to a person or a domestic animal. After a hearing, the court may order the destruction of the dog, at the expense of the owner, if the court finds that the dog is a dangerous dog that did not cause serious injury or death to a person but is likely in the future to cause serious injury or death to a person or in the past has been adjudicated a dangerous dog. 
(d)  If the court or magistrate finds that a dog is a dangerous animal but has not caused serious injury or death to a person, the court or magistrate shall notify the animal control authority for the county in which the complaint was filed of the finding of the court, the name of the owner of dangerous dog, and the address at which the dog is kept at the time of the finding of the court. In addition, the court or magistrate shall order the owner of that dog to do one or more of the following: 
(1)  If the dog that has been found to be a dangerous dog is of the canis familiaris species, have an identification number tattooed upon the dog at the owner's expense, by or under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. The identification number shall be assigned to the dog by the Michigan Department of Agriculture and shall be noted in its records pursuant to Act No. 309 of the Public Acts of 1939, being sections 287.301 to 287.308 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. The identification number shall be tattooed on the upper inner left rear thigh of the dog by the means of indelible or permanent ink. 
(2)  Take specific steps, such as escape proof fencing or enclosure, including a top or roof, to ensure that the dog cannot escape or unauthorized individuals cannot enter the premises. 
(3)  Have the dog sterilized. 
(4)  Obtain and maintain liability insurance coverage sufficient to protect the public from any damager or harm caused by the dog. 
(5)  Take any other action appropriate to protect the public. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-17. - Rabies prevention. 
    Any person who shall have in his or her possession a dog which has contracted rabies, which has been exposed to the same, which is suspected of having rabies, or which has bitten any person, shall, upon the demand of the police department surrender such dog to the police department or health department to be held for observation and treatment as hereinafter required. It shall be the duty of every person owning or harboring a dog which has been attacked or bitten by another dog or other animal showing the symptoms of rabies to immediately notify the police department or health department that such person has such dog or other such animal in his or her possession. Whenever a dog is brought to the pound after having bitten a person, the police department may, if deemed necessary and advisable, after holding such a dog for a sufficient length of time to meet the requirements of the health department for investigation, cause such dog to be destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-18. - Pound. 
    The chief of police or any other any authorized representative shall provide and operate a pound in which shall be impounded all dogs that may be found running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter. The chief of police or any other any authorized representative shall give a receipt for each dog to the party delivering the same, describing the dog and stating the date of delivery. It shall be the duty of every member of the police department of the City of Plymouth and of every other person who may be appointed by city authority for that purpose, to promptly seize and place in the pound all dogs that may be found running at large contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-19. - Release from pound. 
    No dog shall be released from the pound, unless the owner or person entitled to demand the same, shall pay to the keeper of the pound a sum as shall be fixed by the keeper of the pound and shall exhibit a license for such dog issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-20. - Pound records. 
    The chief of police or any other any authorized representative shall keep a record of all dogs received by him or her, with descriptions thereof, the date and hour received, and the disposition of the same. He or she shall also file with the city clerk on the first day of each month, a report showing the number of dogs impounded during the previous month, the date when received, and the disposition of the same. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-21. - Disposition of unclaimed dogs. 
    All dogs not claimed and released within five (5) working days after being impounded shall be euthanized; or if, in the judgment of the chief of police or any other any authorized representative, that a dog is valuable, the same shall be sold at the pound by public auction to the highest bidder at noon on any day following the expiration of the said five-day period. Whenever a dog wearing a proper license shall have been impounded, the chief of police or any other any authorized representative shall forthwith notify licensee, by mail or otherwise, at address appearing upon application for such license of the fact that such dog is impounded. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-22. - Hiring pound facilities. 
    The city manager is authorized to contract with a veterinarian or other person for the furnishing of impounding facilities and the disposal of dogs euthanized pursuant to the provisions hereof to the end that the chief of police may be relieved from operating a pound and this chapter may be economically enforced. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-23. - Violations. 
    Unless stated otherwise within a section, violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or imprisonment for not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, plus costs of prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08; Ord. No. 16-03, 8-7-16; Ord. No. 16-07, 9-6-16 ) 
Sec. 14-24. - Violation tickets. 
    For convenience of the public and economy in enforcement, police officers are hereby authorized to issue violation tickets to offenders hereunder. The form of such tickets shall be approved by the district judge and the chief of police. On the basis of the issued violation ticket, a complaint shall be filed and the alleged violator shall be duly tried therein in the district court. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-25. - Forms. 
    The city clerk shall provide application and license forms containing such information as he or she deems necessary to carry out the provisions hereof. All fees and charges hereunder shall be deposited with the city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-26. - Yard cleanliness. 
    Yards and exercise dog runs shall be kept free of dog droppings, uneaten food, and maintained in a sanitary manner so as not to be a nuisance because of odor or attraction for flies and vermin. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-27. - Injury to property; waste products. 
(a)  No person owning or possessing a dog shall permit the dog to bark, tear up, crush or injure any lawn, flower bed, plant, shrub, tree, garden, or any other property, public or private not owned or possessed by such person, in any manner whatsoever, without the permission of the owner of said property. 
(b)  No person owning or possessing a dog shall cause or permit the dog to soil or defecate on property, public or private, not owned or possessed by such person unless such person shall immediately remove all droppings deposited by the dog by any sanitary method of his choice and transport those droppings within an appropriate container to a receptacle located on property owned or possessed by such person. The person shall possess the proper equipment to perform the required removal and shall display the equipment if requested by any official empowered to enforce this chapter. This subsection shall not apply to a person who is visually or physically handicapped. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 14-28. - Savings clause. 
    If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable. 
(Ord. No. 2008-02, 4-7-08) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; community development, ch. 30; environment, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection and emergency services, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 74; zoning, ch. 78. 
State Law reference- State construction code act, MCL 125.1501 et seq., MSA 5.2949(1) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Agency designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Building, Electrical, Mechanical and Plumbing Codes, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of 1972 PA 230, the Building, Electrical, Mechanical and Plumbing Code Official of the City of Plymouth is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Plymouth under 1972 PA 230, State of Michigan. The City of Plymouth assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 01-13,  1, 10-15-01) 
Secs. 18-2-18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 18-26. - City planning commission-Membership; duties. 
(a)  Confirmation of creation of planning commission; powers and duties. The City of Plymouth hereby confirms the creation of the City of Plymouth Planning Commission, previously established by the city commission on January 17, 1938, with all the powers and duties provided in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act PA 110 of 2006, as amended, and the Michigan Planning Enabling Act (PA 33 of 2008, as amended). The planning commission shall consist of nine members who shall be selected in accordance with the Michigan Planning Enabling Act. One planning commission member shall be a member of the zoning board of appeals. 
(b)  Membership, appointment and terms. 
(1)  The membership of the planning commission shall be representative of important segments and geography of the city of plymouth to the extent practicable. 
(2)  The mayor of the City of Plymouth shall appoint members of the planning commission, subject to approval by a majority vote of the members elected and serving on the City of Plymouth City Commission. 
(3)  The term of each planning commission member shall be for three years. each member shall serve until his/her term shall expire. members of the planning commission shall be qualified electors. 
(c)  Removal from office. 
(1)  The city commission may remove a member of the planning commission for misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing. failure of a member to disclose a potential conflict of interest as required herein constitutes malfeasance in office. 
(2)  Members of the planning commission who are absent from three consecutive planning commission meetings shall be subject to review and/or removal from the planning commission by action of the city commission. 
(d)  Conflict of interest. 
(1)  A member of the planning commission should only abstain from voting on a motion if he/she has a bonafide conflict of interest. A conflict of interest shall include: 
a.  Issuing, deliberating on, voting on, or reviewing a case concerning him or her. 
b.  Issuing, deliberating on, voting on, or reviewing a case concerning work on land owned by him or her or which is adjacent to land owned by him or her. 
c.  Issuing, deliberating on, voting on, or reviewing a case involving a corporation, company, partnership, or any other entity in which he or she is a part owner, or any other relationship where he or she may stand to have a financial gain or loss. 
d.  Issuing, deliberating on, voting on, or reviewing a case involving a relative or other family member. 
e.  Issuing, deliberating on, voting on, or reviewing a case involving which is an action which results in pecuniary benefit to him or her. 
f.  Issuing, deliberating on, voting on, or reviewing a case where his or her employee or employer is: (1) an applicant or agent for an applicant; or (2) has a direct interest in the outcome. 
g.  There is a reasonable appearance of a conflict of interest. An example of this includes a situation where the planning commission member is on the board of directors of an applicant association. 
(2)  The planning commission member disclosing the potential for a conflict of interest should state the nature of the potential conflict and whether he/she believes he/she could impartially consider the request before the commission. Should the member disclosing the potential conflict of interest choose not to remove him/herself from the dais, the remaining members of the planning commission shall evaluate the nature of the potential conflict and determine, by way of a vote, whether or not the member in question should be removed from the dais while the commission discusses or deliberates on the request. In the event that planning commissioner is removed from the dais due to a conflict of interest, either of his/her own volition or by a vote of the planning commission, that individual shall not participate in the discussion or deliberation in a role as a planning commissioner, and shall remove him/herself from the dais. 
(e)  Annual written report of activities. The planning commission, through the building department representative, shall make an annual written report of its activities to the city commission. The fiscal year of the planning commission shall be the same as the fiscal year of the city. 
(f)  Preparation of capital improvements program. The planning commission shall be exempted from the requirement of PA 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3865, requiring annual preparation and submission to the city commission of a capital improvements program. The city commission shall delegate the preparation of the capital improvements program, separate from or as a part of the annual budget, to the city manager or a non-elected administrative official, subject to final approval and adoption by the city commission. 
(g)  Bylaws. The planning commission shall adopt bylaws for the transaction of business, and shall keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations. 
(h)  Assistance. The planning commission may be assisted by other professionals or city staff as needed including the planning and zoning administrator, building official, ordinance officer, planning consultant, city engineer, city attorney or other person or agency. 
(Code 1982,  1.110; Ord. No. 2011-06,  1, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 18-27. - Same-Compensation, expenses. 
    There shall be no compensation for any member of the city planning commission, except that reasonable expenses may be allowed in cases of necessity. 
(Code 1982,  1.111) 
Sec. 18-28. - Application of state law. 
    The rules, regulations, duties, and authority as outlined by Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq., MSA 5.2991 et seq.), as amended, shall apply in all cases. 
(Code 1982,  1.112) 
Sec. 18-29. - Building permits restricted. 
    For the purpose of accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the municipality and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development; including among other things, adequate provision for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of the healthful and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds, and the adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements, no permit shall be issued for, and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected on any land located within the proposed future outside lines of any new, extended or widened street, avenue, place or other public way, or of any park, playground or other public grounds or extension thereof shown on any master plan or adopted plat. 
(Code 1982,  5.271) 
Sec. 18-30. - Appeals. 
    The board of appeals on zoning, established by chapter 78 shall have the power on appeal filed with it by the owner of such land to authorize the granting of a permit for and the erection of a building, or structure, or part thereof, within the lines of any such named street, park, playground, or other public ground in any case in which such board finds, upon the evidence and arguments presented to it on such appeal: 
(1)  That the entire property of the appellant located in whole, or in part, within the lines of such mapped street, park, playground, or other public ground cannot yield a reasonable return to the owner unless such permit is granted; and 
(2)  That, balancing the interest of the city in preserving the integrity of the adopted map, and the interest of the owner of the property in the use and benefits of his property, the granting of such permit is required by considerations of justice and equity. 
Before taking any such action, the board of appeals shall hold a public hearing thereon, at least ten days' notice of the time and place of which shall be given to the appellant by mail at the address specified by the appellant in his appeal petition. If the board of appeals decides to authorize a building permit and erection, it shall have the power to specify the exact location, ground area, height, and other details and conditions of size, character and construction, and also the duration of the building, structure, or part thereof to be permitted. Fees on appeal and procedure by the board shall be as provided in chapter 78 insofar as applicable. 
(Code 1982,  5.272) 
Sec. 18-31. - Enforcement. 
    Compliance with the outside lines or setback lines established by any master plan or adopted plat may be enforced by proceedings for injunction, prohibitory or mandatory, and the same shall be deemed a cumulative remedy and not a bar to prosecution under this Code. 
(Code 1982,  5.273) 
Sec. 18-32. - Adoption of master thoroughfare plan. 
    The master thoroughfare plan of the city, as heretofore formulated and adopted by the city planning commission and as revised or amended by such commission on November 28, 1960, with all maps and precise portions thereof and all changes thereto, is hereby approved and adopted. 
(Code 1982,  5.274) 
Secs. 18-33-18-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 18-56. - Adoption. 
    That certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the building department of the city being marked and designated as the Michigan Building Code, effective date July 31, 2001, or as subsequently amended by the Michigan Bureau of Construction Codes, and any accumulative supplements thereto, as published by the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, Bureau of Construction Codes, is adopted as the building code of the city for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such building code are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the addition, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-7,  1(8.1), 9-7-93; Ord. No. 98-8,  1, 12-7-98; Ord. No. 01-5,  1, 7-2-01) 
Sec. 18-57. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 01-5,  1, adopted July 2, 2001, repealed former section 18-57 in its entirety which pertained to amendments to the BOCA National Building Code and derived from Ord. No. 93-7,  1(8.2), 9-7-93; Ord. No. 98-8,  1, 12-7-98. 
Sec. 18-58 - Fees. 
    Fees for plan examinations, permits, inspections, licenses and registrations shall be as determined by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 01-5,  1, 7-2-01) 
Secs. 18-59-18-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL CODE 

Sec. 18-81. - Adoption. 
    That certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the Building Department of the city being marked and designated as the Michigan Electrical Code, effective date July 31, 2001, or as subsequently amended by the Michigan Bureau of Construction Codes, and any accumulative supplements thereto, as published by the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, Bureau of Construction Codes, is adopted as the electrical code of the city for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such electrical code are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the addition, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-7,  1(11.1), 9-7-93); Ord. No. 98-8,  1, 12-7-98; Ord. No. 01-5,  1, 7-2-01) 
Sec. 18-82. - Fees. 
    Fees for plan examinations, permits, inspections, licenses and registrations shall be as determined by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 93-7,  1(11.2), 9-7-93; Ord. No. 98-8,  1, 12-7-98) 
Sec. 18-83. - Licensing. 
    The City of Plymouth will no longer examine and license electrical contractors or individuals. All electrical contractors or individuals providing electrical construction, repair, or renovation services covered by the Michigan Electrical Code, effective date July 31, 2001, or as subsequently amended by the Michigan Bureau of Construction Codes, and any accumulative supplements thereto, as published by the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, Bureau of Construction Codes, will be required to have, and maintain current, a license issued by the Michigan Department of Consumer and Industry Services, Bureau of Construction Codes, Electrical Division, before providing any electrical construction, repair, or renovation services to businesses or individuals within the corporate limits of the city. A copy of the state license shall be carried on each individual at any time while providing electrical construction, repair, or renovation services to businesses or individuals within the corporate limits of the city. The city Building official, electrical inspector, or a designated representative, may request a licensed contractor or individual to produce a copy of the state license at any time. Failure to obtain, and keep current, a state issued electrical contractor or individual license while providing electrical construction, repair, or renovation services to businesses or individuals within the corporate limits of the city shall be a violation of this article and may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor violation or as a municipal civil infraction according to the discretion of the authorized city official charged with enforcement of such ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 01-5,  1, 7-2-01) 
Secs. 18-84-18-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MECHANICAL CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-106. - Adoption. 
    That certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the Building Department of the city being marked and designated as the Michigan Mechanical Code, effective date July 31, 2001, or as subsequently amended by the Michigan Bureau of Construction Codes, and any accumulative supplements thereto, as published by the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, Bureau of Construction Codes, is adopted as the mechanical code of the city for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such mechanical code are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the addition, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-7,  1(10.1), 9-7-93; Ord. No. 98-8,  1, 12-7-98; Ord. No. 01-5,  1, 7-2-01) 
Sec. 18-107. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 01-5,  1, adopted July 2, 2001, repealed former section 18-107 in its entirety which pertained to amendments to the International Mechanical Code and derived from Ord. No. 93-7,  1(10.2), 9-7-93; Ord. No. 98-8,  1, 12-7-98. 
Sec. 18-108. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 01-5,  1, adopted July 2, 2001, repealed former section 18-108 in its entirety which pertained to adoption of the Reciprocal Heating Code and derived from the Code of 1982. 
Sec. 18-109. - Fees. 
    Fees for plan examinations, permits, inspections, licenses and registrations shall be as determined by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 01-5,  1, 7-2-01) 
Secs. 18-110-18-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISIONS 2-4. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 01-5,  1, adopted July 2, 2001, repealed former Div. 2,  18-121-18-130; Div. 3,  18-141-18-148; Div. 4,  18-161-18-164; in their entirety. Former Divs. 2-4 respectively pertained to licensing of refrigeration contractors, licensing of journeymen and reciprocal regulations and derived from the Code of 1982. 

Sec. 18-121-18-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PLUMBING CODE 

Sec. 18-186. - Adoption. 
    That certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the Building Department of the city being marked and designated as the Michigan Plumbing Code, effective date July 31, 2001, or as subsequently amended by the Michigan Bureau of Construction Codes, and any accumulative supplements thereto, as published by the Department of Consumer & Industry Services, Bureau of Construction Codes, is adopted as the plumbing code of the city for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such plumbing code are hereby referred to, adopted and made part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the addition, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 93-7,  1(9.1), 9-7-93; Ord. No. 98-8,  1, 12-7-98; Ord. No. 01-5,  1, 7-2-01) 
Sec. 18-187. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-01,  1, adopted July 2, 2001, repealed former section 18-187 in its entirety which pertained to amendments to the International Plumbing Code and derived from Ord. No. 93-7,  1(9.2), 9-7-93; Ord. No. 98-8,  1, 12-7-98. 
Sec. 18-188 - Fees. 
    Fees for plan examinations, permits, inspections, licenses and registrations shall be as determined by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 01-5,  1, 7-2-01) 
Secs. 18-189-18-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2002-4,  2, adopted 5-20-02, amended former Art. VII,  18-211, 18-226-18-235 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 93-7,  1(1-14.1), 9-7-93; Ord. No. 94-1,  1, 1-18-94; Ord. No. 98-8,  1, 12-7-98. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-211. - Adoption of Property Maintenance Code By Reference. 
    A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of the City of Plymouth, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Plymouth, in the State of Michigan for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essentials to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided, providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of the City of Plymouth are hereby referred to, adopted, and make a part hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 18-212 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2002-4,  2, 5-20-02; Ord. No. 2006-2,  4, 7-17-06; Ord. No. 2015-01, 2-16-15) 
Sec. 18-212. - International Property Maintenance Code, additions, insertions and changes. 
    The International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, is amended and revised in the following respects: 
    Section 101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Plymouth herein after referred to as the property maintenance code or "this code". 
    Section 103.5 Fees: The fees for activities and services performed by this department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as determined by resolution of the City Commission. 
    Section 106.4 Violation Penalties: Any person, who shall violate any provision of this code or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted under a Municipal Civil Infraction and shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed separate offenses. 
    Section 302.4: All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of eight (8) inches in height. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees and shrubs as further delineated in Section 18-751 of this Article, provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
    Section 304.12: Insect screens: During the period from April 1st to October 1st, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
    Section 602.3 Heating Supply: Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units, rooming units, dormitory or guestrooms on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period of October 1 to May 1 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65F (18C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. 
    Section 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces: Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from October 1 to May 1 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65F (18C) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
(Ord. No. 2002-4,  2, 5-20-02; Ord. No. 2006-2,  4, 7-17-06; Ord. No. 2015-01, 2-16-15) 
Secs. 18-213-18-225. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS 

Sec. 18-226. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to promote the public health, safety and welfare by prohibiting the deterioration and inadequate maintenance of buildings and premises, which contribute to fire, safety and health hazards, and adversely affect the property rights of adjacent owners and occupants. 
(Ord. No. 2002-4,  2, 5-20-02) 
Sec. 18-227. - Intent, conflicts. 
    The intent of this division is to provide minimum standards for the maintenance of buildings and premises. Nothing in this division shall be deemed to supersede, modify or reduce the requirements of other city ordinances, codes and regulations. All other ordinances which are inconsistent with the, provisions of this division shall be controlling to the extent of such inconsistencies. 
(Ord. No. 2002-4,  2, 5-20-02) 
Sec. 18-228. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building means any structure occupied or intended for the purpose of supporting or sheltering any occupancy. 
    Inoperable vehicle means any motor vehicle such as an automobile, truck, motorcycle, boat, personal watercraft, snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle, equipment or trailer, that meet any of the following conditions: Without an operable engine, unable to be started, one or more missing or flat tires, are not currently licensed so as to be lawfully operated on public streets, or are otherwise in a state of disrepair that they cannot be lawfully operated on public streets. 
    Premises means a lot or parcel of land including the buildings and structures. 
    Structure means that which is built or constructed, or any portion thereof. 
    Workmanlike manner means the manner of carrying out such activities as construction, maintenance and repair such as to secure the adequate maintenance of buildings and premises, to sustain the property rights of adjacent owners, and to eliminate conditions which contribute to fire, safety, and health hazards. 
    Yard means an open space on the same lot with a building, which space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. The measurement of the yard is the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the building or structure. 
(1)  Front yard means a yard extending the full width of lot, the depth of which is, the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest line to the principal building on the lot. 
(2)  Rear yard means a yard extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear line or lines of the principal building on the lot. 
(Ord. No. 2002-4,  2, 5-20-02) 
Sec. 18-229. - Reserved. 
Sec. 18-230. - Standards for maintenance of premises. 
    All premises in the city shall be maintained in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  No machinery, equipment, vehicles, lumber piles, crates, boxes, building blocks, furniture, recreation equipment or other materials either discarded, unsightly or showing evidence of a need for repairs, with or without a current license, shall be stored, parked, abandoned, or junked in any yard; and should such use of land occur. it shall be deemed a nuisance. This section shall not apply to construction material while such material is being actively used in the or construction of the premises. 
(2)  Firewood shall be stored behind the front building line and in such a manner as to not cause rodent or other pest infestations. 
(3)  Dog pens and dog runs shall not be placed in front of the front building line nor in the required side yards. They shall be located at least ten feet from adjacent property lines unless an obscuring fence is provided. This restriction shall not apply to those premises containing a dog pen or dog run prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division was derived until those premises either change ownership or no longer conform to the use in existence on the effective date of this division. All dog pens and runs shall he kept free of feces, garbage and other odor-causing conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2002-4,  2, 5-20-02) 
Secs. 18-231, 18-232. - Reserved. 
Sec. 18-233. - Administration and enforcement. 
    Violations, notices and orders will be issued as prescribed in the property maintenance code, as adopted by reference in section 18-211. 
(Ord. No. 2002-4,  2, 5-20-02) 
Sec. 18-234. - Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2002-4,  2, 5-20-02) 
Sec. 18-235. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violations of this article shall be subject to the penalties as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2002-4,  2, 5-20-02) 
Secs. 18-236-18-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS 

Sec. 18-256. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dish means that part of the earth station shaped like a saucer or dish. 
    Dish-type satellite signal-receiving antenna means a signal receiving device the purpose of which is to receive radio, communications, television, data transmission or other signals from a satellite or satellites in earth orbit. Considered a structure, thus subject to all provisions of this Code and city ordinances relating to structures. 
    Earth station or ground station means a signal receiving device the purpose of which is to receive radio, communications, television, data transmission or other signals from satellite or satellites in earth orbit, considered a structure, thus subject to all provisions of this Code and city ordinances relating to structures. 
    Low noise amplified (LNA) means a signal-amplifying device situated within the earth station; the purpose of which is to magnify the electronic signals received and transfer them through the coaxial cable to the receiver. 
    Receiver means a television set, radio, communication device or data input device that utilizes the signals from the earth station. 
(Ord. No. 85-5,  1, 3-18-85) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 18-257. - Permit required. 
    No person shall construct an earth station without a permit, nor shall construction commence before a permit is issued in accordance with the building code adopted in section 18-56. 
(Ord. No. 85-5,  1, 3-18-85) 
Sec. 18-258. - Application for permit. 
(a)  The owner, or occupant with written permission from the owner, of any residential, commercial, or industrial facility within the city who desires to construct an earth station on such premises or land parcel, shall first obtain a permit to do so from the city. Only one permit for an earth station shall be granted for each main structure or planned grouping of such structures. 
(b)  The application for a permit to install an earth station shall include: 
(1)  A plot plan showing the proposed location of the earth station. 
(2)  A site plan showing not only the building locations of the land parcel involved, but also building locations of properties on either side of the subject land parcel, plus the building or buildings directly across the street. 
(3)  Sketches or pictures of the proposed earth station that would depict the view from the adjacent properties. 
(4)  Construction plans and specifications, plus a structural engineering analysis prepared and submitted by a professional engineer registered in the state. At the sole discretion of the city engineer, the requirement to have these plans certified by a professional engineer can be waived. 
(5)  A statement that the equipment installed will meet all FCC requirements applicable to noise and spurious emissions. 
(6)  A statement that the installation complies with all applicable building and electrical codes. 
(Ord. No. 85-5,  1, 3-18-85) 
Sec. 18-259. - Ground mounted. 
(a)  Any such structure shall be located in a rear yard. Exceptions may be made in certain commercial or industrial locations if approved by the planning commission upon review of the site plan. 
(b)  The outside extremity of the earth station shall be no closer than three feet from any property line. 
(c)  The earth station shall be obscured from the view of adjacent property owners or public rights-of-way by buildings, screen wall, fence, berm, evergreen plantings or any combination thereof. Such screening devices shall be at least 80 percent obscuring for at least the first six feet above grade and also afford as great a degree of obscuring above the six feet as practical. 
(d)  The dish antenna portion of the earth station shall not exceed 12 feet in diameter and no portion of the earth station shall be capable of exceeding a height of 15 feet above grade when installed and operating. 
(e)  The earth station shall be designed to withstand a wind force of not less than 75 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 85-5,  1(1), 3-18-85) 
Sec. 18-260. - Roof-mounted. 
(a)  Earth stations shall be mounted directly upon the roof of a primary or accessory structure, as defined in the building code. 
(b)  The dish portion of such an antenna shall not exceed three feet in diameter in the R-1 single-family and RT-1 two-family zoning districts, nor more than 12 feet in the RM-1 and RM-2 multiple-family zoning districts; the B-1, B-2 and B-3 commercial zoning districts and the I-1 and I-2 industrial zoning districts. 
(c)  No portion of any such earth station shall extend more than four feet above the highest point of a roof in the R-1 and RT-1 zoning districts, nor more than 13 feet above the highest point of a roof in the RM-1 or RM-2 zoning districts, the B-1, B-2, B-3 and I-1 and I-2 zoning districts. 
(d)  An earth station shall be designed to withstand the applicable wind force as specified in the building code for structures without any supporting guide wires. 
(Ord. No. 85-5,  1(2), 3-18-85) 
Sec. 18-261. - Penalty. 
    Whosoever violates any of the provisions of this article of the Code of the City of Plymouth, shall be fined as prescribed in section 1-13. A separate violation shall be deemed to have been committed each day during or on which a violation occurs, or continues to occur. 
(Ord. No. 85-5,  1, 3-18-85) 
Sec. 18-262. - Appeals. 
    Appeals from decisions of the city engineer under this article shall be made to the zoning board of appeals as provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 85-5,  1, 3-18-85) 
Secs. 18-263-18-285. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SWIMMING POOLS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-286. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Enforcing official means the building official of the city or his authorized representative. 
    Health department means the county health department or its authorized representatives. 
    Permanent pool means any pool built into the ground, more than one foot; and any aboveground pool with a structure which provides fencing and a walkway partially or completely around the water's edge. 
    Swimming pool means any artificially constructed structure intended for human swimming or bathing, located either above or below grade and located either in or outside or partially in or partially outside a permanent and enclosed roofed building. 
    Temporary pool means any above ground pool, with maximum water depth greater than 18 inches that is or can be assembled with hand tools by the homeowner. 
    Wading pool means any temporary pool with maximum water depth of 18 inches. 
(Code 1982,  8.41) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 18-287. - Operation generally. 
    Pools and pool equipment shall be operated and maintained in a manner which will not create health or safety hazards or any public nuisance. 
(Code 1982,  8.46(1)) 
Sec. 18-288. - Supervision. 
    Each swimming pool in the city shall be so supervised that safety hazards are not created. The gate shall be kept locked when the pool is not in use. 
(Code 1982,  8.46(3)) 
Sec. 18-289. - Rescue devices. 
    A rescue pole, hook, or a similar device shall be available within the pool enclosure. 
(Code 1982,  8.46(5)) 
Sec. 18-290. - Potable water supply. 
    Every swimming pool shall be filled and maintained with potable water. 
(Code 1982,  8.43(3)) 
Sec. 18-291. - Water quality. 
    Between Memorial Day and Labor Day of each year the water shall be free of algae and turbidity. During this period satisfactory water clarity will permit observation of a coin on the bottom of the pool at the deepest point when the viewer is standing on the deck. 
(Code 1982,  8.46(2)) 
Sec. 18-292. - Disinfection. 
    Proper germicidal levels shall be maintained at all times during pool usage to protect the health of users. A chlorine residual of 0.4 to 0.8 parts per million shall satisfy this requirement. Disinfecting agents other than chlorine may be used if approved by the health department. The hydrogen ion concentration (pH) of the pool water shall be maintained between 7.2 and 7.6. Testing devices capable of accurately measuring pH and chlorine residual or other disinfectant shall be available. 
(Code 1982,  8.46(4)) 
Sec. 18-293. - Water restrictions. 
    The filling of swimming pools from the public water supply shall be regulated the same as lawn sprinkling. 
(Code 1982,  8.46(6)) 
Sec. 18-294. - Drainage restrictions. 
    No swimming pool shall be drained to a sewer during a period of heavy rainfall if such drainage would contribute to overloading the sewer. 
(Code 1982,  8.46(7)) 
Secs. 18-295-18-315. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 18-316. - Enforcing official to administer article. 
    The enforcing official shall administer the requirements of this article so as to protect the health and safety of the public, the bathers, and other persons. 
(Code 1982,  8.42(1)) 
Sec. 18-317. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful to construct, install or alter any permanent or temporary swimming pool without first having obtained permit therefor. Before a permit is issued an application shall be approved by the health department. A permit is not required for a wading pool. 
(Code 1982,  8.42(2)) 
Sec. 18-318. - Application, approval. 
    Pools shall be constructed, installed and/or altered in conformity with the application approved by the enforcing official. Any deviation from the approved application shall require prior approval by the enforcing official. 
(Code 1982,  8.42(3)) 
Sec. 18-319. - Permit fees. 
    The fee for a permit under this article to be paid the city is as follows: 
Category Permit Fee Temporary pools $ 10.00 Permanent pools up to 35,000 gallons 15.00 Permanent pools over 35,000 gallons 25.00  
(Code 1982,  8.42(4)) 
Sec. 18-320. - Workmanship. 
    All work performed under this article shall be done in an acceptable manner and shall comply with applicable building, plumbing, electrical, and heating codes. 
(Code 1982,  8.42(5)) 
Sec. 18-321. - Inspection. 
    The pool contractor, or the owner if no contractor is involved, shall notify the building official upon completion of pool construction, installation, or modification. The enforcing official shall inspect all permanent or temporary pools after such notification so that all provisions of this article are satisfied. When necessary, the enforcing official or health department shall make additional inspections. 
(Code 1982,  8.42(6)) 
Sec. 18-322. - Stop work order. 
    Construction work that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article shall be immediately stopped upon notice from the enforcing official or health department. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. 
(Code 1982,  8.42(7)) 
Sec. 18-323. - Right of entry. 
    The enforcing official and representatives of the health department shall have the right at any reasonable hour to inspect any swimming pool for the purpose of determining compliance with the intent of this article. 
(Code 1982,  8.42(8)) 
Sec. 18-324. - Notice of noncompliance. 
    Any swimming pool which is not maintained to the minimum standards established by this article shall be placed out of use by the owner after a notice by the enforcing official itemizing the corrections needed. Upon failure to correct the item or items cited, the pool may be ordered removed in accordance with section 18-325. 
(Code 1982,  8.46(8)) 
Sec. 18-325. - Pool removal. 
    Upon discontinuing the use of a pool, the owner thereof shall forthwith remove all water therefrom and shall remove and/or fill the structure or excavation with earth level to grade or otherwise make the premises safe. 
(Code 1982,  8.46(9)) 
Sec. 18-326. - Appeals. 
    An appeal may be taken to the zoning board of appeals by any person, or any officer, department, board or bureau affected by a decision of the building inspector. Such appeal shall be taken by filing a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds for such appeal, with the board of zoning appeals on appropriate forms provided by the building inspector and payment of the required fee. The building inspector shall forthwith transmit to the board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(Code 1982,  8.47) 
Secs. 18-327-18-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 18-336. - Pool clearance. 
    The location and enclosure of any pool shall be such that no hazard exists for pool users or the public. The minimum distance from the nearest part of the pool water shall be as follows: 
(1)  Six feet horizontally to any street property line, and five feet horizontally to any other property line and four feet to any building wall or nonproperty-line fence. No pool shall be located in required front yard. 
(2)  Ten feet horizontally from any overhead electrical or telephone wire to the water's edge or to any diving board or platform. Under no circumstances shall wires of any kind cross over the water surface. 
(3)  Twenty-five feet horizontally to any private water well or 75 feet to any semipublic water well, unless a shorter distance is approved by the health department. 
(4)  Three feet horizontally to any sewer for a permanent pool. There shall be ten feet horizontally to a septic tank and tile field or other similar treatment facility, provided the water level in the pool is one foot or more above the ground surface elevation of the treatment facility. 
(5)  Except as approved by the enforcing official there shall be ten feet to any underground water, electrical, telephone, gas or other pipes and conduits, except for parts of the swimming pool system. 
(Code 1982,  8.43(1)) 
Sec. 18-337. - Fence. 
(a)  No temporary or permanent pool 18 inches or deeper shall be constructed or maintained unless such swimming pool is entirely enclosed by a building, wall and/or fence. The minimum height of all parts of the fence or wall, including gates, shall be 48 inches measured on the outside of the fence or wall upward from the highest adjacent ground. All gates shall be equipped with a lock and key. Such fence shall be designed and constructed so that the pool is not readily accessible to children by climbing or entering through the fence openings. Fence material shall not contain openings larger than two inches nominal size nor material that provides ready footing for climbing. 
(b)  A permanent above ground pool which has a structure intended to provide self-fencing shall satisfy the fencing requirements of this article if it provides: 
(1)  A walkway not less than 20 inches in width completely around the water's edge and at least three feet above grade. 
(2)  The self-fencing shall be at least three feet high above the walkway. 
(3)  A fold-up stairway or gate which must be locked when residents are away from the home or when the pool is not in use. 
The self-fencing shall make the pool inaccessible to children by climbing or entering through the fence openings. 
(c)  No wading pool shall be left unattended unless it is provided with a substantial cover or is surrounded by a fence as provided in this section. 
(Code 1982,  8.43(2)) 
Sec. 18-338. - Method of pool fill. 
    If a hose is used to fill the pool or to add makeup water an acceptable vacuum breaker shall be installed on the hose thread of the hose bib, sill cock or fixture. Fill spouts will be acceptable if located under a diving board or installed so as to prevent any hazard and provided there is a fixed air gap of six inches or more above the pool coping. 
(Code 1982,  8.43(4)) 
Sec. 18-339. - Pool drainage. 
    Facilities shall be provided for disposing of all pool drainage and wastewater to the community sanitary sewer system or in some other manner approved by the enforcing official. There shall be a six-inch air gap between the pool discharge line and the sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1982,  8.43(5)) 
Sec. 18-340. - Material, equipment. 
    Pool equipment and material shall be subject to evaluation and acceptance by the enforcing official before installation. 
(Code 1982,  8.43(6)) 
Sec. 18-341. - Overflow. 
    The pool and surrounding area shall be constructed and arranged in such a manner that no water shall return from the deck to the pool. Wastewater shall not be allowed to create a nuisance or to overflow onto adjoining property. 
(Code 1982,  8.43(7)) 
Sec. 18-342. - Surface drainage. 
    No surface or roof drainage shall be permitted to enter the pool. 
(Code 1982,  8.43(8)) 
Sec. 18-343. - Hazards and shape. 
    There shall be no hazardous projections, or low over-water construction in the pool or the pool enclosure which could trap or injure bathers. The pool shall be shaped so that all parts of the pool can be observed from a single vantage point on the pool deck. 
(Code 1982,  8.43(9)) 
Sec. 18-344. - Lights. 
    Pool area lights, if provided, shall be shielded so as to direct the light away from adjacent premises. 
(Code 1982,  8.43(10)) 
Sec. 18-345. - Equipment location. 
    Water treatment equipment shall be installed above grade, except that it may be installed in a properly drained residential basement, cellar, or other approved structure. Any accessory building shall comply with applicable requirements of zoning and building codes. 
(Code 1982,  8.43(11)) 
Sec. 18-346. - Overflows. 
    Unless a continuous overflow weir gutter is installed around the pool, one or more surface skimmers shall be provided. There shall be one skimmer for each 800 square feet of water surface or any fraction thereof, which shall operate continuously while the pool water is being circulated and which shall automatically adjust for vertical variations in the water level of three inches or more. 
(Code 1982,  8.43(12)) 
Sec. 18-347. - Suction cleaner. 
    There shall be a suction cleaner outlet connected to the pump suction piping between the pool and the hair and lint strainer, to permit use of a suction cleaner or other acceptable device for cleaning the entire pool. 
(Code 1982,  8.43(13)) 
Sec. 18-348. - Additional provisions-Temporary pools. 
(a)  Ladders. Any temporary pool with maximum water depth of four feet or more shall have at least one acceptable ladder or set of steps permitting exit from the pool water. 
(b)  Diving boards. Diving boards shall not be permitted at temporary pools. 
(c)  Filters. Each temporary pool shall have a filter capable of maintaining clear water in the pool whenever the pool is in use. 
(d)  Pumps. Each temporary pool shall have a pump with sufficient capacity to circulate the pool volume each 12 hours or less. 
(Code 1982,  8.44) 
Sec. 18-349. - Same-Permanent pools. 
    The following provisions shall govern the installation and operation of all permanent swimming pools installed in the city: 
(1)  Finish and cove. Pool floor and walls shall have a cleanable, light-colored, and impermeable surface. The pool floor and the deck shall be skid resistant. Where the water depth is less than five feet, the maximum cove radius shall be eight inches. 
(2)  Ladders. Every permanent pool shall have at least one acceptable ladder or set of steps permitting exit from the pool water. The ladder is to be located at the deepest end of the pool. 
(3)  Deck. Below ground pools shall have a walkway or deck of concrete or other approved impervious material around the perimeter of the pool and shall be at least three feet wide and shall slope away from the pool. 
(4)  Slopes. The slope of the bottom of any part of a pool in which the water is less than five feet in depth shall not be more than one foot vertically in each eight feet horizontally. The top three feet of all side and end walls shall be vertical or shall have an outward batter not to exceed six feet vertically to one foot horizontally, except to comply with subsection (1) of this section. 
(5)  Diving board or platform. There shall be at least eight feet clearance between the end of any diving board or platform and each side wall of the pool. The end of the diving board or platform shall project over the water one foot from the deep end wall. Diving structures shall be securely anchored and shall have at least 13 feet unobstructed headroom for at least eight feet horizontally over the water surface from all parts of the diving surface. 
(6)  Water depths for diving. No diving board or platform shall be installed except in accordance with the following limits: 
a.  Minimum water depth, at deepest point in pool, shall be eight feet. 
b.  Minimum distance from diving wall to deepest point in pool shall be ten feet. 
c.  Minimum distance from deepest point in pool to point where water is five feet deep shall be ten feet. 
(7)  Depth markings. If a diving board is installed, there shall be at least one depth marking on the deck or wall of the pool above the water line indicating greatest depth in feet. 
(8)  Floatline. When maximum water depth exceeds five feet, recessed floatline anchors shall be provided in the walls at the place where the water depth is five feet. A suitable floatline shall be installed when the pool is in use. 
(9)  Piping. Pool piping shall be sized to permit the rated flows for filtering and filter backwash without exceeding the maximum head at which the pump will provide such flows. The water velocity in the pool piping shall not exceed ten feet per second in pressure piping and five feet per second in suction piping at design flows. (The water velocity in plastic piping shall not exceed five feet per second.) 
(10)  Inlets. There shall be a minimum of one filtered water inlet for each 60 feet of pool perimeter. Each of the minimum required water inlets shall be at least ten inches below the highest overflow line and at least ten feet from any other inlet or from any skimmer, unless otherwise approved by the enforcing official. Inlets shall be located to impart a circulatory motion to the pool water. 
(11)  Main drains. One or more outlets shall be placed at the deepest point in every permanent pool for circulating the pool water. The effective area of the drain grating shall be at least four times the area of the outlet pipe. 
(12)  Skimmers. All skimmers in permanent pools shall be recessed or flush with the walls of the pool. Unless a continuous overflow weir gutter is installed around the pool, one or more surface skimmers shall be provided. There shall be one skimmer for each 800 square feet of water surface or any fraction thereof, which shall operate continuously while the pool water is being circulated and which shall automatically adjust for vertical variations in the water level of three inches or more. 
(13)  Valves. A gate valve shall be installed on the discharge side of the pump to permit regulation of flow. 
(14)  Pumps. The pump shall have sufficient capacity at maximum anticipated hydraulic head to circulate the pool volume each 12 hours and to supply the required backwash rate to any one filter. Unless hydraulic analysis demonstrates otherwise, each pump shall supply the required filtration rate at a total head of at least 50 feet for any sand filter system and 60 feet for a diatomite filter system at permanent pools. The motor horsepower rating shall be determined for maximum total head conditions at a 12-hour pool volume turnover time. 
(15)  Strainer. A pump connected to a pressure filter shall be equipped on its inlet with a noncorrosive hair and lint strainer. The ratio of the open strainer area to the open side area of the suction piping shall be at least four to one. 
(16)  Gauges. A pressure gauge of appropriate range shall be installed on the piping between each filter and pool. 
(17)  Filters. 
a.  All filters approved by the building official shall be equal in performance to the sand and diatomite filters described in this section. Filters approved by the National Sanitation Foundation testing laboratory will be accepted. 
b.  The total effective filter area in square feet shall be at least equal to the volume of the pool in gallons divided by 2,160 (three gallons per minute per square foot for 12-hour turnover). Each filtering system shall be provided with a sight glass or visible discharge. The influent shall be applied to the filter media surface in a manner which prevents direct turbulent discharge against the media. 
c.  All pressure filters shall be equipped with an air release at the high point in the system. If an automatic device is installed for this purpose, there shall be a manual valve for testing its effectiveness. 
d.  The shell containing the filter media or elements shall be constructed so as to provide satisfactory strength and freedom from corrosion, and shall be installed in a manner to prevent setting or upset. 
(18)  Sand filters. 
a.  High rate sand filters shall be approved by and carry the seal of the National Sanitation Foundation Testing Laboratory. 
b.  Standard sand filters shall be sized so that the filtration rate does not exceed three gallons per minute per square foot of effective filter area. Each pressure sand filter shall be provided with backwash water at a minimum rate of 12 gallons per minute per square foot of effective surface area. 
c.  For standard sand filters the filter sand shall be uniformly graded silica material, with effective particle diameters between 0.45 and 0.55 millimeters and with uniformity coefficient less than 1.75. The sand shall be free of clay, organic matter, and water-soluble material and no less than 20 inches in depth, with a 12-inch or greater freeboard. 
d.  For standard sand filters the graded gravel or crushed anthracite used to support the filter media shall be free of organic and water soluble material. It shall be graded by size and separately leveled in layers. The total depth of the graded gravel shall not be less than 16 inches. 
(19)  Diatomite filters. Diatomite filters shall be sized so that the filtration rate does not exceed two gallons per minute per square foot of effective filter area. A precoat funnel or other feeding device shall be provided. 
(Code 1982,  8.45) 
Secs. 18-350-18-370. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - FENCES 

Sec. 18-371. - Purpose, intent. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this article to assure to occupants of all properties adequate light and air adjacent to structures and in yard areas, effective and desirable sight distance from the front of all structures in all directions, the right to provide for their own privacy within their properties, to protect plantings from damage by trespass, and to prevent such construction related thereto as would be hazardous. 
(Ord. No. 82-11,  1(8.21), 8-16-82) 
Sec. 18-372. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Border means a planting area composed of shrubs, trees, etc., which is utilized as a part of the landscaping of a lot. 
    Decorative fence means a permanent barrier not used for enclosure. Any such fence shall be a part of the overall landscape plan and shall be composed of natural materials such as wood (i.e., split rail fence, picket, etc.) or a decorative metal construction (i.e., wrought iron, etc.). 
    Fence means a permanent barrier enclosing a plot of land or portion thereof composed of manmade or processed materials erected on posts, for the purpose of preventing or controlling entrance or to confine within or to mark a boundary. 
    Gutter grade means the lowest point of integral curb and gutter down which water flows, or, when no curb or gutter exists, is the lowest point between the street and sidewalk down which water will flow or drain. 
    Wall means a barrier constructed of masonry or other solid materials on a continuous concrete footing for the purpose of controlling entrance, sound and/or view. 
(Ord. No. 82-11,  1(8.22), 8-16-82; Ord. No. 2011-02,  1, 1-17-11) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 18-373. - Prevention of hazards. 
(a)  No fence, border or wall shall have exposed beneath a height of eight (8) feet any sharp protrusions which would be likely to cause physical or material damage to persons or clothing passing by the fence, border or wall. 
(b)  Any wall shall be capped with a peaked coping of sufficient pitch to discourage walking. 
(Ord. No. 82-11,  1(8.26), 8-16-82; Ord. No. 2011-02,  1, 1-17-11) 
Sec. 18-374. - Line fences and walls. 
    All fences and walls must be located entirely on the private property of the person constructing the same; provided, however, that if adjoining property owners jointly apply for and sign a permit to erect a fence upon their common property line, such fence may be so erected. No temporary type of barrier or temporary fence of any type shall be permitted in the front yard areas. 
(Ord. No. 82-11,  1(8.27), 8-16-82) 
Sec. 18-375. - Electric fences. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain, or to allow to be constructed or maintained upon property owned or occupied by such person, any fence charged or connected with an electrical current in such manner as to transmit such current in the form of shock to persons or animals which might come in contact with such charged fence. This shall exclude underground electric pet containment fences. 
(Ord. No. 82-11,  1(8.28), 8-16-82; Ord. No. 2011-02,  1, 1-17-11) 
Sec. 18-376. - Appeals. 
    If there is believed to be a conflict between the stated intent and any specific provisions of this article, the zoning board of appeals may, in accordance with established procedures, permit modification of such specific provision, while retaining the intent, in such appealed instance. 
(Ord. No. 82-11,  1(8.29), 8-16-82) 
Sec. 18-377. - Permits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, or cause to be constructed, any fence or wall upon any property within the city without first having obtained a permit therefor. 
(b)  Any person desiring to construct, or cause to be constructed a fence or wall upon property in the city shall first apply to the building department of the city for a permit, for which there shall be a fee, the amount of which shall be set by resolution of the city commission. Such permit shall be issued by the building inspector upon a written application, and shall contain such information as may be required by the inspector in order to determine that such fence or wall will not violate any provision of the city Code or state law. 
(Ord. No. 82-11,  1(8.23), 8-16-82) 
Sec. 18-378. - Establishing lot lines. 
    The building inspector may require the owner of property upon which a fence is to be constructed to establish lot lines upon such property, through the placing of permanent stakes located by a licensed surveyor. Such lot line shall be established before such fence shall be erected, and the building inspector may withhold the issuance of the required permit until the lot lines are established and permanent stakes are placed. 
(Ord. No. 82-11,  1(8.30), 8-16-82) 
Sec. 18-379. - Borders. 
    Borders may be planted in any yard area subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Borders shall not be located nearer than two feet to any drive or walkway. Borders are also subject to additional restrictions as specified in this section. 
(2)  No border shall obscure visibility within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between the right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection. Shrubs or hedges or other plantings (excluding trees) in this area shall not exceed 30 inches in height above the average gutter grade adjacent to this area. Trees planted within this same area shall not have branches lower than eight feet above the average gutter grade. Sight visibility shall be in accordance with Section 78-207 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(3)  Similar restrictions as above shall be required in a 15-foot corner triangle formed at the intersection of any driveway and alley or any driveway and street right-of-way line. 
(Ord. No. 82-11,  1(8.24), 8-16-82; Ord. No. 2011-02, 1-17-11) 
Sec. 18-380. - Fences and walls. 
(a)  All posts thereof shall be of materials designed to withstand rusting, rotting and other weather-related deterioration for a period of not less than ten years. 
(b)  No fence or wall shall be constructed along the street line of a lot closer than one foot from the established sidewalk line. 
(c)  Solid masonry walls shall be erected on continuous foundations at least 42 inches below grade. 
(d)  Fences or walls within a required front yard area shall be decorative style only consisting of wrought iron, metal, or picket fences and masonry or stone walls. Decorative fences or walls placed within a front yard shall not exceed 30 inches in height. A decorative fence or wall shall contribute to the identification and beauty of the principal building. Chain link fences are not allowed within a required front yard area. 
(e)  In residential zoned areas, fences and between lots shall not exceed a height above ground level of more than six and one-half feet, and shall not extend toward the front of the lot nearer than the front of the house or the required minimum front yard, whichever is greater. In the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard, the side yard abutting a street shall be continuation of the required front setback on the lot to the rear, and no fence shall project into this area. When side yards abut on frontages across a common street, the side yard abutting a street shall not be less than the required front yard of the district and no fence shall project into this area (see Figures 1, 2 and 3). 
Figure 1. Fence Location 

Figure 2. Fence Location 

Figure 3. Fence Location 

(f)  for those properties having side yards abutting upon streets, a fence may be constructed from the front building line to within one foot of the front sidewalk line, not to exceed 30 inches in height above gutter grade. 
(g)  In business zoned areas, fences and walls should not exceed a height above ground level of more than six and one-half feet. On corner lots, no fence, wall, shrubbery or other obstruction to vision above a height 30 inches from the established street gutter grades shall be permitted within the triangular area forward at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between such right-of-way lines for a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection. 
(h)  In industrial zoned areas, fences and walls may be constructed up to eight feet in height. On corner lots, no fence, wall, shrubbery or other obstruction to vision above a height of 30 inches from the established street gutter grades shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between such right-of-way lines for a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection. Barbed wire may be installed on the top of such fences on arms or supports over the private property of the owner of the fence at least eight feet above the adjacent grade level. 
(Ord. No. 82-11,  1(8.25), 8-16-82; Ord. No. 2011-02,  1, 1-17-11) 
Secs. 18-381-18-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - HOUSING CODE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Human relations, ch. 42. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-401. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Basement means a portion of a building located partly underground, but having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Cellar means a portion of a building located partly or wholly underground, and having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
    Dwelling means any building which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants; provided that temporary housing shall not be regarded as a dwelling. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating. 
    Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the health officer. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
    Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, corridors, closets, and storage spaces. 
    Health officer means the legally designated health authority of the city or his authorized representative. 
    Infestation means the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents, or other pests. 
    Multiple dwelling means any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units. 
    Occupant means any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
    Operator means any person who has charge, care, or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
    Ordinary minimum winter conditions means the temperature 15 degrees Fahrenheit above the lowest recorded temperature for the previous ten-year period. 
    Owner means any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others shall have: 
(1)  Legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee, or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner. 
    Plumbing means and includes all of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines, catchbasins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer, or gas lines. 
    Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
    Roominghouse means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator. 
    Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage. The term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible 
    material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery, and dust. 
    Supplied means paid for, furnished, or provided by or under the control of the owner or operator. 
    Temporary housing means any tent, trailer, or other structure used for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days. 
Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "roominghouse," "rooming unit," "premises," are used in this article, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
(Code 1982,  6.91) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 18-402. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article or any provision of any rule or regulation adopted by the health officer pursuant to authority granted by this article, shall upon conviction be punished as prescribed in section 1-13. 
(Code 1982,  6.195) 
Sec. 18-403. - Conflict with other laws. 
    In any case where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with any provision of this Code relating to zoning, building, fire, safety, or health, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. 
(Code 1982,  6.196) 
Secs. 18-404-18-415. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 18-416. - Authority. 
    The health officer is hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises located within the city in order to safeguard the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the general public. 
(Code 1982,  6.95) 
Sec. 18-417. - Right of entry. 
    For the purpose of making inspections under this division the health officer is hereby authorized to enter, examine, and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units, and premises. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, and rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the health officer free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination, and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit, or its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1982,  6.95) 
Secs. 18-418-18-430. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ENFORCEMENT; NOTICE; HEARINGS 

Sec. 18-431. - Notice of violation. 
    Whenever the health officer determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person responsible therefor, as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall: 
(1)  Be put in writing; 
(2)  Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued; 
(3)  Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires; 
(4)  Be served upon the owner or his agent, or the occupant, as the case may require; provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy thereof is: 
a.  Served upon him personally; 
b.  Sent by registered mail to his last known address; 
c.  Posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the notice; or 
d.  Served with such notice by any other method authorized or required under the laws of this state. 
(5)  May contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this article and with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1982,  6.98) 
Sec. 18-432. - Hearing. 
    Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this article, or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the health officer; provided, that such person shall file in the office of the health officer a written petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within ten days after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition the health officer shall set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such hearing the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than ten days after the day on which the petition was filed. Upon application of the petitioner the health officer may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period, if in his judgment the petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such postponement. 
(Code 1982,  6.99) 
Sec. 18-433. - Orders. 
    After such hearing the health officer shall sustain, modify, or withdraw the notice, depending upon his finding as to whether the provisions of this article and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the health officer sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served pursuant to section 18-431 shall automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the health officer within ten days after such notice is served. After a hearing in the case of any notice suspending any permit required by this article or by any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, when such notice has been sustained by the health officer, the permit shall be deemed to have been revoked. Any such permit which has been suspended by a notice shall be deemed to be automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed in the office of the health officer within ten days after such notice is served. 
(Code 1982,  6.100) 
Sec. 18-434. - Record of hearing. 
    The proceedings at a hearing under this division, including the findings and decision of the health officer, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the health officer. Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the health officer may seek relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this state. 
(Code 1982,  6.101) 
Sec. 18-435. - Emergency orders. 
    Whenever the health officer finds that an emergency exists which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the health officer shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon his finding as to whether the provisions of this article and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto have been complied with, the health officer shall continue such order in effect, or modify it, or revoke it. 
(Code 1982,  6.102) 
Secs. 18-436-18-445. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RULES 

Sec. 18-446. - Authorized. 
    The health officer is hereby authorized to make and, after a public hearing has been held in accordance with the laws governing the conduct of public hearings by the health officer of this city, to adopt such written rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this article, subject to approval by the city commission. Such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with the provisions of this article. The health officer shall file a certified copy of all rules and regulations which he may adopt with the city clerk. Such rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect as the provisions of this article, and the penalty for violation thereof shall be the same as provided in section 1-13 of this Code. 
(Code 1982,  6.105) 
Secs. 18-447-18-455. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - MINIMUM STANDARDS 

Sec. 18-456. - Compliance required. 
    No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, which does not comply with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1982,  6.111) 
Sec. 18-457. - Kitchen sink. 
    Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the health officer. 
(Code 1982,  6.112) 
Sec. 18-458. - Toilet, lavatory. 
    Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person within such room and which is equipped with a flush water closet and a lavatory basin in good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the health officer. 
(Code 1982,  6.113) 
Sec. 18-459. - Bath. 
    Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room which affords privacy to a person within such room, a bathtub or shower in good working condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the health officer. 
(Code 1982,  6.114) 
Sec. 18-460. - Water supply. 
    Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower required under the provisions of sections 18-457, 18-458 and 18-459 shall be properly connected with both hot and cold water lines. 
(Code 1982,  6.115) 
Sec. 18-461. - Rubbish storage. 
    Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate rubbish storage facilities, type and location of which are approved by the health officer. 
(Code 1982,  6.116) 
Sec. 18-462. - Garbage storage. 
    Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers, type and location of which are approved by the health officer. 
(Code 1982,  6.117) 
Sec. 18-463. - Hot water supply. 
    Every dwelling shall have supplied water-heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, are properly connected with hot water lines required under the provisions of section 18-460, and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than 120 degrees Fahrenheit. Such supplied water-heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this section when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating facilities required under the provisions of section 18-481 are not in operation. 
(Code 1982,  6.118) 
Sec. 18-464. - Egress. 
    Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of this state and this city. 
(Code 1982,  6.119) 
Secs. 18-465-18-475. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - LIGHT, VENTILATION, AND HEATING 

Sec. 18-476. - Compliance required. 
    No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1982,  6.125) 
Sec. 18-477. - Windows. 
    Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be ten percent of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window of any such room and such light-obstruction structures are located less than three feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least 15 percent of the total floor area of such room. 
(Code 1982,  6.126) 
Sec. 18-478. - Ventilation. 
    Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum window area size or minimum skylight-type window size, as required in section 18-477, except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the health officer. 
(Code 1982,  6.127) 
Sec. 18-479. - Bathroom light and air. 
    Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in sections 18-477 and 18-478, except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet compartments equipped with a ventilation system which is kept in continuous operation and approved by the health officer. 
(Code 1982,  6.128) 
Sec. 18-480. - Electrical outlets. 
    Where there is electric service available from power lines which are not more than 300 feet away from a dwelling, every habitable room of such dwelling shall contain at least two separate floor- or wall-type electric convenience outlets, or one such convenience outlet and one supplied ceiling-type electric light fixture; and every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room, and public hall shall contain at least one supplied ceiling- or wall-type electric light fixture. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner. 
(Code 1982,  6.129) 
Sec. 18-481. - Heating facilities. 
    Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, and are capable of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of at least 70 degrees Fahrenheit, at a distance three feet above floor level, under ordinary minimum winter conditions. 
(Code 1982,  6.130) 
Sec. 18-482. - Lighting. 
    Every public hall and stairway in every multiple-family dwelling containing three or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy and containing not more than four dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently located light switches, controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of full-time lighting. 
(Code 1982,  6.131) 
Sec. 18-483. - Screens generally. 
    During that portion of each year when the health officer deems it necessary for protection against mosquitoes, flies, and other insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space shall have supplied screens and a selfclosing device; and every window or other device with openings to outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be supplied with screens. Screens shall not be required during such period in rooms deemed by the health officer to be located high enough in the upper stories of buildings as to be free from such insects, and in rooms located in areas of this city which are deemed by the health officer to have so few such insects as to render screens unnecessary. 
(Code 1982,  6.132) 
Sec. 18-484. - Screens for basement or cellar windows. 
    Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with a screen or such other device as will effectively prevent their entrance. 
(Code 1982,  6.133) 
Secs. 18-485-18-495. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 18-496. - Compliance required. 
    No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1982,  6.141) 
Sec. 18-497. - Exterior maintenance. 
    Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling, and roof shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof; shall be capable of affording privacy; and shall be kept in good repair. 
(Code 1982,  6.142) 
Sec. 18-498. - Windows and doors. 
    Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be reasonably weathertight, watertight, and rodentproof; and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
(Code 1982,  6.143) 
Sec. 18-499. - Stairs and porches. 
    Every inside and outside stair, every porch, and every appurtenance thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(Code 1982,  6.144) 
Sec. 18-500. - Plumbing. 
    Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects, leaks, and obstructions. 
(Code 1982,  6.145) 
Sec. 18-501. - Toilet, bathroom floors. 
    Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1982,  6.146) 
Sec. 18-502. - Supplied facilities-Maintenance. 
    Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or utility which is required under this article shall be so constructed or installed that it will function safely and effectively, and shall be maintained in satisfactory working condition. 
(Code 1982,  6.147) 
Sec. 18-503. - Same-Removal. 
    No owner, operator, or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment, or utility which is required under this article to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by him, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by the health officer. 
(Code 1982,  6.148) 
Sec. 18-504. - Clean before leasing. 
    No owner shall occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling unit unless it is clean, sanitary, and fit for human occupancy. 
(Code 1982,  6.149) 
Secs. 18-505-18-515. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - SPACE, USE, LOCATION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 18-516. - Compliance required. 
    No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1982,  6.151) 
Sec. 18-517. - Minimum living space. 
    Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space for the first occupancy thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be calculated on the basis of total habitable room area. 
(Code 1982,  6.152) 
Sec. 18-518. - Minimum sleeping space. 
    In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof. 
(Code 1982,  6.153) 
Sec. 18-519. - Room arrangement. 
    No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms shall have such room arrangements that access to a bathroom or water closet compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or water closet compartment. 
(Code 1982,  6.154) 
Sec. 18-520. - Ceiling height. 
    At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least seven feet; and the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof. 
(Code 1982,  6.155) 
Sec. 18-521. - Basements and cellars. 
    No space located partially or totally below grade shall be used as a habitable room of a dwelling unit unless approved by the health officer in writing and unless: 
(1)  The floor and those portions of the walls below grade are of waterproof and dampproof construction. 
(2)  The minimum window area is equal to at least that required in section 18-477 and such window area is located entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area, or if windows are located wholly or partly below grade, there be constructed a properly drained window well whose open area is equal to or greater than the area of the masonry opening for the window; the bottom of the window well is below the top of the impervious masonry construction under this window, and the minimum horizontal distance at a right angle from any point of the window well is equal to or greater than the vertical depth of the window well as measured from the bottom of the masonry opening for the window; except where there is supplied adequate artificial illumination. 
(3)  The total openable window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum as required under section 18-478, except where some other approved devices affording adequate ventilation and humidity control are supplied. 
(4)  There are no pipes, ducts or other obstructions less than six feet, eight inches above the floor level which interfere with the normal use of the room or area. 
(Code 1982,  6.156) 
Sec. 18-522. - Egress. 
    Every apartment and rooming unit shall have immediate access to two or more safe, unobstructed means of egress, with minimum head room of six feet, six inches, leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the law of this state and this city. 
(Code 1982,  6.157) 
Secs. 18-523-18-535. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - OWNER, OCCUPANT RESPONSIBILITY 

Sec. 18-536. - Public areas. 
    Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof. 
(Code 1982,  6.161) 
Sec. 18-537. - Dwelling unit. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and premises thereof which he occupies and controls. 
(Code 1982,  6.162) 
Sec. 18-538. - Rubbish. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish containers required by section 18-461. 
(Code 1982,  6.163) 
Sec. 18-539. - Garbage. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his garbage and any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents, in a clean and sanitary manner, by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage containers required by section 18-462. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to supply such facilities or containers for all dwelling units in a dwelling containing more than four dwelling units and for all dwelling units located on premises where more than four dwelling units share the same premises. In all other cases it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to furnish such facilities or containers. 
(Code 1982,  6.164) 
Sec. 18-540. - Screens and storm windows. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for hanging all screens and double or storm doors and windows whenever the same are required under the provisions of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, except where the owner has agreed to supply such service. 
(Code 1982,  6.165) 
Sec. 18-541. - Extermination of pests. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents, or other pests therein or on the premises. Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(Code 1982,  6.166) 
Sec. 18-542. - Plumbing fixtures. 
    Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
(Code 1982,  6.167) 
Secs. 18-543-18-555. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - ROOMINGHOUSES 

Sec. 18-556. - Compliance required. 
    No person shall operate a roominghouse, or shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any roominghouse, except in compliance with the provisions of every section of this article except sections 18-456 to 18-464 inclusive and sections 18-536 to 18-542 inclusive. 
(Code 1982,  6.171) 
Sec. 18-557. - Permit required. 
    No person shall operate a roominghouse unless he holds a valid roominghouse permit issued by the health officer in the name of the operator and for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit. The operator shall apply to the health officer for such permit, which shall be issued by the health officer upon compliance by the operator with the applicable provisions of this article and of any rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. This permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the roominghouse at all times. No such permit shall be transferable. Every person holding such a permit shall give notice in writing to the health officer within 24 hours after having sold, transferred, given away, or otherwise disposed of ownership of, interest in, or control of any roominghouse. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such roominghouse. Every roominghouse permit shall expire at the end of one year following its date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1982,  6.172) 
Sec. 18-558. - Permit denial; appeal. 
    Any person whose application for a permit to operate a roominghouse has been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the health officer, under the procedure provided by section 18-432. 
(Code 1982,  6.173) 
Sec. 18-559. - Inspection; notice of violation. 
    Whenever upon inspection of any roominghouse the health officer finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any provision of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, the health officer shall give notice in writing to the operator of such roominghouse that unless such conditions or practices are corrected within a reasonable period, to be determined by the health officer, the operator's roominghouse permit will be suspended. At the end of such period the health officer shall reinspect such roominghouse, and if he finds that such conditions or practices have not been corrected, he shall give notice in writing to the operator that the latter's permit has been suspended. Upon receipt of notice of suspension, such operator shall immediately cease operation of such roominghouse, and no person shall occupy for sleeping or living purposes any rooming unit therein. 
(Code 1982,  6.174) 
Sec. 18-560. - Permit suspension; appeal. 
    Any person whose permit to operate a roominghouse has been suspended, or who has received notice from the health officer that his permit is to be suspended unless existing conditions or practices at his roominghouse are corrected, may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the health officer, under the procedure provided by section 18-432. If no petition for such hearing is filed within ten days following the day on which such permit was suspended, such permit shall be deemed to have been automatically revoked. 
(Code 1982,  6.175) 
Sec. 18-561. - Toilets and baths. 
    At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bath tub or shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the health officer and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each eight persons or fraction thereof residing within a roominghouse, including members of the operator's family wherever they share the use of the facilities; provided that in a roominghouse where rooms are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half the required number of water closets. All such facilities shall be so located within the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times. No such facilities shall be located in a basement except by written approval of the health officer. 
(Code 1982,  6.176) 
Sec. 18-562. - Bed linens and towels. 
    The operator of every roominghouse shall change supplied bed linen and towels therein at least once each week, and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner. 
(Code 1982,  6.177) 
Sec. 18-563. - Minimum space. 
    Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof. 
(Code 1982,  6.178) 
Sec. 18-564. - Egress. 
    Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws of this state and this city. 
(Code 1982,  6.179) 
Sec. 18-565. - Maintenance. 
    The operator of every roominghouse shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings, and for maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of the roominghouse; and he shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or building is leased or occupied by the operator. 
(Code 1982,  6.180) 
Sec. 18-566. - Application to hotels. 
    Every provision of this article which applies to roominghouses shall also apply to hotels, except to the extent that any such provision may be found in conflict with the laws of this state or with the lawful regulations of any state board or agency. 
(Code 1982,  6.181) 
Secs. 18-567-18-575. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - UNFIT DWELLINGS; CONDEMNATION 

Sec. 18-576. - Compliance required. 
    The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation and the procedure for the condemnation and placarding of such unfit dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1982,  6.185) 
Sec. 18-577. - Condemnation. 
    Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and shall be so designated and placarded by the health officer: 
(1)  Is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, insanitary, unsafe, or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public. 
(2)  Lacks illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the public. 
(3)  Because of its general condition or location is insanitary, or otherwise dangerous, to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public. 
(Code 1982,  6.186) 
Sec. 18-578. - Vacating dwelling. 
    Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation, and so designated and placarded by the health officer, shall be vacated within a reasonable time as ordered by the health officer. 
(Code 1982,  6.187) 
Sec. 18-579. - Use after condemnation. 
    No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by, the health officer. The health officer shall remove such placard whenever the defect upon which the condemnation and placarding action were based has been eliminated. 
(Code 1982,  6.188) 
Sec. 18-580. - Removal of placard. 
    No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded as such, except as provided in section 18-579. 
(Code 1982,  6.189) 
Sec. 18-581. - Appeal. 
    Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemning and placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the health officer, under the procedure set forth in section 18-432. 
(Code 1982,  6.190) 
Secs. 18-582-18-600. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - MOVING, DEMOLISHING BUILDINGS 

Sec. 18-601. - Permit required, restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to move or cause to be moved or assist in the moving of any building or structure from any location to another, whether on the same or on different lots, or to raze or demolish the same, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the building department. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for the moving of any building or structure along, on or through any street, alley or over any public property where such removal shall cause damage to the shade trees on or along such street, alley or public property; nor shall it be permissible to move any building or other structure over or along any street paved with asphalt except by special permission of the city engineer. Good, sound and adequate planking, to be approved by the engineer, shall be kept under and between the rollers of the truck carrying such building or other structure and the roadway at all times during such moving, for the distribution of the load over the base of such roadway. 
(c)  No building shall be moved over any street, alley or public place on skids. 
(d)  No permit shall be issued, nor shall it be lawful to move or cause to be moved any such building or other structure that has been damaged by wear and tear or other cause, over 50 percent of its present value as estimated by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 92-1,  1(13.1), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 18-602. - Compliance with regulations. 
    Permission to move any building or structure from one location to another is contingent upon compliance with the building and zoning regulations of the city and, in the case of a dwelling, with the State Housing Act (MCL 125.651 et seq., MSA 5.3011 et seq.), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 92-1,  1(13.2), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 18-603. - Taxes. 
    Before such a permit is issued under this article, the owner of the property shall present to the building inspector, for filing, sufficient evidence that the property is free of any entanglements and that all taxes, water bills, assessments and any other city charges against the same are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 92-1,  1(13.3), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 18-604. - Bill of sale. 
    The applicant, if other than the owner, shall present a written statement or bill of sale signed by the owner that he is entitled to move or raze the building or structure. The statement or bill of sale shall be filed with the permit in the office of the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 92-1,  1(13.4), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 18-605. - Bond deposit. 
    Before a permit to move or raze a structure is issued, the owner or applicant shall make a bond deposit in sufficient amount (schedule of required deposit and permit fees to be determined by resolution of the city commission) to protect the city against any claim of damage to public or private property and to reimburse the city for any expense incurred by any of its departments in connection with such moving or razing and to guarantee that all rubbish and materials will be removed from the premises, and walls and excavations will be filled and leveled to the existing grade and left in a safe and sanitary condition, and that sewer leads will be bulkheaded, and if such conditions are not complied with within a specific time period as determined by the building inspector, the city will proceed to do the necessary work and charge the cost thereof against the cash deposit. 
(Ord. No. 92-1,  1(13.5), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 18-606. - Balance of deposit. 
    Within 14 days after all work is completed and after deducting all expenses for supervision and inspection of moving operations and any expense incurred by any of the departments of the city, the balance of monies remaining in the cash deposit shall be returned to the party who shall have made such deposit. 
(Ord. No. 92-1,  1(13.6), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 18-607. - Insurance. 
    A liability insurance policy in the amount of $100,000.00 shall be provided, with certificates of insurance provided prior to issuance of the permit. Additional insurance may be required as determined by the building department and the city risk management consultant. 
(Ord. No. 92-1,  1(13.7), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 18-608. - Discontinuance of utilities. 
    Before moving or razing any building it shall be the duty of the mover or wrecker to see that the sewer line is plugged with a concrete stopper, and inspected by the building inspector before backfilling, the water shut off, and disconnected, and the meter returned to the city water office. The electric and gas services shall be removed in accordance with the regulations of the respective service companies. The applicant shall obtain releases from gas, water, phone, cable television and electric utilities, and provide same in written form with the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 92-1,  1(13.8), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 18-609. - Notice to public utilities. 
    The applicant shall notify any person owning or controlling any telegraph, telephone, cable television, electric light or power, fire or police alarm, or others owning or controlling personal property on public property by giving two days' notice thereto that the building or structure will come in contact with such personal property. The applicant shall pay for the cost of moving such structure as may be affected by such moving. 
(Ord. No. 92-1,  1(13.9), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 18-610. - Moving permit. 
    Before moving a building or structure upon any street, alley or place, the mover, in addition to approval of the building inspector, shall secure a permit as required by chapter 62 prescribing the time allowed for moving and the route to be used. 
(Ord. No. 92-1,  1(13.10), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 18-611. - Cancellation of permit. 
    If the time for moving exceeds the time allowed, then the building inspector shall cancel the permit unless the delay is deemed reasonable. The building inspector may cause dismantling of the structure in a location specified by him for failure of the permit holder to comply with the provisions of this article or reasonable instructions to refrain from destruction or injury to public or private property or unreasonable delay causing obstruction of public thoroughfares. 
(Ord. No. 92-1,  1(13.11), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 18-612. - Application. 
    Application for any permit under this article must be accompanied by the following written information: 
(1)  Extreme length, width and height when mounted, of the structure to be moved. 
(2)  Present location. 
(3)  Proposed location. 
(4)  Route of proposed moving. 
(5)  Complete information, and plat if required, showing location of building at the proposed site with reference to lot lines and to surrounding buildings within 30 feet of the proposed building. 
(6)  Date when such moving is to commence, and the probable time required for its completion. 
(7)  Certificates of insurance. 
(8)  Required bonds. 
(9)  Utility releases. 
(Ord. No. 92-1,  1(13.12), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 18-613. - Schedule of permit fees and deposits. 
    Permit fees and deposits which may be imposed under this article shall be as determined by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 92-1,  1(13.13), 2-18-92) 
Secs. 18-614-18-635. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - KELLOGG PARK HISTORIC DISTRICT[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Local historic districts act, MCL 399.201 et seq., MSA 5.3407(1) et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-636. - Statement of purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Safeguard the heritage of the city by preserving one or more historic districts in the city which reflect elements of its cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history; 
(2)  Stabilize and improve property values in such district and the surrounding areas; 
(3)  Foster civic beauty; 
(4)  Strengthen the local economy; 
(5)  Promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens of the city; and 
(6)  Assist property owners in recognizing and protecting their historic resources. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  1(A), 3-22-94) 
Sec. 18-637. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alter or alteration means work that changes the detail of the resource but does not change the basic size or shape. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means the written approval of a permit application for work that is appropriate and that does not adversely affect a resource. 
    Committee means a historic district study committee appointed by the city commission. 
    Demolition means the razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a resource and includes, but is not limited to demolition by neglect. 
    Demolition by neglect means neglect in maintaining, repairing, or securing a resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource or the loss of structural integrity of the resource. 
    Denial means the written rejection of a permit application for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource. 
    Historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources that are related by history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or culture. 
    Historic district commission (HDC) means the city historic district commission. 
    Historic preservation means the identification, evaluation, establishment, and protection of resources significant in history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or culture. 
    Historic resource means a publicly or privately owned building, structure, site, object, feature or open space that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering or culture of the city. 
    Notice to proceed means the written permission issued by the HDC for work to be performed within a historic district when the HDC has found the proposed work to be necessary, pursuant to a finding under section 18-691. 
    Open space means undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal or manmade landscape area that provides a connective link or a buffer between resources. 
    Ordinary maintenance means keeping a resource unimpaired and in good condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time, in its exterior condition. Ordinary maintenance does not change the external appearance of the resource except through the elimination of the usual and expected effects of weathering, age and use. Ordinary maintenance does not constitute work for the purposes of this article. 
    Proposed historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries and that is under review by a committee or a standing committee for the purpose of making a recommendation as to whether it should be established as a historic district or added to an established historic district. 
    Repair means to restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound condition by any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of a resource constitutes work for the purpose of this article. 
    Resource means one or more publicly or privately owned historic or nonhistoric buildings, structures, site, objects, features or open spaces located within a historic district. 
    Standing committee means a permanent body established by the legislative body of a local unit to conduct the activities of a historic district study committee on a continuing basis. 
    Work means construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation or demolition of a resource located within a historic district. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  1(B), 3-22-94) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 18-638. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person who violates this article is responsible for a civil violation and may be fined not more than $100.00. An action taken under state law, MCL 399.201 et seq., MSA 5.3407(1) et seq., however, provides for a civil violation and a fine of not more than $5,000.00. 
(b)  A person who violates this article and state law may be ordered by the court to pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved, excavated, or demolished. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  13, 3-22-94) 
Sec. 18-639. - Boundaries of district. 
    The city historic district shall be the area within the boundary lines described as follows: 
(1)  In Assessor's Plymouth Plat No. 8: Beginning at the southwest corner of Lot 216a; thence northerly along the west line of Lot 216a to the northwest corner of said lot; thence easterly along the north line of Lots 216a, 215, 214 and 213 to the northeast corner of Lot 213; thence northerly along the west line of Lot 212 to the northeast corner of said lot; thence southeasterly along the north line of Lot 212 to the northeast corner of said lot; thence northerly across the Fralick Street right-of-way to the southwest corner of Lot 199; thence northerly along the west line of Lots 199, 198 and 197 to the northwest corner of Lot 197; thence easterly along the north line of Lot 197 to the southwest corner of Lot 196; thence northerly along the west line of Lots 196, 195, 194, 193 and 192a to the northwest corner of Lot 192a; thence northerly across Church Street right-of-way to a part of the northeasterly public park and the adjoining 1/2 of vacated church street on the north thereof "Assessor's Plymouth plat No. 8" of part of the southwest 1/4 of section 26, part of the southeast 1/4 of section 27 and all of "Ella Safford's Subdivision" of part of said sections 26 & 27, Town 1 South, Range 8 east, Plymouth Village (now city), Wayne County, Michigan, as recorded in Liber 64 of plats on Page 78, Wayne County Records, more particularly described as beginning at a point on the east & west 1/4 line of section 26 and the centerline of vacated Church Street distant south 8811'00? west 41.17 feet from the intersection of the centerline of vacated Church Street with the centerline of South Main Street and proceeding thence along the northwesterly line of South Main Street south 3454'30? west 251.47 feet; thence north 5421'58" west 168.20 feet; thence along the westerly face of a stone wall along a curve concave to the east, radius 22.05 feet, central angle 9329'28?, chord bears north 0737'15? west 32.11 feet, an arc distance of 35.97 feet; thence along the northwesterly face of said stone wall along a curve concave to the southeast, radius 107.50 feet, central angle 3425'47?, chord bears north 5620'23? east 63.63 feet, an arc distance of 64.50 feet; thence along the northwesterly face of said stone wall north 7333'16? east 58.55 feet; thence north 1322'00? east 19.65 feet; thence along the east & west 1/4 line of section 26 and the centerline of vacated Church Street north 8811'00? east 171.29 feet to the point of beginning, containing 0.7253 acres, subject to the rights of the public and of any governmental unit in any part thereof used, taken or deeded for street, road or highway purposes, subject to easements and restrictions of record thence easterly across the Main Street right-of-way to the northwest corner of Lot 262a, Assessor's Plymouth Plat No. 9. 
(2)  In Assessor's Plymouth Plat No. 9: Beginning at the northwest corner of Lot 262a; thence southerly along the east right-of-way line of Main Street to the northwest corner of Lot 221a; thence easterly along the north line of Lot 221a to the northeast corner of such lot; thence southerly along the east line of Lots 221a, 222a, 223b1a1, 223b1b1, 223b2a, 224a, 225a, 226a1 and 226b to a point intersecting the north line of Lot 231; thence easterly along the north line of Lots 231 and 232a to the northeast corner of Lot 232a; thence northerly across the public alley to the southeast corner of Lot 235; thence northerly along the west line of Lot 232b to the southwest corner of Lot 18a, Fralick's Addition. 
(3)  In Fralick's Addition: Beginning at the southwest corner of Lot 18a; thence northerly along the west line of Lots 18a, 17a, 16a, 15a and 14a to the northeast corner of Lot 14a; thence easterly along the north line of Lot 14a to the northeast corner of such lot; thence southerly along the west right-of-way line of Union Street to the southeast corner of Lot 18a; thence easterly across the Union Street right-of-way to the northwest corner of Lot 237, Assessor's Plymouth Plat No. 9. 
(4)  In Assessor's Plymouth Plat No. 9: Beginning at the northwest corner of Lot 237; thence easterly along the north line of Lots 237 and 239 to the northeast corner of Lot 239; thence southerly along the east line of Lots 239 and 240 to the southeast corner of Lot 240; thence southerly across the West Ann Arbor Trail right-of-way to the northeast corner of Lot 712, Assessor's Plymouth Plat No. 20. 
(5)  In Assessor's Plymouth Plat No. 20: Beginning at the northeast corner of Lot 712; thence southerly along the east line of Lot 712 to the southeast corner of such lot; thence westerly along the south line of Lots 712, 711 and 710 to the northeast corner of Lot 734; thence southerly along the east line of Lot 734 to the southeast corner of such lot; thence westerly along the south line of Lots 734 and 735a to the southwest corner of Lot 735a; thence westerly across the Deer Street right-of-way to the southeast corner of Lot 707; thence westerly along the south line of Lots 707, 706, 705 and 704 to the northeast corner of Lot 739; thence southerly along the east line of Lot 739 to the southeast corner of such lot; thence westerly along the south line of Lot 739 to the southwest corner of such lot; thence westerly across the Main Street right-of-way to the southeast corner of combined Lots 312, 313 and 314b1e, Assessor's Plymouth Plat No. 12. 
(6)  In Assessor's Plymouth Plat No. 12: Beginning at the southeast corner of combined Lots 312, 313 and 314b1e; thence westerly along the south line of the lot to the southwest corner of such lot; thence northerly along the west line of such lot to the northwest corner of such lot; thence northerly across the West Ann Arbor Trail right-of-way to the southeast corner of Lot 149a, Assessor's Plymouth Plat No. 7. 
(7)  In Assessor's Plymouth Plat No. 7: Beginning at the southeast corner of Lot 149a; thence northerly along the west line of Lots 149a, 148, 147, 146, 145, 144b, 143, 142, 141 and 140 to the northwest corner of Lot 140; thence westerly along the south line of Lots 139 and 138 to the southwest corner of Lot 138; thence northerly along the west line of Lot 138 to the south right-of-way line of Penniman Avenue; thence westerly along the south right-of-way line of Penniman Avenue to the east right-of-way line of Harvey Street; thence northerly across the Penniman Avenue right-of-way to the southwest corner of Lot 216a, which is the point of beginning. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  2, 3-22-94; Ord. No. 2001-11,  1, 2, 9-4-01) 
Sec. 18-640. - Regulation of structures. 
    There shall be no construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, or demolition of a resource within any designated historic district within the city, such as the city historic district, unless such action complies with the requirements set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  3, 3-22-94) 
Sec. 18-641. - Acceptance of gifts, grants, bequests. 
(a)  The city may accept gifts, grants or bequests from the state or federal government for historic restoration purposes or historic purposes; it may accept public or private gifts, grants or bequests for such purposes; provided, however, that such gifts, grants, or bequests are not prohibited by the city Charter; and are not used for the purpose of paying any fees or expenses arising out of any litigation. The city commission may appoint the historic district commission to administer on behalf of the city such gifts, grants, or bequests for the purposes herein provided. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall be custodian of funds of the historic district commission and authorized expenditures shall be certified by the city treasurer by the secretary or other officer designated by the HDC. The HDC shall annually report to the city commission any money it shall receive or expend. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  12, 3-22-94) 
Secs. 18-642-18-650. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HISTORIC DISTRICT COMMISSION 

Sec. 18-651. - Creation. 
    In order to execute the purposes declared in this article, there is hereby created a commission to be called the city historic district commission. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  4(A), 3-22-94) 
Sec. 18-652. - Membership. 
(a)  The historic district commission shall consist of seven members whose residence is located in the city. They shall be appointed by the mayor for terms of office of three years, provided that two of the initial members shall be appointed for one year, two for two years, and three for three years. After the initial terms expire, each member shall be appointed for three years. Members of the HDC may be reappointed after their terms expire. 
(b)  At least one member of the historic district commission shall be appointed from a list of citizens submitted by a duly organized and existing preservation society and at least one member of the HDC shall be a graduate of an accredited school of architecture who has two years of architectural experience or who is an architect duly registered in this state, if such person resides in the city and is available for appointment. A majority of the members of the HDC shall have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. 
(c)  A vacancy occurring in the membership of the historic district commission for any cause shall be filled within 60 calendar days, by a person appointed by the mayor for the unexpired term. The members of the HDC shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  4(B), 3-22-94) 
Sec. 18-653. - Ethics, removal of members. 
(a)  All members of this historic district commission shall be governed by the city's code of ethics. Any member or members of the HDC may be removed by vote of the city commission for inefficiency, neglect of duty, unresolved conflict of interest, or malfeasance in office, after due consideration by the city commission. The city commission shall issue its directive to any member being considered for removal indicating the time, date and place for consideration by the city commission along with a specification of grounds upon which removal is being considered. At the time and place set, such member shall have an opportunity to be heard and may be represented by counsel. Decisions by the city commission shall be final and shall be based upon the record of such show cause proceeding. The record of all such proceedings shall be taken and preserved for one year unless a longer retention is requested by the member under consideration for removal. 
(b)  Absence from three consecutive regular meetings of the historic district commission shall automatically operate to vacate the seat of a member of the HDC, unless the absence is excused by the HDC by resolution setting forth such excuse. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  4(B), 3-22-94) 
Sec. 18-654. - Duties and powers. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the historic district commission to review all plans for the construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation or demolition of structures in the historic district and it shall have the power to pass upon such plans before a permit for such activity can be granted. In reviewing the plans, the commission shall follow the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings, as set forth in 36 CFR 67, or their equivalent as approved or established by the state bureau of history of the department of state, and shall also give consideration and significance to: 
(1)  The historical or architectural value and significance of the historic resource and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area; 
(2)  The relationship of the exterior architectural features of such historic resource to the rest of the resources and to the surrounding area; 
(3)  The general compatibility of the exterior design, arrangement, texture and materials proposed to be used; 
(4)  To any other factor, including aesthetics, which it deems pertinent; 
(5)  The proposed major changes to open spaces in a historic district. The HDC shall review plans for major changes to these open spaces, such as the removal of large trees (over 12 inches in diameter as measured four feet above ground) or the making of major contour changes in terrain features. The HDC may use its discretion to decide if proposed changes are major in nature or not. 
(b)  The HDC shall review and act upon exterior features of a resource, and shall not review and act upon interior arrangements unless interior work will cause visible changes to the exterior of the historic resource. The HDC shall not disapprove applications except in regard to considerations as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The HDC may delegate the issuance of certificates of appropriateness for specified minor classes of work to its staff, to the inspector of buildings, or to another delegated authority. The HDC shall provide to such delegated authorities specific written standards for issuing the certificates of appropriateness under this subsection. Such delegated authorities shall come before the next regularly scheduled HDC meeting and the HDC shall review the certificates of appropriateness so issued. These reviews are to serve the purpose of keeping the HDC informed as to what certificates of appropriateness for minor work have been issued since the last HDC meeting. On a quarterly basis, the HDC shall review the certificates of appropriateness, if any, issued by the aforesaid delegated authority to determine whether or not the delegated responsibilities should be continued. 
(d)  In case of an application for work affecting the appearance of a resource or for the alteration, moving or demolition of a resource which the commission deems so valuable to the city that the loss thereof will adversely affect the public purpose of the city, the historic district commission shall endeavor to work out with the owner an economically feasible plan for preservation of the historic resource. 
(e)  If all efforts by the historic district commission to preserve a resource fail, or if it is determined by the city commission that public ownership is most suitable, the city commission, if considered to be in the public interest, may acquire the resource using public funds, public or private gifts, grants, or proceeds from the issuance of revenue bonds. Such an acquisition shall be based upon the recommendation of the HDC or standing committee. The HDC or standing committee is responsible for maintaining publicly owned resources using its own funds, if not specifically designated for other purposes, or public funds committed for that use by the city commission. Upon recommendation of the HDC or standing committee, the city may sell resources acquired under this section with protective easements included in the property transfer documents, if appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  4(C), 3-22-94) 
Sec. 18-655. - Rules. 
(a)  The historic district commission shall elect from its membership a chairman and a vice-chairman whose terms of office shall be fixed by the HDC. The chairman shall preside over the HDC and shall have the right to vote. The vice-chairman shall, in the case of the absence or disability of the chairman, perform the duties of the chairman. 
(b)  A secretary shall be appointed and shall keep a record of all resolutions, proceedings and actions of the HDC and report regularly to the city commission. 
(c)  At least four members of the historic district commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of its business. The HDC shall adopt rules or bylaws for the transaction of its business which shall provide for the time and place of holding regular meetings. They shall provide for the calling of special meetings by the chairman or by at least two members of the HDC. All meetings of the HDC shall be open to the public and any person or his duly constituted representative shall be entitled to appear and be heard on any matter before it reaches its decision. 
(d)  Public notice of the time, date and place of meetings shall be given in the manner required by Act No. 169 of Public Acts of Michigan of 1970 (MCL 399.171 et seq., MSA 5.3407(1) et seq.), as amended. Each notice shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the city historic district commission. The notice must be posted at the principal office of the HDC, in addition to any other location deemed appropriate by the city commission, including cable television. A meeting agenda shall be a part of the notice and shall include a listing of each permit application to be reviewed or considered by the HDC. The requirements of such act include: 
(1)  For regular meetings of a public body, there shall be posted within ten days of the first meeting of the HDC in each calendar or fiscal year a public notice stating the dates, times and places of its regular meetings; 
(2)  For a rescheduled regular meeting or special meeting of the HDC, a public notice stating the date, time and place of the meeting shall be posted at least 18 hours before the meeting; 
(3)  For a change in the schedule of regular meetings of the HDC, a notice shall be posted within three days after the meeting at which the change is made stating the new dates, times and places of its regular meetings; 
(4)  Nothing in this section shall bar the historic district commission from meeting in an emergency session should a severe and imminent threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public when two-thirds of the HDC members decide that delay would be detrimental to efforts to lessen or respond to the threat. 
(e)  The historic district commission shall keep a record, which shall be open to public view, of its resolutions, proceedings and actions. The concurring affirmative vote of four members shall constitute approval of plans before it for review or for adoption of any resolution, motion or other action of the HDC. 
(f)  The historic district commission shall submit an annual report to the city commission of the general activities of the HDC and shall submit such special reports as requested by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  4(D), 3-22-94) 
Sec. 18-656. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any permit applicant aggrieved by a decision of the historic district commission may file an appeal with the state historic preservation review board of the state historical commission within the department of state. The appeal shall be filed within 60 days after the decision is furnished to the applicant. 
(b)  A permit applicant aggrieved by the decision of the state historic preservation review board may appeal the decision to the circuit court having jurisdiction over the HDC whose decision was appealed to the state historic preservation review board. Such applicant may only appeal to the circuit court after appealing to the state historic preservation review board. 
(c)  In addition, any citizen or duly organized historic preservation organization in the city, other than the resource property owner, jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the HDC may appeal the decision to the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  6, 3-22-94) 
Sec. 18-657. - Demolition by neglect. 
(a)  Upon a finding by the historic district commission that a historic resource either in the historic district or in a proposed historic district, which is subject to HDC review pursuant to the terms under section 18-675, is threatened by demolition by neglect, the HDC may do either of the following: 
(1)  Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions contributing to demolition by neglect; or 
(2)  If the owner does not make the repairs within a reasonable time, the HDC or its agents may enter the property and make such repairs as are necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. 
(b)  The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the city as a special assessment against the property. The HDC or its agents may enter the property for purposes of this section upon obtaining an order from the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  7, 3-22-94) 
Sec. 18-658. - Failure to obtain a permit. 
(a)  When work has been done upon a historic resource without a permit, and the historic district commission finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of appropriateness, the HDC may require an owner to restore the resource to the condition the resource was in before the inappropriate work was conducted or modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  If the owner does not comply with the restoration or modification requirement within a reasonable time, the HDC may seek an order from the circuit court to require the owner to restore the resource to its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(c)  If the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the order of the court, the HDC or its agents may enter the property and conduct work necessary to restore the resource to its former condition or modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the court's order. The cost of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the city as a special assessment against the property. When acting pursuant to such order of the circuit court, the HDC or its agents may enter a property for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  8, 3-22-94) 
Secs. 18-659-18-670. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 18-671. - Establishment of study committee. 
    Before establishing, amending, adding to, removing properties from or eliminating any historic district, the city commission shall appoint a historic district study committee. The committee shall contain a majority of persons who have a clearly demonstrated interest or knowledge of historic preservation, and shall contain representation from one or more duly organized local historic preservation organizations. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  9(A), 3-22-94) 
Sec. 18-672. - Duties of study committee. 
(a)  The historic district study committee, or consultants employed by the committee, shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each proposed historic district following procedures established or approved by the state historic bureau; 
(2)  Conduct basic research of each proposed historic district and the historic resources located within that district; 
(3)  Determine the total number of historic and nonhistoric resources within the proposed historic district and the percentage of historic resources of that total. In evaluating the significance of the historic resources, the committee shall be guided by the selection criteria for evaluation issued by the secretary of the interior for inclusion of resources in the national register of historic places, as set forth in 36 CFR 60 below: 
a.  The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, and culture is present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association and: 
1.  That are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or 
2.  That are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or 
3.  That embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction, or that represent the work of a master, or that possess high artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or 
4.  That have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history. 
b.  Criteria established or approved by the Michigan Historic Bureau, if any; 
(4)  Prepare a preliminary historic district study committee report that addresses at a minimum all of the following: 
a.  Charge of the committee; 
b.  Composition of the committee membership; 
c.  Historic district or district study; 
d.  Boundaries for each proposed historic district in writing and on maps; 
e.  History of each proposed historic district; 
f.  Significance of each district as a whole, as well as a sufficient number of individual resources to fully represent the variety of resources found within the district, relative to the evaluation criteria. 
(b)  Not less than 60 calendar days after the transmittal of the preliminary report, the committee shall hold a public hearing. Notice will be published of the time, date and place of the hearing. Written notice shall be mailed by first class mail not less than 14 calendar days before the hearing to the owners of properties within the proposed historic district, as listed on the tax rolls of the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  9(B), 3-22-94) 
Sec. 18-673. - Actions taken by committee. 
    After the date of the public hearing, the historic district study committee and the city commission shall have not more than one year, unless otherwise authorized by the city commission, to take the following actions: 
(1)  The committee shall prepare and submit a final report with its recommendation and the recommendation, if any of the city planning commission to the city commission. If the recommendation is to establish a historic district or districts, the final report shall include a draft of a proposed ordinance. 
(2)  After receiving a final report that recommends the establishment of a historic district or districts, the city commission, at its discretion, may introduce and pass or reject an ordinance. If the city commission passes an ordinance establishing one or more historic districts, the city commission shall file a copy of that ordinance, including a legal description of the property or properties located within the historic district or districts, with the register of deeds. The city commission shall not pass an ordinance establishing a contiguous historic district less than 60 days after a majority of the property owners within the proposed historic district, as listed on the city tax rolls, have approved the establishment of the historic district pursuant to a written petition. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  9(C), 3-22-94) 
Sec. 18-674. - Elimination of districts. 
    If considering elimination of a historic district the historic district study committee shall follow the procedures set forth herein for issuing a preliminary report, holding a public hearing, and issuing a final report but with the intent of showing one or more of the following: 
(1)  The historic district has lost those physical characteristics that enabled establishment of the district. 
(2)  The historic district was not significant in the way previously defined. 
(3)  The historic district was established pursuant to defective procedures. 
(4)  All writings prepared, owned, used, in possession of, or retained by the committee in the performance of any official function, shall be made available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  9(D), 3-22-94) 
Sec. 18-675. - Powers of city commission. 
    Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic, architectural, archaeological, engineering or cultural significance of a proposed historic district, the city commission may adopt a resolution requiring that all applications for permits within the proposed historic district be referred to the historic district commission as prescribed in sections 18-640 and 18-686 through 18-691. The HDC shall review permit applications with the same powers that would apply if the proposed historic district was an established historic district for not more than one year, or until such time as the city commission approves or rejects the establishment of the historic district by ordinance, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  10, 3-22-94) 
Secs. 18-676-18-685. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REVIEW OF PLANS 

Sec. 18-686. - Filing of application. 
(a)  Application for a building permit to construct, alter, repair, move, add to, excavate or demolish any structure in a historic district, shall be made to the building department. The application shall state whether the property is in a historic district such as the city historic district. Plans shall be submitted showing the structure in question and also showing its relation to adjacent structures. 
(b)  Upon the filing of such application, the building department shall immediately determine the zoning classification of the parcel and if it is determined to be located within a residential zoning district and for work on a new or existing residence or a new or existing residential accessory structure. The building department shall immediately notify the historic district commission of the receipt of such application and shall transmit it together with accompanying plans and other information to the HDC. If the parcel is determined to be within any zoning classification other than residential or for consideration of any kind of request other than work on a new or existing residence or new or existing residential accessory structure, then processing requirements for site plan review as set forth in section 78-416 et seq. must be completed and approved prior to review by the HDC. The planning commission may, however, at any time during its review refer such application to the HDC for the HDC's preliminary review. Upon approval of the required site plan in accordance with section 78-416 et seq., the building department shall immediately notify the HDC of the application and shall transmit the application to the HDC for its review. 
(c)  The building department shall not issue a permit and no proposed work shall proceed until the HDC has acted on the application by issuing a certificate of approval or a notice to proceed except as provided for in section 18-654(c). 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  5(A), 3-22-94) 
Sec. 18-687. - Action upon application. 
(a)  The historic district commission shall meet within 35 days after a complete application has been received by the building department, and shall review the plans according to the duties and powers specified herein. In reviewing the plans the HDC must make every effort to confer with the applicant for the building or demolition permits. No fees shall be charged to process a permit application through the HDC beyond the existing building department fees. 
(b)  The failure of the historic district commission to approve or disapprove of such plans within 60 days from the date of a completed application for permit, unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the HDC in writing, shall be deemed to constitute approval and the building department shall proceed to process the application without regard to a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  5(B), 3-22-94) 
Sec. 18-688. - Approval of application. 
(a)  If the historic district commission approves such plans, it shall issue a certificate of appropriateness which is to be signed by the chairman, attached to the application for a building permit and immediately transmitted to the building department. The chairman shall also stamp all prints submitted to the HDC signifying its approval. 
(b)  After the certificate of appropriateness has been issued and the building permit granted to the applicant, the building department shall, from time to time, inspect the work approved by such certificate and shall take such action as is necessary to force compliance with the approved plan. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  5(C), 3-22-94) 
Sec. 18-689. - Denial of application. 
(a)  If the historic district commission disapproves of such plans, it shall state its reasons for doing so and shall transmit a record of such action and reasons therefor in writing to the building department and to the applicant. The HDC may advise what it thinks is proper if it disapproves of the plan submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications to his plan and shall have the right to resubmit the application at any time after so doing. 
(b)  A denial of a permit application shall be binding on the building department, building inspector or any such other relevant authority. The denial of the plan shall also include a notice to the applicant of his rights of appeal to the state historic preservation review board and to the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  5(D), 3-22-94) 
Sec. 18-690. - Ordinary maintenance and prior permit work. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance of a resource within the historic district, or to prevent work on any resource under a permit issued by the building inspector or another duly delegated authority before the ordinance from which this article was derived was enacted. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  5(E), 3-22-94) 
Sec. 18-691. - Notice to proceed. 
    Under special conditions and emergencies, work within a historic district shall be permitted through the issuance of a notice to proceed by the historic district commission if any of the following conditions prevail and if the proposed work can be demonstrated by a finding of the HDC to be necessary to substantially improve or correct any of the following: 
(1)  The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or the occupancy of a structure; 
(2)  The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program which will be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approval, financing and environmental clearances; 
(3)  Retention of the resource would cause undue financial hardship to the owner when a governmental action, an act of God, or other events beyond the owner's control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource for sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site within the historic district have been attempted and exhausted by the owner; or 
(4)  Retention of the resource would not be in the interests of the majority of the community. 
(Ord. No. 94-6,  5(F), 3-22-94) 
Secs. 18-692-18-710. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - VEGETATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 18-711-18-720. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREES 

Secs. 18-721-18-732. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-06 , adopted October 16, 2017, repealed  18-721-17-732 and enacted similar provisions in chapter 34. Former  18-721-18-732 pertained to trees and derived from the Code of 1982. 
Sec. 18-733. - Public tree care. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
(b)  The city may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This subsection does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of such trees is in accordance with sections 34-1 through 34-9. 
(Code 1982,  3.70(12); Ord. No. 17-06 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 18-734. - Tree topping. 
    It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the trees. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this section at the determination of the city. 
(Code 1982,  3.70(13); Ord. No. 17-06 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 18-735. - Pruning, corner clearance. 
    Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection, and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Such owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign. 
(Code 1982,  3.70(14)) 
Sec. 18-736. - Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. 
    The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased tree on private property within the city when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The city will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by such owners at their own expense within 30 days after the date of service of notice. Upon failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner's property tax notice. 
(Code 1982,  3.70(15); Ord. No. 17-06 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 18-737. - Removal of stumps. 
    All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Code 1982,  3.70(16)) 
Secs. 18-738-18-740. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-06 , adopted October 16, 2017, repealed  18-738-17-740 and enacted similar provisions in chapter 34. Former  18-738-18-740 pertained to trees and derived from the Code of 1982. 
Secs. 18-741-18-750. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NOXIOUS WEEDS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-04, adopted Aug. 1, 2016 , amended and restated former Div. 3,  18-751-18-756, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 3, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code of 1982,  9.61-9.66; Ord. No. 86-3,  1-4, 3-17-86; Ord. No. 2006-2, 7-17-06. 

Sec. 18-751. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Noxious weeds includes Canada thistle (Circium arvense), dodders (any species of Cuscuta), mustards (Charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard; species of Brassica, or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa incana), quack-grass (Syropyron repens), crab-grass (Digitaria sanguinalis), poison ivy (Rhus toxicodendron), poison sumac (Rhus vernie), ragweed, goldenrod, and all weeds or grasses over eight inches in height, on the average, or other plants or grasses which, in the opinion of the city commission, shall be regarded as a common nuisance. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, 8-1-16 ) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 18-752. - Duty to cut. 
    It shall be the duty of every owner, occupant, or person having charge of any land within the city to cut down or cause to be cut down and destroyed all grass and/or noxious weeds each year and to again destroy same as often as may be necessary to prevent same from going to seed or exceeding a height of eight inches, on the average. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, 8-1-16 ) 
Sec. 18-753. - Cutting by city. 
    If any owner, occupant or person having charge of any land within the city shall refuse or neglect to cut and destroy all grass and/or noxious weeds as provided in this division, then the city manager or his agent shall cause the land to be entered upon by city employees or a city contractor for the purpose of cutting and destroying such grass and/or weeds and such entering upon shall not be deemed a trespass. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, 8-1-16 ) 
Sec. 18-754. - Costs. 
    The city manager or his agent shall keep an accurate account of expense incurred for each lot or parcel of land in carrying out the provisions of section 18-753 and such expense shall be charged against such lot or premises and collected by giving notice thereof to the owner of the premises. If such expense or charge shall not be paid the same shall be assessed against the premises and collected as provided by section 12.22 of the city Charter. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, 8-1-16 ) 
Sec. 18-755. - Notice. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager or his agent to post notices in not less than three conspicuous places within the city and to publish a copy of the notice issued under this division at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city each calendar year, prior to the growing season. In the alternative, the city manager or his agent shall notify by first class mail or by posting notice in a conspicuous location on the property, the owner, agent or occupant of any lands on which grass and/or noxious weeds are found growing. Such notice shall require that the person having charge of such land cut down or cause to be cut down and destroyed all grass and/or noxious weeds within 24 hours, and shall contain a summary of the provisions of this division. Failure of the city manager or his agent to give notice shall not, however, constitute a defense to any action to enforce the payment of any penalty provided for, or debt created under, the provisions of this division. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, 8-1-16 ) 
Sec. 18-756. - Penalty. 
    Any owner, occupant, or person having charge of a lot or parcel of land, who shall refuse or neglect to cut down or cause to be cut down all grass and/or noxious weeds shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $100.00 for the first offense, $150.00 for the second offense, and $200.00 for the third and each subsequent offense in the given growing season. Such amounts as are paid to the city under the provisions of this division shall be deposited into a special purpose fund to be known as the Noxious Weed Control Fund. 
( Ord. No. 16-04, 8-1-16 ) 
Secs. 18-757-18-775. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - FLOODS 

Sec. 18-776. - Authority. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the building official of the City of Plymouth is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the city under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The city assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-15,  1(8.10), 12-18-92; Ord. No. 2012-03,  1, 2-20-12) 
Sec. 18-777. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, mobile home placement, excavation or drilling operations located within the area of special flood hazard. 
    Flood insurance rate map means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood boundary, floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-15,  1(8.11), 12-18-92) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 18-778. - Establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a specific engineering report for the city, with an accompanying flood insurance rate map, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. The flood insurance rate maps, numbers 26163C0038E, 26163C0039E, 26163C0201E and 26163C0202E, dated February 2, 2012, are on file at the office of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 92-15,  1(8.12), 12-18-92; Ord. No. 95-15,  1, 1-2-96; Ord. No. 01-01,  1, 2-5-01; Ord. No. 2011-05(2),  1, 1-3-12; Ord. No. 2012-03,  3, 2-20-12) 
Sec. 18-779. - Building code referenced. 
    The building code referenced in the Rules and Regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program, shall be the current State of Michigan Building Code and current revisions as adopted. 
(Ord. No. 92-15,  1(8.13), 12-18-92Ord. No. 2011-05(2),  2, 1-3-12; Ord. No. 2012-03,  2, 2-20-12) 
Sec. 18-780. - Designation and duties of administrator. 
    The building official is hereby appointed administrator and is to review all development and subdivision proposals to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-15,  1(8.14), 12-18-92; Ord. No. 95-15,  1, 1-2-96) 
Sec. 18-781. - Development prohibition. 
    All development shall be prohibited within areas of special flood hazard as established in section 18-778. 
(Ord. No. 92-15,  1(8.15), 12-18-92) 
Sec. 18-782. - Variance procedure. 
    The board of zoning appeals of the city shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variance from the requirements of this article consistent with sections 60.3 and 60.6a of the standards of the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program as published in 44 CFR 59 et seq., dated May 31, 1979, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 92-15,  1(8.16), 12-18-92) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; human relations, ch. 42; multichannel service providers, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 58; zoning, ch. 78. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Marihuana establishments prohibited. 
    Marihuana establishments as defined in Section 3 of the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, and as it may hereafter be amended from time to time, are completely prohibited within the city limits of the City of Plymouth, as provided for in Section 6 of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 18-05 , 12-3-18) 
Sec. 22-2. - Annual review. 
    Sections of the ordinance related to the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act shall be reviewed annually. 
(Ord. No. 18-05 , 12-3-18) 
Secs. 22-3-22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 22-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cause includes the making of fraudulent or false statements in the application and/or the doing or omitting of any act, or permitting any condition to exist in connection with any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license or permit is granted under the provisions of this Code or upon any premises or facilities used in connection therewith, which act, omission or condition is: 
(1)  Contrary to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public; 
(2)  Unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature; 
(3)  Unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license or permit granted; or 
(4)  Forbidden by the provisions of this Code or any duly established rule or regulation of the city applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license or permit has been granted. 
(Code 1982,  7.17) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 22-27. - Required. 
    No person shall engage, or be engaged, in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which any license is required by any provision of this Code without first obtaining such license from the city in the manner provided for in this article. 
(Code 1982,  7.1) 
Sec. 22-28. - Multiple businesses. 
    The granting of a license or permit to any person operating, conducting or carrying on any trade, profession, business or privilege which contains within itself, or is composed of, trades, professions, businesses or privileges which are required by this Code to be licensed, shall not relieve the person to whom such license or permit is granted from the necessity of securing individual licenses or permits for each such trade, profession, business or privilege. 
(Code 1982,  7.2) 
Sec. 22-29. - State licensed businesses. 
    The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by the state to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege shall not exempt such person from the necessity of securing a license or permit from the city if such license or permit is required by this Code. 
(Code 1982,  7.3) 
Sec. 22-30. - Application. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, every person required to obtain a license from the city to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege shall make application for such license to the city clerk upon forms provided by the city clerk and shall state under oath or affirmation such facts, as may be required for, or applicable to, the granting of such license. 
(Code 1982,  7.4) 
Sec. 22-31. - License year. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Code as to certain licenses, the license year shall begin January 1 of each year and shall terminate at 12:00 midnight on December 31 of that year. Original licenses shall be issued for the balance of the license year at the full license fee. License applications for license renewals shall be accepted and licenses issued for a period of 15 days prior to the annual expiration date. In all cases where the provisions of this Code permit the issuance of licenses for periods of less than one year, the effective date of such licenses shall commence with the date of issuance thereof. 
(Code 1982,  7.5) 
Sec. 22-32. - Conditions for issuance. 
    No license or permit required by this Code shall be issued to any person who is required to have a license or permit from the state until such person shall submit evidence of such state license or permit and proof that all fees appertaining thereto have been paid. No license shall be granted to any applicant therefor until such applicant has complied with all the provisions of this Code applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which application for license is made. 
(Code 1982,  7.6) 
Sec. 22-33. - Where certification required. 
    No license shall be granted where the certification of any officer of the city is required prior to the issuance thereof, until such certification is made. 
(Code 1982,  7.7) 
Sec. 22-34. - Fire chief's certificate. 
    In all cases where the certification of the fire chief is required prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk, such certification shall be based upon an actual inspection and a finding that the premises in which the person making application for such license proposes to conduct or is conducting the trade, profession, business or privilege comply with all the fire regulations of the state and of the city. 
(Code 1982,  7.9) 
Sec. 22-35. - Police chief's certificate. 
    In all cases where the certification of the chief of police is required prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk, such certification shall be based upon a finding that the person making application for such license is of good moral character. 
(Code 1982,  7.10) 
Sec. 22-36. - Building inspector's certificate. 
    In all cases where the carrying on of the trade, profession, business or privilege involves the use of any structure or land, a license therefor shall not be issued until the building inspector shall certify that the proposed use is not prohibited by the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1982,  7.11) 
Sec. 22-37. - Bonds. 
    Where any provision of this Code requires that the applicant for any license or permit furnish a bond, such bond shall be furnished in an amount deemed adequate by the proper city officer, or, where the amount thereof is specified in the schedule of fees and bonds set out in section 22-66 et seq. or elsewhere in this Code, in the amount so required; the form of such bond shall be acceptable to the city attorney. In lieu of a bond, an applicant for a license or permit may furnish one or more policies of insurance in the same amounts and providing the same protection as called for in any such bond. Any such policies of insurance shall be approved as to substance by the city official issuing such license or permit and as to form by the city attorney. 
(Code 1982,  7.12) 
Sec. 22-38. - Late renewals. 
    All fees for the renewal of any license which are not paid at the time such fees shall be due, may be paid without penalty for the first 30 days that such license fee remains unpaid and thereafter the license fee shall be that stipulated for such licenses under section 22-66 et seq., plus 50 percent of such fee. 
(Code 1982,  7.13) 
Sec. 22-39. - Right to issuance. 
    If the application for any license is approved by the proper officers of the city, as provided in this Code, such license shall be granted and shall serve as a receipt for payment of the fee prescribed for such license. 
(Code 1982,  7.14) 
Sec. 22-40. - When fees paid. 
    The fee required by this Code for any license or permit shall be paid at the office of the city treasurer upon or before the granting of such license or permit. 
(Code 1982,  7.15) 
Sec. 22-41. - Suspension or revocation. 
    Any license issued by the city may be suspended by the city manager for cause, and any permit issued by the city may be suspended or revoked by the issuing authority for cause, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code. The licensee shall have the right to a hearing before the city commission on any such action of the city manager, provided a written request therefor is filed with the city clerk within five days after receipt of such notice of such suspension. The commission may confirm such suspension or revoke or reinstate any such license. The action taken by the commission shall be final. The same procedure shall apply where a license application is denied. Upon suspension or revocation of any license or permit, the fee therefor shall not be refunded. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, any licensee whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible to apply for a new license for the trade, profession, business or privilege for a period of one year after such revocation. 
(Code 1982,  7.16) 
Sec. 22-42. - Renewal. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, an application for renewal of a license shall be considered in the same manner as an original application. 
(Code 1982,  7.18) 
Sec. 22-43. - Exhibition. 
    No licensee shall fail to carry any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this article upon his person at all times when engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license was granted; except that where such trade, profession, business or privilege is operated, conducted or carried on at a fixed place or establishment, such license shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place in his place of business. Every licensee shall produce his license for examination when applying for a renewal thereof or when requested to do so by any city police officer or by any person representing the issuing authority. 
(Code 1982,  7.19) 
Sec. 22-44. - Exhibition on vehicle and machine. 
    No licensee shall fail to display conspicuously on each vehicle or mechanical device or machine required to be licensed by this Code such tags or stickers as are furnished by the city clerk for such purpose. 
(Code 1982,  7.20) 
Sec. 22-45. - Displaying invalid license. 
    No person shall display any expired license or any license for which a duplicate has been issued. 
(Code 1982,  7.21) 
Sec. 22-46. - Transferability; misuse. 
    No license or permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall be transferable unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code. No licensee or permittee shall, unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code, transfer or attempt to transfer his license or permit to another nor shall he make any improper use of the same. 
(Code 1982,  7.22) 
Secs. 22-47-22-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FEES, BONDS 

Sec. 22-66. - Schedule established. 
    The fee required to be paid and the amount of any bond required to be posted, or insurance required to be carried, to obtain any license to engage in the operation, conduct, or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license is required by the provisions of this Code shall be as hereinafter provided in this article. No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he first pays to the city clerk the fee and posts a bond or evidence of insurance coverage in the amount required for the type of license desired. 
(Code 1982,  7.31) 
Sec. 22-67. - Fees for licenses. 
    Fees for licenses shall be as prescribed in this section under the business, trade, occupation or privilege to be licensed. Bonds or insurance coverage, where required, shall be in the amounts listed beneath the license fee prescribed for such business. 
Amusements: 
Mechanical or electronic amusement devices, per machine ..... $    200.00 
Transfer fee, per machine ..... 25.00 
Mechanical rides: 
Per day ..... 5.00 
Per week ..... 10.00 
Liability insurance, P.I.: 
1 person ..... 100,000.00 
1 accident ..... 300,000.00 
Liability insurance, P.D., 1 accident ..... 100,000.00 
Billiard room (see Pool room) 
Bowling establishment, per lane, annual fee ..... 20.00 
Canvasser: 
Per day ..... 5.00 
Per 3 months ..... 50.00 
Per 6 months ..... 75.00 
Per year ..... 100.00 
Helper or assistant: 
Per day ..... 2.00 
Per 3 months ..... 20.00 
Per 6 months ..... 30.00 
Per year ..... 50.00 
Registration ..... 5.00 
Circuses: 
Fee, per day ..... 15.00 
Liability insurance, P.I.: 
1 person ..... 100,000.00 
1 accident ..... 300,000.00 
Liability insurance, P.D., 1 accident ..... 100,000.00 
Dances, public: 
Hall: 
Annual fee ..... 25.00 
Plus, for each public dance ..... 2.00 
School, annual fee ..... 2.00 
Dogs: 
Annual fee ..... 2.00 
Kennel license, annual fee ..... 25.00 
Electrical wiring: 
Contractors: 
Annual fee ..... 50.00 
Plus for foreign corporations, bond ..... 1,000.00 
Reciprocal registration, annual fee ..... 10.00 
Journeymen: 
Annual fee ..... 5.00 
Reciprocal registration, annual fee ..... 5.00 
Masters, annual fee ..... 15.00 
General contractor, per 3-year period ..... 10.00 
Going out of business license, for 30 days ..... 50.00 
Heating installers: 
1 or more classifications, annual fee ..... 35.00 
Reciprocal registration, annual fee ..... 15.00 
Meat market (see Food establishment) 
Peddler: 
Per day ..... 5.00 
Per 3 months ..... 50.00 
Per 6 months ..... 75.00 
Per year ..... 100.00 
Helper or assistant: 
Per day ..... 2.00 
Per 3 months ..... 20.00 
Per 6 months ..... 30.00 
Per year ..... 50.00 
Poolroom: 
First table ..... 10.00 
Next 3 tables, each ..... 7.00 
Over 3 tables, each ..... 5.00 
Refrigeration installers: 
Contractors, annual fee ..... 35.00 
Reciprocal registration, annual fee ..... 15.00 
Journeymen, annual fee ..... 10.00 
Reciprocal registration, annual fee ..... 5.00 
Master, annual fee ..... 15.00 
Shows (see Tent shows) 
Sidewalk builder, bond ..... 1,000.00 
Solicitor (see Canvasser) 
Taxicab: 
Annual fee ..... 100.00 
Liability insurance, P.I.: 
1 person ..... 100,000.00 
1 accident ..... 300,000.00 
Liability insurance, P.D., 1 accident ..... 100,000.00 
Taxicab driver, annual fee (city-based company only) ..... 5.00 
Tent shows, fee per day ..... 15.00 
Theaters, annual fee ..... 15.00 
Trailer coach parks, annual fee ..... (State law) 
(Code 1982,  7.32-7.38) 
Secs. 22-68-22-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DRIVE-IN RESTAURANTS 

Sec. 22-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Drive-in restaurant means any restaurant where meals, sandwiches, ice cream, or other food, is served directly to or is permitted to be consumed by patrons in automobiles, motorcycles or other vehicles parked on the premises. 
(Code 1982,  6.61) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 22-92. - License required. 
    No person shall operate a drive-in restaurant without having first obtained a license therefor. 
(Code 1982,  6.62) 
Sec. 22-93. - Duty of licensee. 
    It shall be the duty of the licensee to maintain good order upon the premises of a drive-in restaurant, and the licensee shall not permit disorderly or illegal conduct or loitering. The licensee shall not cause or permit to be caused any noise or other nuisance on the premises of a drive-in restaurant whereby the quiet and good order of the premises or of the neighborhood is disturbed. 
(Code 1982,  6.63) 
Sec. 22-94. - Waste containers. 
    It shall be the duty of the licensee of a drive-in restaurant, or any person in charge of such restaurant, to keep the premises whereon such restaurant is located, together with the parking area and that portion of any public street or streets adjoining such drive-in restaurant, free from all rubbish, waste products and debris, including napkins, straws, paper cups and plates, and other waste material, at all times. Each drive-in restaurant shall provide a sufficient number of suitable containers to hold such waste material until the same is removed from the premises. Such containers shall be of metal construction or other approved material with self-closing, reach-in type cover. 
(Code 1982,  6.64) 
Sec. 22-95. - Cost of rubbish removal. 
    In addition to the penalty for a violation of this Code, the proprietor of any drive-in restaurant may be charged with the cost of cleaning up or removing debris found on the premises and on the public highway or highways adjacent to the premises. The city manager, the health officer, or any officer of the department of public safety, shall have the right, if he sees debris on the premises occupied by the drive-in restaurant and the highways adjacent thereto, to cause the same to be cleaned up and removed from the premises and shall certify the cost of such cleaning up and removal to the city manager. 
(Code 1982,  6.65) 
Sec. 22-96. - Loudspeakers banned. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any drive-in restaurant to operate, or permit to be operated, any loudspeakers or make or permit to be made, any other loud noise or permit any show or exhibit on the premises occupied by such drive-in restaurant; provided, however, the owner or operator of such restaurant may use a public address system solely for the purpose of giving instructions to employees on the premises, but the instructions so given shall not be loud enough to cause any noise or disturbance to persons not on the premises of such drive-in restaurant. 
(Code 1982,  6.66) 
Sec. 22-97. - Horn blowing and loud noises prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person of a drive-in restaurant while parking on or adjacent to the premises thereof, or for any other person, while on the premises of such restaurant to race the motor of any car, to suddenly start or stop any car, or to make or cause to be made, any other loud or unseemly noise. It shall also be unlawful for any patron of a drive-in restaurant, or any other person parked on the premises of such restaurant, to blow or cause to be blown any automobile horn or motorcycle horn at any time while so parked. 
(Code 1982,  6.67) 
Sec. 22-98. - Unlawful conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any patron or other person on the premises of a drive-in restaurant, whether in or out of an automobile, to drink any intoxicating liquor, or to have in his possession any open bottle, can or other receptacle containing alcoholic liquor. It shall be unlawful for any number of persons to congregate for any time whatsoever at any location on the premises of a drive-in restaurant other than in the restaurant building, or in a legally parked motor vehicle. Any persons so congregating shall be deemed loitering. No person shall drive a motor vehicle onto the premises of a drive-in restaurant and then from such premises without parking such motor vehicle and seeking service, unless there is no unoccupied parking space available on such premises. It shall be the duty of the licensee to post on the premises, in a conspicuous location, one or more signs bearing the following legend: 
CRUISING AND GATHERING OUTSIDE 
OF VEHICLE UNLAWFUL 
(Code 1982,  6.68) 
Sec. 22-99. - Enforcement of parking restrictions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle on any private property or drive-in establishment without the express or implied consent, authorization or approval of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of such property. Complaint for the violation of this section shall be made by the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of such property, and the police department shall enforce this section. 
(Code 1982,  6.69) 
Secs. 22-100-22-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MASSAGE 

Sec. 22-121. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Employee means any person employed in the traditional sense of the term and shall include, but not be limited to, those persons who through some contractual relationship, either verbal or written, are permitted by the massage establishment, license holder, owner, operator, manager or other employee to use space in the facilities as an independent contractor or tenant. 
    Genitalia means the pubic area, penis, scrotum, vulva, perineum or anus, and any portion of the female breast at or below the areola. 
    Massage means a method of treating external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading, pressing, bathing, adjusting or tapping with the hand or any instrument, electric, magnetic or otherwise, with or without supplementary aids, for compensation. Massage shall include, but is not limited to, alcohol rubs, fomentation, physiotherapy and manipulation of the body. 
    Massage establishment means any building, room, place, establishment, or institution where treatment of any nature for the human body is given by means of massage or similar treatment is given, for compensation. A massage establishment shall include, but is not limited to, massage parlors, health clubs, health spas, sauna baths, turkish bath houses and steam baths, and massage schools. 
    Massage school means a school which is recognized by the state board of massage, which satisfies the requirements of the department of education and is accredited by the state and which requires for admission, students with a tenth grade education or its equivalent, which employs one or more competent licensed massagists or instructors, and which has minimum requirements of continuous course of study and training and consisting of study in physiology, anatomy, massage theory, hydrotherapy, hygiene, ethics and practical massage. For the purposes of this article, a correspondence school shall not be construed to be a recognized school. 
    Massagist means any person, male or female, who administers to another person, a massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, electric or magnetic massage procedure, manipulation of the body or other similar procedure for any form of consideration or compensation. 
    Student means any person who, under the guidance of an instructor in a massage school, is being trained or instructed in the theory, method or practice of massage. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  2, 8-17-92) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 22-122. - Nuisance per se. 
    Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article and without the appropriate licenses pertinent thereto as herein set forth shall be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city shall have the right and authority, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution hereunder, to commence civil proceedings for the abatement or termination of such activity and to seek damages in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  26, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-123. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating, or neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this article, shall upon conviction thereof be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  27, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-124. - License required. 
    No person shall practice, engage in, carry on or operate the business of a massagist, or conduct, operate and carry on a massage establishment or similar business within the city, without first having applied for and obtained the required license. No person shall practice massage for compensation without obtaining, and maintaining in effect, a license as a massagist as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  3, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-125. - Requirements and duties of personnel. 
    It shall be the responsibility of an owner, operator, manager or permittee under this article, in charge of or in control of a massage establishment or similar business, to ensure that each person employed or engaged by him in such business as a massagist, shall have first obtained a valid massagist license pursuant to this article. Any owner, operator, manager or permittee in charge of or in control of a massage establishment or similar business, who employs a person performing as a massagist who is not in possession of a valid massagist license, or allows such an employee to perform, operate or practice within a massage establishment, shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  4, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-126. - Application, investigation fee. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a massage establishment or similar business, or to perform massage services shall make application to the city clerk, who shall refer all such applications to the chief of police for an investigation. An application to obtain a license to operate a massage establishment, massage school or similar business shall be accompanied by an investigation fee in an amount established by resolution of the city commission, no part of which is refundable. 
(b)  Each application for a license to allow an individual to perform massage services shall be accompanied by an investigation fee in an amount established by resolution of the city commission, no part of which is refundable. 
(c)  The application fee required herein shall be payable to the city treasurer at the time the application is filed and such application fee shall be in addition to any other license, permit or fee required under this Code or any other city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  5, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-127. - Application contents. 
    Any applicant for any license required by this article shall submit, in writing, to the city clerk, upon a form provided for that purpose, signed and sworn to, the following information: 
(1)  For a massage establishment license: 
a.  A description of the facilities and services to be available on the premises of the proposed establishment. 
b.  The location and mailing address of each applicant. 
c.  The name and residence of each applicant. If the applicant is an association or a partnership, the names and residence addresses of each of the associates or partners. If the applicant is a corporation, the name and residence address of each of the officers and directors of such corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, if such stockholder is, or is likely to be, involved in the day-to-day operation of the establishment. If one or more of the stockholders owning more than ten percent of the applicant corporation is itself a corporation, and owns 33 percent of the stock of the applicant corporation, the names and residence addresses of each of the officers and directors of such corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation if such officers, directors or stockholders are, or are likely to be, involved in the day-to-day operation of the establishment. 
d.  If the applicant is an individual, all other residences of the applicant for the three-year period immediately prior to the application. If the applicant is an association or a partnership, the name and residence of each associate partner for the three-year period immediately prior to the application. If the applicant is a corporation, all the residences for a three-year period of each of the officers and directors of such corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation if such stockholder is, or is likely to be, involved in the day-to-day operation of the establishment. 
e.  If the applicant is an individual, written proof that the applicant is 18 years of age or older. If the applicant is a partnership, written proof that each partner is 18 years of age or older. If the applicant is a corporation, written proof that each of the officers and directors of such corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation is 18 years of age or older, if such stockholder is, or is likely to be, involved in the day-to-day operation of the establishment. 
f.  If the applicant is an individual, a complete set of the applicant's fingerprints. If the applicant is an association or partnership, a complete set of each associate's or partner's fingerprints. If the applicant is a corporation, a complete set of fingerprints of each of the officers and directors of the corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation if such stockholder is, or is likely to be, involved in the day-to-day operation of the establishment. If one or more of the stockholders owning more than ten percent of the applicant corporation is itself a corporation, a complete set of fingerprints of each of the officers and directors of such corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, if such officers, directors or stockholders are, or are likely to be, involved in the day-to-day operation of the establishment. The fingerprints shall be taken by the chief of police or his agent. 
g.  If the applicant is an individual, the business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three-year period immediately preceding the date of the application. If the applicant is an association or partnership, the business occupation or employment of each associate or partner for the three-year period immediately prior to the date of the application. If the applicant is a corporation, the business, occupation or employment of each of the officers and directors of the corporation, and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, if such stockholder is, or is likely to be, involved in the day-to-day operation of the establishment, as well as the nature of the business conducted by the corporation for the three-year period immediately prior to the date of the application. 
h.  The history of the applicant in the operation of massage establishments or similar business or occupation including, but not limited to, whether or not such person, in previously operating in this city or another municipality or state under a permit or license, has had such permit or license revoked or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
i.  The criminal record, if any, other than misdemeanor traffic violations, of the applicant. If the applicant is an association or partnership, the criminal record of each associate or partner. If the applicant is a corporation, the criminal record of each officer or director of the corporation, and each of the stockholders owning more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, if such stockholder is, or is likely to be, involved in the day-to-day operation of the establishment. If one or more of the stockholders owning more than ten percent of the applicant corporation is itself a corporation and owns 33 percent of the stock of the applicant corporation, the criminal record of each of the officers and directors of such corporation and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation, if such officers, directors or stockholders are, or are likely to be, involved in the day-to-day operation of the establishment. 
j.  The number of employees and the names and current addresses of all personnel. 
k.  Certification that all employees engaged in the practice of massage at the proposed establishment are duly licensed by the city as a massage technician or that application has been made therefor. 
l.  Disclosure of any other legal name or alias used by any applicant during the three-year period immediately prior to the date of the application. 
m.  Such other identification or information necessary to discover the truth of the matters specified herein as required to be set forth in the application. 
(2)  For a massagist license: 
a.  The legal name, current address and birth date of the applicant, together with applicant's telephone number, if any. 
b.  The previous addresses of the applicant for the preceding three-year period, including the dates of each. 
c.  A photograph of the head/shoulders, 31/2 inches by five inches in size, taken within the preceding six-month period. 
d.  The history of employment of the applicant for the preceding three-year period. 
e.  The applicant's height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair. 
f.  The history of the applicant in the operation of massage establishments or similar business or occupation, including, but not limited to, whether or not such person, is or has previously operated in this or another city or state under license, whether such license is or has been revoked or suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action or suspension or revocation. 
g.  The criminal record, if any, other than misdemeanor traffic violations, of the applicant. 
h.  The date of the last general medical exam of the applicant, together with a signed certificate from a medical doctor licensed to practice in the state, stating that the applicant has, within the preceding 90 days, been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease which is likely to be communicated during the administration of a massage. 
i.  The name and location of the massage establishment at which the applicant expects to be employed. 
j.  An explanation of the training which the applicant has received as a massagist including the dates thereof and the names and addresses of the schools and/or business establishments connected therewith. 
k.  The names and addresses of other schools attended by the applicant together with the diplomas or certificates received therefrom. 
l.  Written proof that the applicant is 18 years of age or older. 
m.  Disclosure of any other legal name or alias used by any applicant during the three-year period immediately prior to the date of the application. 
n.  Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters specified herein as required to be set forth in the application. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  6, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-128. - License procedure. 
    Upon receipt of an application in proper form, the city clerk shall refer the same to the county health department, the city engineer, the fire chief and the police chief, each of whom shall make an inspection and investigation, together with a written report and recommendation. The object of such investigation and inspection is to determine whether or not the building and premises are properly located, constructed and equipped for the purpose for which it is desired to license the same, whether or not the applicant is a person of good moral character and other facts and circumstances which may be required under the provisions of this article and the regulations authorized herein. The investigations shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The city engineer shall inspect the site to determine compliance with all of the building code requirements, zoning code requirements, off-street parking requirements and the provisions of this article. 
(2)  The fire chief shall inspect the site and the facilities to be used to determine whether or not such facilities meet all requirements of the city fire code, and any policies or regulations for the operation of such massage establishment to facilitate compliance with the fire code. 
(3)  The police chief shall investigate the background of the applicant specifically, but not limited to, the character, reputation, moral integrity, and physical and mental condition of the applicant. If the police chief's investigation reveals the applicant to be inimical to the public safety, morals or general welfare, a recommendation to deny the application for a license shall be made. In making his determination, the chief of police shall consider: 
a.  Penal history. All applicant's convictions, the reasons therefor, and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to release. 
b.  License and permit history. The license and permit history of the applicant; whether such person in previously operating in another city or state under a license or permit has had such license or permit revoked or suspended; the reasons therefore; and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to such action. 
c.  Character. The chief of police, or his designee, shall make all recommendations as to the applicant's good moral character in accordance with the provisions of Act No. 381 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 (MCL 338.41 et seq., MSA 18.1208(1) et seq.), as amended. 
d.  Totality of information. The chief of police shall consider all of the above information, if relevant to the applicant's ability to lawfully operate a massage establishment, massage school or similar business, or as a massagist, in its totality, not separately, in determining whether or not the applicant may operate in a manner inimical to the public safety, health, morals or general welfare. 
(4)  The city clerk, after receiving favorable recommendations from the county health officer, the city engineer, the fire chief and the police chief shall issue a license to all persons who have applied, if all requirements described herein have been met, unless it appears that the applicant has deliberately falsified the application. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  7, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-129. - Facilities necessary. 
    No license to conduct a massage establishment or similar business shall be issued unless an inspection by the city reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following requirements: 
(1)  Massage establishment facilities shall be located in a proper zoning district as specified in the city's zoning ordinance. 
(2)  A recognizable and readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment or massage school or similar business, provided that all such signs shall comply with the sign requirements of the city. 
(3)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the state construction code and in addition, at least one artificial light of not less than 60 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth where massage services are being performed on a patron. 
(4)  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the state construction code. 
(5)  Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided. 
(6)  Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times. 
(7)  Closed cabinets shall be provided, which cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean linen. 
(8)  Adequate bathing, dressing, locker and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons. A minimum of one tub or shower, one dressing room containing a separate locker for each patron to be served, which locker shall be capable of being locked, as well as a minimum of one toilet and one washbasin, shall be provided by establishment, provided, however, that if male and female patrons are to be served at the establishment, separate bathing, separate massage room, or rooms, separate dressing and separate toilet facilities shall be provided for male and for female patrons. 
(9)  A minimum of one separate washbasin shall be provided in each separate room or booth designated for massage services for the use of employees of any such establishment, which basin shall provide soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to the performing of massage services. In addition, there shall be provided at each washbasin sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  8, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-130. - Massage establishment operation and hygiene. 
    All massage establishments licensed under this article shall conform with all rules and regulations of the county health department and shall conform with the following minimum hygienic standards: 
(1)  All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and basins, and all other physical facilities for the massage establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, bathtubs, hand basins, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected at least once each day the business is in operation, and more often as needed. 
(2)  Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for each patron of the establishment. No common or repeated use of unlaundered towels or linens shall be permitted. Cabinets for the storage of clean linen shall be required and shall be kept clean and sanitary. 
(3)  No massage establishment shall serve any patron when the skin of the patron is inflamed or erupted unless the patron submits a certificate from a duly licensed physician to the county health department stating that such inflammation or eruption is not communicable. 
(4)  Every massage technician shall cleanse his hands thoroughly with soap and hot running water immediately before serving each patron. 
(5)  There will be sanitary toilet facilities required on the same basis as provided in the building and housing ordinances and regulations of the city and the state housing law. 
(6)  In any establishment in which massage services are rendered, the massagist and the customer may be placed in a single, separate room, or the operators of the massage establishment may elect to place the massagist and the customer in separate enclosed rooms or booths having adequate ventilation to an area outside such room or booth, while massage services are being performed. 
(7)  Uniforms or garments covering the torso shall be worn by massagists or employees while attending patrons. Such uniforms or garments shall be of a washable material and shall be kept in a clean condition. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  9, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-131. - License fee; term. 
    Any person granted a license to operate a massage establishment or similar business by the city manager or city commission shall pay to the city treasurer an annual fee in an amount established by resolution of the city commission, and any person granted a license to administer massages shall pay an annual fee in an amount established by resolution of the city commission. The license year shall be the period from the date of license issuance to December 31 next, inclusive, unless otherwise provided. All licenses issued for the license year shall expire on December 31 unless suspended or revoked. Any license applied for between Labor Day and December 31 of any calendar year shall be one-half the price stated herein. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  10, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-132. - Contents of license. 
(a)  Massage establishment. Each massage establishment license shall contain the name and address of the licensee and a brief description of the premises for which the license was issued, including the maximum number of persons permitted to occupy such premises at any one time, and such other information as may be required by the regulations authorized herein. 
(b)  Massagist. Each massagist license shall contain the name, address, physical description, a 31/2-inch by five-inch photograph of the licensee, and the location of the establishment employing the massagist. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  11, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-133. - Renewal. 
    The license to operate a massage establishment or similar business, as well as massagist's license, shall be applied for at least 15 days prior to the date of expiration of the current license. The license shall be renewed provided the applicant submits a sworn affidavit that the matters contained in the original application are correct and indicates any changes necessary. In addition to the affidavit, a signed statement from a doctor stating that the applicant for a massagist's license has been examined within the prior 90 days and found to be free from any contagious or communicable disease which is likely to be communicated during the administration of a massage. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  12, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-134. - Display of license; article. 
    Every person to whom a massage establishment or massagist license shall have been granted, shall prominently display such license and a copy of this article in a conspicuous place, so that the same may be readily seen by persons entering the premises where the massage, bath or treatment is given. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  13, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-135. - Transfer prohibited. 
    No license issued under this article shall be transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  14, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-136. - Hours of operation; living or sleeping quarters. 
(a)  No massage establishment shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(b)  No such establishment shall be operated or conducted, either directly or indirectly, with any portion of the facility used for living or sleeping quarters. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  15, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-137. - List of employees; maintenance; disclosure. 
    Licensees, owners and persons who control, conduct or manage massage establishments, licensed under this article, shall keep a list of the names and addresses of all employees or persons engaged as massagists, both on duty and off duty, and such list shall be shown, upon request, to all proper authorities of the police department, county health department, and the city engineer. The licensees, owners or persons who control, conduct or manage a massage establishment, licensed herein, shall further provide a quarterly report listing all employees to the chief of police on the first business day of each of the months of March, June, September and December. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  16, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-138. - Unlawful acts. 
    The following acts are expressly prohibited, any violation of the prohibitions of this section shall be deemed grounds for the revocation of the license granted under this article: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to engage in, conduct or carry on a massage establishment without a valid, nonsuspended license issued pursuant to this article. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to administer a massage in or out of a massage establishment without having a valid, nonsuspended license as a massagist issued by the city. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for individual massagists to perform massages upon individuals of the opposite sex. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful, for the purpose of sexual gratification, for any person in a massage establishment to intentionally place his hands upon the genitalia of any other person, or to touch any part of his body in the genitalia of any other person, or to fondle in any manner the genitalia of any other person, or to massage the genitalia of any other person. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful, for the purpose of sexual gratification, for any person in a massage establishment to intentionally expose: 
a.  His genitalia, or any portion thereof, to any other person. 
b.  The genitalia, or any portion thereof, of any other person. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful, for the purpose of sexual gratification, for any person, while in the presence of any other person in a massage establishment, to intentionally fail to conceal with full opaque covering, the genitalia of his body. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a massage establishment to knowingly employ a person who is engaging in prostitution on the premises of the establishment. 
(8)  No person licensed as a massagist shall massage or treat any person under the age of 18 upon the licensed premises, except upon written order by a licensed medical doctor, doctor of osteopathic medicine, or physical therapist. Such order shall be dated and in the possession of the massagist giving the massage or treatment. If the person under the age of 18 is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian during the massage or treatment, this provision shall not apply. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a massage establishment, knowingly to cause, allow or permit in or about such massage establishment, any agent, employee or any other person under his control or supervision to perform such acts prohibited in this section or any act prohibited by this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  17, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-139. - Right to entry. 
    The county health department, the building department, fire department and the ordinance department are hereby authorized, after reasonable notice to the licensee, to enter, examine and survey during business hours, any premises in the city for which a massage establishment license has been applied for or for which a massage establishment license has been issued pursuant to this article for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article or other city regulations and for no other official purposes. The section shall not restrict or limit the right of entry vested in any law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  18, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-140. - Rules and regulations. 
    The building department, the fire department and the police department are hereby authorized to make such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article, copies of which shall be available for distribution to all interested persons. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  19, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-141. - Change of location. 
    A change of location of any license may be approved by the city clerk, provided the requirements set forth in this article, as well as all other ordinances and regulations of the city and the state laws are complied with, and the change of location fee in an amount established by resolution of the city commission is deposited with the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  20, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-142. - Emergency employee. 
    If the holder of a license to operate a massage establishment is required to use an emergency employee because of illness or incapacity of a regular licensed employee, same shall be permitted, provided that such emergency employee shall be required to make application for a valid license as required herein within three days from date of beginning work. Emergency employee shall be defined herein to mean an individual who possesses a current, unrevoked massagist's license from another municipality of this state, with the same or higher licensing standards, and who works not more than three days per year in the city, and does not possess a valid city license. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  21, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-143. - Licenses; refusal, revocation, notice. 
(a)  Any license requested under this article may be refused by the city clerk, and any license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked or suspended by the city manager at any time, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for license; 
(2)  Fraud or misrepresentation in the operation of the licensee's business; 
(3)  Any violation of this article or of the regulations authorized herein; 
(4)  Any violation of any of the ordinances of the city, excluding traffic offenses; 
(5)  Any violation of any of the laws of the United States and this state; 
(6)  Operating under any name or conducting its business under any designation not specified in its license; 
(7)  Conducting a business in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or is inimical to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public; 
(8)  Any failure or inability on the part of the applicant to meet and satisfy the requirements and provisions of this article and the regulations authorized herein; 
(9)  Advertising by a massage establishment or massagist that is false or deceptive, or advertising that the practice of massage arrests or cures an illness or disease; 
(10)  Lack of good moral character. 
(b)  A written notice of refusal, revocation or suspension stating the cause or causes therefor, shall be delivered to the applicant or licensee personally, or mailed to the address stated in the violator's application. 
(c)  The revocation or suspension shall not be effective until ten days after the mailing of such notice of suspension or revocation to the licensee, unless otherwise provided herein. If the licensee initiates the appeal process set forth in section 22-144, the suspension or revocation shall not be effective until the appeal hearing process before the city commission is concluded. If a violation poses an immediate danger to the public's health, safety or general welfare, the city manager or his designee may order the license suspended pending a hearing; and it shall be unlawful for any person to carry on the activities formerly permitted, pursuant to the suspended license, until reinstated by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  22, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-144. - Appeal; hearing. 
    Any person whose license is revoked or suspended, or any person whose request for a license is refused, shall have a right to a hearing before the city commission, provided a written request therefor is filed with the city clerk within ten days following the delivery or mailing of the notice of revocation or suspension, or within ten days following such refusal. The city commission shall have the right to affirm and sustain any refusal to issue a license, or any revocation or suspension of a license, and the city commission may grant or reinstate any license. The city commission shall conduct a hearing within 30 days of the date it receives a request for such hearing from the applicant or licensee unless such time period is waived by the applicant or licensee. All decisions shall be in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  23, 8-17-92) 
Sec. 22-145. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths and physical therapists who are licensed to practice their respective professions in the state, or who are permitted to practice temporarily under the auspices of an associate or establishment duly licensed in the state. 
(2)  Nurses who are registered under the laws of this state and who administer a massage in the normal course of nursing duties. 
(3)  A trainer of any duly constituted athletic team who administers a massage in the normal course of training duties. 
(4)  Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of this state and who administer a massage in the normal course of their duties. 
(5)  Participants in growth seminars or sensitivity sessions provided such seminars or sessions are conducted by a member of one of the exempted professions defined in subsection (1) of this section. 
(6)  Massagists who meet the following criteria: 
a.  Proof of graduation from a school of massage licensed by the state, 
b.  Current licensure by another state with licensure standards that meet or exceed the standards for graduation from a school of massage licensed by the state, 
c.  Proof of comparable education, training, and/or experience in massage, 
d.  Current basic certification by the International Myomassethics Federation (IMF), 
e.  Proof of current professional membership in the American Massage Therapy Association (AMTA), Associated Bodywork and Massage Professionals (ABMP), or other national massage therapy organization with comparable membership requirements, 
f.  Maintain professional liability insurance, or 
g.  Any duly licensed establishment in which the above-described persons practice their respective professions. 
(Ord. No. 92-11,  25, 8-17-92) 
Secs. 22-146-22-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDDLERS AND CANVASSERS 

Sec. 22-166. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Canvasser means any natural person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of each sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not, provided that such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad box car, boat, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop, or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
    Peddler means any natural person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, magazines, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products, or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance, and including one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this article. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster." 
(Code 1982,  7.51(1), (2)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 22-167. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Newsboys and persons traveling on an established route at the request, express or implied, of their customers, are not to be considered within the definitions of peddler or canvasser under this article. 
(b)  The following exemptions from the license fee requirements of this article shall apply: mechanics and artisans selling products of their own manufacture; farmers selling their own products, either produced by themselves or by their regular farm employees; any person who is soliciting for goods, wares, merchandise and foodstuffs who has first obtained a license pursuant to Act No. 359 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 35.441 et seq., MSA 4.1241 et seq.); but all such persons must furnish satisfactory proof to the city clerk that they are the one and same persons that they represent themselves to be, and they must agree to comply with all terms and conditions of this article and upon so doing the city clerk shall furnish a license free of charge. 
(c)  The following exemptions from all provisions of this article shall apply: persons soliciting orders for goods, wares, merchandise and foodstuffs from retail or wholesale dealers; vendors of wares, merchandise and foodstuffs at a definite business location in the city; and philanthropic or charitable organizations where sale or solicitation has been approved by the city manager or city commission. 
(Code 1982,  7.51(3)-(5)) 
Sec. 22-168. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler or canvasser within the city without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(Code 1982,  7.52) 
Sec. 22-169. - Application. 
    Applicants for a license under this article must file with the city clerk a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city clerk, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant. 
(2)  Address (legal and local). 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with the credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(6)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with license number or other means of identification. 
(7)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(8)  The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two reliable property owners of the county who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility, or, in lieu of the names of references, any other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility. 
(9)  A sworn statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(Code 1982,  7.53) 
Sec. 22-170. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of such application, the original shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. 
(b)  If as a result of such investigation the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and return the application to the city clerk, who shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no license shall be issued. 
(c)  If as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on the application his approval, execute a license addressed to the applicant for the carrying on of the business applied for and return such license, along with the application to the city clerk, who shall, upon payment of a prescribed license fee, in an amount to be determined from time to time by the city commission, deliver to the applicant his license. 
(Code 1982,  7.54) 
Sec. 22-171. - Transfer. 
    No license, badge or other identification issued under the provisions of this article shall be used or worn at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
(Code 1982,  7.55) 
Sec. 22-172. - Restrictions on minors. 
    No male under 12 years of age and no female under 18 years of age shall engage in any peddling or canvassing in the city. No male under 17 years of age shall engage in any peddling, or canvassing during school hours, unless legally excused from school, or for a combined school and work period of more than eight hours in any one day. 
(Code 1982,  7.56) 
Sec. 22-173. - Time limitation. 
    No person shall engage in any peddling or canvassing between sundown and 8:00 a.m. or on Sundays or holidays. 
(Code 1982,  7.56) 
Sec. 22-174. - Loud noises and speaking devices. 
    No peddler or canvasser nor any person in his behalf, shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound device, including any loudspeaker, radio or sound amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the city or upon any private premises in the city where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks, or other public places, for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell. 
(Code 1982,  7.57) 
Sec. 22-175. - Use of streets. 
    No peddler or canvasser shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor shall any be permitted a stationary location, nor shall he be permitted to operate in any congested area where his operations might impede or inconvenience the public. For the purpose of this article, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public impeded or inconvenienced. 
(Code 1982,  7.58) 
Sec. 22-176. - Exhibition of license. 
    Peddlers and canvassers are required to exhibit their licenses at the request of any citizen or police officer. 
(Code 1982,  7.59) 
Sec. 22-177. - Fall festival. 
    During the fall festival held in the city each and every year, no new license shall be issued by the city clerk for the solicitation, sale or vending of any goods, wares or merchandise under the provisions of this article unless and until the city commission gives approval therefor. The city commission may consult with the Fall Festival Committee in granting or denying such license. No licensee, previously licensed under this article, shall engage or conduct any business during the period in which the fall festival is held in the city in that area bounded by Harvey, Wing, Harding, Maple, Hamilton, Roe, Union and Church Streets. 
(Code 1982,  7.60) 
Sec. 22-178. - Clubs. 
    This article and the fees prescribed for licenses under this article shall be applicable to all fraternal organizations, service clubs and organized clubs and groups of all kinds; and such clubs and groups shall comply with the provisions of this article, except that such clubs and groups, upon written application to and consent of the city commission, shall be permitted to conduct one event per year without obtaining a license. 
(Code 1982,  7.61) 
Secs. 22-179-22-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PUBLIC DANCES AND DANCE SCHOOLS 

Sec. 22-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dance school means any place where instructions are given for dancing for which the recipient must pay a consideration. 
    Public dance means any dance at which the public or any part of the general public may gain admission. 
(Code 1982,  7.121) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 22-202. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to conduct any public dance in the city until a permit has been issued by the city clerk. It shall also be unlawful to conduct a dance school without first obtaining a license from the city clerk. 
(b)  No person shall conduct a public dance except in or on premises licensed hereunder. No public dance hall license shall be granted except upon certification of the building inspector, the chief of the fire department and the police chief. 
(Code 1982,  7.122) 
Sec. 22-203. - Sanitary facilities. 
    No license shall be issued to any dance hall or place where public dances are held, unless there is in such hall: 
(1)  Proper provisions for ventilation, either natural or mechanical, so that each person in the hall will be supplied with 1,200 cubic feet of air per hour; 
(2)  Sufficient toilet conveniences so that there will be at least one women's toilet in good sanitary condition per 2,000 square feet of floor space, or fraction thereof; 
(3)  At least one men's toilet and urinal in good sanitary condition per 4,000 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof, and provision made for privacy therein; 
(4)  At least one wash stand in each toilet provided with soap and sanitary towels; at least one sanitary drinking fountain, either on the dance floor or reasonably accessible thereto for each 4,000 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof; 
(5)  Sufficient fire exits free from all rubbish and inflammable material as required by the regulations of the state fire marshal; and 
(6)  At least one free and unobstructed means of exit from the premises in addition to the main entrance thereto. 
(Code 1982,  7.123) 
Sec. 22-204. - Building code requirements. 
    No license shall be issued for any place in which public dances are held unless the building code requirements of the city, as far as can be determined, are being complied with. 
(Code 1982,  7.124) 
Sec. 22-205. - Conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or sponsor who obtains a permit or license to allow or permit at any public dance, or instruction for dancing, any indecent act to be committed or any disorder or conduct of a gross, violent or vulgar character, or to allow any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor in the dance hall. At any public dance it shall be unlawful for any patron or customer thereof to smoke while dancing. Any member of the police department or authorized inspector of dance halls shall have the power and duty to cause any dance hall to be vacated whenever any provision of this article has been violated, or whenever any indecent act has been committed. 
(Code 1982,  7.125) 
Secs. 22-206-22-225. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PRECIOUS METALS AND GEM DEALERS 

Sec. 22-226. - Purpose. 
    This article shall provide regulation for the business of buying and receiving gold, silver, platinum, gems, jewelry, and other precious items; shall provide powers to the police department with respect to such regulation; shall provide for the registration of precious metals and gem dealers; shall provide for civil damages; and shall prescribe penalties. 
(Ord. No. 82-8,  1, 6-7-82) 
Sec. 22-227. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent or employee means a person who, for compensation or valuable consideration, is employed either directly or indirectly by a dealer. 
    Dealer means any person who, in whole or in part, engages in the ordinary course of repeated and recurrent transactions of buying or receiving precious items from the public within the city. 
    Gold means elemental gold having an atomic weight of 196.967 and the chemical element symbol of Au, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal. 
    Jewelry means an ornamental item made of a material that includes a precious gem. 
    Platinum means elemental platinum having an atomic weight of 195.09, and the chemical element symbol of Pt, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal. 
    Precious gem means a diamond, alexandrite, ruby, sapphire, opal, amethyst, emerald, aquamarine, morganite, garnet, jadeite, topaz, tourmaline, turquoise, or pearl. 
    Precious item means jewelry, a precious gem, or an item containing gold, silver, or platinum. Precious items do not include the following: 
(1)  Coins, commemorative medals, and tokens struck by, or in behalf of, a government or private mint, unless they contain precious metals as defined herein. 
(2)  Bullion bars and discs of the type traded by banks and commodity exchanges. 
(3)  Items if, at the time they are purchased, are purchased directly from a dealer registered under this article, a manufacturer, or a wholesaler who purchased them directly from a manufacturer. 
(4)  Industrial machinery or equipment. 
(5)  An item being returned to or exchanged at the dealer where the item was purchased and which is accompanied by a valid sales receipt. 
(6)  An item which is received for alteration, redesign, or repair in a manner that does not substantially change its use and returned directly to the customer. 
(7)  An item which does not have a jeweler's identifying mark or a serial mark and which the dealer purchases for less than $5.00. 
(8)  Scrap metal which contains incidental traces of gold, silver, or platinum which are recoverable as a byproduct. 
(9)  Jewelry which a customer trades for other jewelry having a greater value, and which difference in value is paid by the customer. 
    Silver means elemental silver having an atomic weight of 107.869 and the chemical element symbol of Ag, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal. 
(Ord. No. 82-8,  2, 6-7-82) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 22-228. - Certificate of registration. 
(a)  A dealer shall not conduct business in the city unless the dealer has obtained a valid certificate of registration from the city. 
(b)  A dealer shall apply to the police department for a certificate of registration, and pay a fee not to exceed $50.00 to cover the reasonable cost of processing and issuing the certificate of registration, by disclosing the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and thumbprint of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address under which the applicant does business. 
(3)  The name, address, and thumbprint of all agents or employees of the dealer. Within 24 hours after hiring a new employee, the dealer shall forward to the police department the name, address, and thumbprint of the new employee. 
(c)  A dealer or an agent or employee of a dealer who is convicted of a misdemeanor under this or under section 535 of Act 328 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1931 (MCL 750.1 et seq., MSA 28.191 et seq.), as amended, shall not be permitted to operate as a dealer within this city for a period of one year after conviction. 
(d)  Upon receipt of the application described in subsection (b) of this section, the police department shall issue a certificate of registration in accordance with this section. 
(e)  Upon receipt of the certificate of registration from the police department, the dealer shall post it in a conspicuous place in the dealer's place of business. 
(f)  Not less than ten days before a dealer changes the name or address under which the dealer does business, the dealer shall notify the police department of the change. 
(Ord. No. 82-8,  3, 6-7-82) 
Sec. 22-229. - Record of transaction. 
(a)  A dealer shall maintain a permanent record of each transaction on record of transaction forms, legibly written in ink. Each record of transaction form shall be filled out in triplicate by the dealer or agent or employee of the dealer, with one copy going to the police department, pursuant to section 22-228, one copy going to the customer, and one copy to be retained by the dealer. At the time a dealer receives or purchases a precious item, the dealer or agent or employee of the dealer shall ensure that the following information is recorded accurately on a record of transaction form: 
(1)  The dealer certificate of registration number. 
(2)  A general description of the precious item or precious items received or purchased, including its type of metal or precious gem. In the case of watches, the description shall contain the number of the maker and the number of both the works and the case. In the case of jewelry, all letters and marks inscribed on the jewelry shall be included in the description. 
(3)  The date of the transaction. 
(4)  The name of the person conducting the transaction. 
(5)  The name, date of birth, driver's license number or state personal identification card number, and street and house number of the person with whom the transaction is being made, together with a legible imprint of the right thumb of the person with whom the transaction is made, or if that is not possible, then the left thumb or a finger of that person. However, the thumbprint or fingerprint shall only be required on the record of transaction form retained by the dealer. The thumbprint or fingerprint shall be made available to the police department only during the course of a police investigation involving a precious item or items described on the record of transaction. After a period of one year from the date of the record of transaction, if a police investigation concerning a precious item or items described on the record of transaction has not occurred, the dealer and police department may destroy, and not keep a permanent record of, the records of transaction. A dealer who goes out of business or changes his business address to another local jurisdiction either within or out of this state shall transmit the records of all transactions made by the dealer within one year before his closing or moving, to the police department. 
(6)  The price to be paid by the dealer for the precious item or precious items. 
(7)  The form of payment made to the customer, check, money order, bank draft, or cash. If the payment is by check, money order, or bank draft, the dealer shall indicate the number of the check, money order, or bank draft. 
(8)  The customer's signature. 
(b)  The record of each transaction shall be numbered consecutively, commencing with the number 1 and the calendar year. 
(c)  Within 48 hours after receiving or purchasing a precious item, the dealer shall send a copy of the record of transaction form to the police department. The record of transaction forms received by the police department shall not be open to inspection by the general public. The police department shall be responsible for ensuring the confidentiality of the record of transaction forms and insuring that the record of transaction forms are used only for the purpose for which they were received. 
(d)  The record of transaction forms of a dealer and each precious item received shall be open to inspection by the county prosecuting attorney, police department, and the state police, at all times during the ordinary business hours of the dealer. As a condition of doing business, a dealer is deemed to have given consent to the inspection prescribed by this subsection. The record of transaction forms of a dealer shall not be open to inspection by the general public. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, each record of a transaction shall be retained by the dealer for not less than one year after the transaction to which the record pertains. 
(Ord. No. 82-8,  4, 6-7-82) 
Sec. 22-230. - Retention period. 
    A precious item received by a dealer shall be retained by the dealer for nine calendar days after it was received, without any form of alteration other than that required to make an accurate appraisal of its value. 
(Ord. No. 82-8,  5, 6-7-82) 
Sec. 22-231. - Unlawful acts. 
    A dealer or an agent or employee of a dealer shall not: 
(1)  Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from any person who is less than 18 years of age or any person known by the dealer or agent or employee of the dealer to have been convicted of theft or receipt of stolen property within the preceding five years, whether the person is acting in his own behalf or as the agent of another. 
(2)  Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from a person unless that person presents a valid driver's license or a valid state personal identification card. 
(Ord. No. 82-8,  6, 6-7-82) 
Sec. 22-232. - Penalties. 
(a)  A dealer or an agent or employee of a dealer who knowingly fails to make an entry of any material matter in his records kept as required by this article is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine of $500.00, or both. 
(b)  A dealer who knowingly violates any other provision of this article shall be punished as prescribed in section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 82-8,  7, 6-7-82) 
Secs. 22-233-22-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TAXICABS 

Sec. 22-256. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Driver means any person who drives a taxicab or motor vehicle for carrying passengers for hire. 
    Taxicab means a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of not more than nine persons, and not operated on a fixed route. 
    Taxicab company means the owner, lessor, or the person, firm, copartnership, corporation, or other organization having possession or control over the taxicab or motor vehicle. 
(Code 1982,  7.71) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 22-257. - License required. 
    No taxicab company shall be permitted to operate taxicabs on the streets of the city without first being licensed by the city clerk. Application for such license shall be made on forms provided by the city clerk under the rules prescribed by the city manager. All information required by such form shall be complete and accurate and made under the oath of the applicant. Applicants must be at least 18 years of age. 
(Code 1982,  7.70, 7.72) 
Sec. 22-258. - Police department approval. 
    The city clerk shall submit all license applications for taxicabs and taxicab drivers to the police department for approval or rejection. Such approval or rejection shall be made within a reasonable period of time with any rejection accompanied by the police department's reasons therefor. 
(Code 1982,  7.80) 
Sec. 22-259. - License fees. 
    At the time the license is issued, the city clerk shall collect a fee for each taxicab company license and for each city based taxicab driver's license as specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1982,  7.74) 
Sec. 22-260. - Insurance. 
(a)  Every application for license to operate a taxicab must be accompanied by a policy or certificate of insurance. Such insurance shall be issued by a company authorized to do business in the state. Insurance is required in the amounts specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Such policy or certificate shall contain a clause requiring the insuring company to give ten days' written notice to the city manager prior to cancelling the policy. 
(Code 1982,  7.78) 
Sec. 22-261. - Term of license. 
    All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall expire as of 12:00 midnight on December 31 of the year of issue, unless sooner revoked for cause. 
(Code 1982,  7.75) 
Sec. 22-262. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
    The city commission may, upon its own motion or upon the recommendation of the city manager or chief of police, suspend or revoke any taxicab company or taxicab driver's license for failing to comply with the rules and regulations set forth by the police department pertaining to driver conduct and motor vehicle standards, or for failure to provide satisfactory service, or loss of insurance required by this article, or other causes deemed sufficient by the city commission. 
(Code 1982,  7.76) 
Sec. 22-263. - Notice and hearing. 
    No license issued under this article shall be suspended for more than two weeks, except after notice to the licensee and a hearing at which the licensee shall have an opportunity to be present and present his case or defense. At such hearing the city commission may set aside the suspension or continue the suspension in force for any length of time or revoke the license. 
(Code 1982,  7.77) 
Sec. 22-264. - Additional penalties. 
    The suspension or revocation of a license shall not prohibit the institution of criminal prosecutions for the violations of the provisions of this article or any other law or provisions of this Code. Neither shall the institution of criminal prosecutions, for any such violation or the acquittal or conviction of any person thereunder, prevent the suspension or revocation of a license or licenses by the city commission hereunder. 
(Code 1982,  7.81) 
Sec. 22-265. - Driver's license. 
    No person shall be permitted to drive a taxicab in the city without first obtaining a license from the municipality in which the taxicab is primarily licensed to operate. Applications for a city based license shall be made on forms provided by the city clerk's office. All information required by such form shall be complete and accurate and made under the oath of the applicant. Each applicant for a city based license shall submit together with the completed form, a certificate from an accredited physician stating that the applicant is not suffering from any contagious or infectious disease and two pictures of himself suitable for attaching to the license card. All applicants for city based taxicab driver's licenses shall be 18 years of age or older. 
(Code 1982,  7.73) 
Sec. 22-266. - Taxicab rates. 
    The rates to be charged for taxicab service are to be metered, based on a schedule of rates established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1982,  7.79) 
Secs. 22-267-22-287. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PEDICABS 

Sec. 22-288. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this article are to regulate the pedicab industry; to set basic safety standards, operating procedures and insurance requirements; and to ensure the safety and welfare of passengers in the operation of pedicabs and pedicab companies. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, 1-6-14) 
Sec. 22-289. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chief of police means the police chief of the City of Plymouth or the police chief's designee. 
    City manager means the city manager of the City of Plymouth or the city manager's designee. 
    Operating permit means a written permit issued by the city authorizing a person to operate a pedicab. 
    Pedicab means a multi-wheeled passenger vehicle that is moved by human power that is pulled, pushed or otherwise propelled by a person, which is sued in the movement of passenger(s) on public right-of-way and shall include vehicles pulled or pushed directly by human power and vehicles propelled through a cycle or other mechanical means. Pedicab shall include, but not be limited to, cycle-rickshaws, cyclos, velotaxis, trishaws, biketaxis and any other pushcart or rickshaw-type vehicle. 
    Pedicab driver means a person who operates a pedicab. 
    Pedicab owner means a person who is the owner of a pedicab or a proprietor of a pedicab business who supplies pedicabs to others to operate as independent contractors or employees. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, 1-6-14) 
Sec. 22-290. - Operating regulations. 
    No person shall drive or operate a pedicab for hire upon the streets, highways or thoroughfares of the City of Plymouth, and no person who owns or controls a pedicab shall permit it to be so driven or operated unless the pedicab is operated in compliance with all of the requirements of this section. 
(1)  No person shall operate a pedicab without an operating permit. 
(2)  No person under the age of 18 shall operate a pedicab. 
(3)  No person shall drive or operate a pedicab unless that person has a current valid Michigan driver's license. 
(4)  No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, a pedicab, in an unsafe condition. 
(5)  All pedicab drivers are subject to all applicable traffic safety laws, rules, and regulations of the City of Plymouth and the State of Michigan. 
(6)  Pedicabs are not permitted to park on public property except as follows: 
a.  The city manager may designate a portion of a public street, alley, plaza, park or similar public place as "pedicab stand," for the parking of pedicabs. 
b.  In a legal parking space, provided that the fee for occupying said space is paid, if applicable. 
c.  A single pedicab may park temporarily at the curb or on a sidewalk only as long as necessary for passengers to board and exit the vehicle. 
d.  In all cases, pedicabs shall be parked in a location that does not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(7)  Fares must be agreed upon at the beginning of each trip. 
(8)  No person shall use or allow any pedicab to be used, for any illegal purpose. No person shall use or permit or allow any pedicab to be used in, or to aid or abet, any illegal act. 
(9)  No person shall operate or knowingly permit any other person to operate any pedicab under the influence of intoxicating liquor, any controlled, exhilarating or stupefying substance or of any combination of substances mentioned herein. 
(10)  No person shall operate a pedicab when the number of passengers exceeds the number of available seats. No person shall operate a pedicab unless all passengers are seated in a seat designed for that purpose and using the seatbelt provided for in the seat. This requirement shall be clearly displayed to pedicab passengers. 
(11)  A pedicab shall not be operated on a roadway with a posted speed limit greater than 30 miles per hour (mph). 
(12)  No person operating or in control of a parked or moving pedicab shall operate or permit the operation of an electronically amplified sound system in or on the vehicle so as to produce sound that is plainly audible more than 50 feet from the vehicle, except when a specific permit is first granted by the city commission. The term plainly audible shall mean any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided hearing faculties. 
(13)  No pedicab operator shall stop to load or unload passengers on the traffic side of the street, while occupying any intersection or crosswalk, or in such a manner as to unduly interfere with the orderly flow of traffic. All pedicab operators shall pull as close to the curb or edge of the roadway as possible to take on or discharge passengers. 
(14)  A pedicab shall not be parked in any restricted zone for other vehicles (i.e. taxicab parking only). 
(15)  At any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, and at any other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the highway are not clearly discernible at a distance of 500 feet ahead, a pedicab shall be operated with a headlamp of sufficient intensity to reveal a person or a vehicle from 300 feet ahead. 
(16)  At any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise, and at any other time when, due to insufficient light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons and vehicles on the highway are not clearly discernible at a distance of 500 feet ahead, a pedicab shall be operated with tail lamps capable of being seen from a distance of 500 feet. 
(17)  No one shall operate or be in control of a pedicab while the person's blood alcohol concentration (BAC) is .08 or greater, or while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any drug or combination thereof, or while the ability to operate a vehicle is impaired by the consumption of intoxicating liquor. 
(18)  Each pedicab owner shall adopt and operate a system for the collection, storage and return of personal property left in a pedicab. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, 1-6-14) 
Sec. 22-291. - Vehicle regulations. 
    No person shall drive or operate a pedicab for hire upon the streets, highways or thoroughfares of the city, and no person who owns or controls a pedicab shall permit it to be so driven or operated unless the pedicab vehicle is in compliance with all of the requirements of this section. 
(1)  The maximum width of the pedicab shall be 54 inches. 
(2)  The maximum length of the pedicab shall be ten feet. 
(3)  All pedicab owners must have each pedicab vehicle inspected by the city prior to operation. All pedicab vehicles must be constructed for and have the structural integrity to support pedicab operations. Each pedicab vehicle must be equipped with the following: 
a.  Front and rear turn signals. 
b.  Head light. 
c.  Tail lights. 
d.  Rear view mirror. 
e.  Bell or horn. 
f.  Seatbelts for passengers. 
g.  Reflectors placed on each wheel and at each corner of the body of the pedicab. 
h.  Hydraulic or mechanical disc or drum brakes, which shall be unaffected by rain or wet conditions. 
i.  Any other equipment required to comply with all applicable federal and state laws. 
j.  A pedicab must not have any cracks, broken or missing parts, or other visible damage. All wheels must be firmly attached to the hub of a vehicle and all springs, axles, and supporting structures of each pedicab must be intact. 
(4)  Each pedicab owner shall, at all times, keep each pedicab vehicle clean and free of refuse and in safe operating condition. Prior to the operation of any pedicab and at the beginning of each shift or each day of operation, the pedicab owner shall thoroughly inspect the pedicab for safe operating conditions. For any condition found then or at any other time that will prevent the safe operation of the pedicab, the owner shall immediately remove the pedicab from service and correct the condition before the pedicab is returned to service. 
(5)  Each pedicab shall have a unique, non-transferable vehicle identification number at least four inches in height visible on both sides of the vehicle. 
(6)  Each pedicab owner shall prepare a training program for pedicab drivers covering, at a minimum, the safe operation of pedicab vehicles, customer service policies and the requirements of this chapter. 
(7)  Each pedicab owner shall at all times maintain a policy of liability insurance in the minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 for personal injuries, and property damage arising out of the permitted operation. The policy shall directly protect the City of Plymouth, its officers and employees and agents as additional named insureds, and shall provide that the insurance be primary insurance and that no other insurance purchased by the city will be called on to contribute to a loss covered by said policy. The policy shall further provide ten days notice of cancellation or material change to the city's designated agent. Evidence of insurance coverage must be provided before any permit is issued. Prior approval of the city is required. Each owner and operator shall further agree to hold the city harmless for any liability or claim arising out of his or her operation that is not covered by the required insurance. Any deviation from the listed insurance coverage is subject to the approval of the city. 
(8)  If a pedicab vehicle is involved in an accident or collision, the pedicab driver shall immediately notify the pedicab owner and the police department and remain at the scene until the accident or collision is investigated by the police. The pedicab owner shall submit a full written report on the condition of the pedicab vehicle to the city clerk's office within 72 hours after the occurrence. Before operating the pedicab vehicle again, the pedicab owner shall ensure that the vehicle is in compliance with all requirements of the City of Plymouth Pedicab Business and Operation Policy. 
(9)  Each pedicab owner must file a business information card with the police department prior to operation. Each business information card shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name of the business. 
b.  Name of the business manager, owner(s) and shareholder(s). 
c.  Contact information of the business manager, owner(s) and shareholder(s). 
d.  A list of each authorized pedicab driver, including name, address, date of birth, and certification that the driver has completed the required training program established in this policy. 
e.  Current insurance certificate as required by this policy. 
(10)  All pedicab drivers must display an identification badge. Each identification badge must contain the following information: 
a.  Name. 
b.  Age. 
c.  Height. 
d.  Weight. 
e.  Photograph. 
f.  Company name. 
g.  Company phone number. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, 1-6-14) 
Sec. 22-292. - Application for operating permit. 
(a)  The operating permit application form shall be prescribed by the city. 
(b)  Any application that does not include all information requested by the application form or is not supported by the material required by this policy shall be denied. 
(c)  The application form shall require the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full name and residence address; 
(2)  The applicant's date of birth; 
(3)  The applicant's Michigan driver's license number; and 
(4)  Such other information as the city may require. 
(d)  The applicant shall provide the following material to complete the application: 
(1)  Valid Michigan driver's license. 
(2)  Two recent color passport-sized photographs. 
(3)  Such other material as the city may require. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, 1-6-14) 
Sec. 22-293. - Validity of the operating permit. 
(a)  Operating permits shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. 
(b)  Operating permits shall become invalid immediately if the operating permit is defaced, altered, forged or counterfeited. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, 1-6-14) 
Sec. 22-294. - Pedicab identification number and decal. 
(a)  Each pedicab shall have a unique, non-transferable vehicle identification number at least four (4) inches in height visible on both sides of the vehicle. 
(b)  Before allowing a pedicab to be operated for hire, owners shall obtain a decal issued by the city. The decal shall be affixed in a manner prescribed by the city. 
(c)  The decal form shall be prescribed by the city. 
(d)  The owner shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Full name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address of all legal and registered owners of the pedicab. 
(3)  A description of the pedicab, including trade name, in any, serial number and body style. 
(e)  Applicants shall also provide proof of insurance in accordance with the provisions of this policy. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, 1-6-14) 
Sec. 22-295. - Pedicab operating permit and decal fee. 
    The city shall charge a non-refundable fee to recover the cost of activities associated with the administration, regulation and issuance of decals and operating permits. The fee shall be determined by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, 1-6-14) 
Sec. 22-296. - Grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of operating permit or decal. 
(a)  Operating permits or decals may be denied, suspended or revoked by the city based upon any of the following grounds: 
(1)  The operator or pedicab owner fails or has failed to comply with the application provisions of this article. 
(2)  The operator has been convicted of any felony involving force and violence; any misdemeanor or felony reckless driving or driving under the influence offense; or any crime reasonably related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the passenger transport business or the ability of the operator to safely transport passengers; unless fiveyears has elapsed from the successful completion of the sentence for any such conviction. 
(3)  The operator has been convicted of a crime that requires registration under the Michigan Penal Code as a sex offender. 
(4)  The operator or owner has knowingly made a false statement of material fact, or knowingly failed to state a material fact in the application process for the operating permit or decal. 
(5)  The operator's ability to drive lawfully in Michigan is currently expired, suspended or revoked. 
(6)  The operator has engaged in activity that, in the judgment of the city manager, constitutes a serious threat to public health, safety or welfare. Such threat may be indicated by, but is not limited to: 
a.  An arrest for driving under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance while operating a pedicab; 
b.  An arrest for a crime, that if convicted, would require registration as a sex offender, and where a pedicab was used in the planning of, perpetration of, or fleeing from the offense; 
c.  A report from a law enforcement agency that the pedicab or pedicab operator was involved in a vehicle accident involving a pedicab, where the pedicab passengers were injured. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, 1-6-14) 
Sec. 22-297. - Notification of suspension or revocation of operating permit; appeals. 
(a)  Any operating permit issued by the city may be suspended or revoked by the issuing officer or Authority for cause as herein defined. In either case, a hearing shall be scheduled to be held by the city manager or the city manager's designee. Depending upon the necessity for prompt action, the hearing shall be held in accordance with one of the following provisions: 
(1)  If there is no immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the hearing shall be held to determine whether the operating permit should be suspended or revoked. The holder of the operating permit shall be notified of the time, date and place of the hearing and shall be notified of the reason or reasons for the proposed suspension or revocation. The operating permit holder shall be entitled to be represented by counsel, to submit evidence, to cross-examine testifying witnesses, and to make arguments concerning the factual and legal issues. The hearing officer or body shall render a written decision stating the reasons for the decision. 
(2)  If there is an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the operating permit may be suspended prior to the hearing. If a license or permit is suspended prior to the hearing, the hearing shall be commenced as soon as it is practical, but in no case more than ten days after the suspension. The hearing shall be held to determine whether to terminate or extend the suspension or whether the suspension should be converted into a revocation of the operating permit. The holder of the operating permit shall be notified of the time, date and place of the hearing and shall be notified of the reason or reasons for the already-imposed suspension and for any contemplated future action. The operating permit holder shall be entitled to be represented by counsel, to submit evidence, to cross-examine testifying witnesses, and to make arguments on factual and legal issues. The hearing officer or body shall render a written decision stating the reasons for the decision. 
(b)  In any hearing held pursuant to the provisions of this article, the rules of evidence shall be followed as far as practicable, but a hearing officer or body may admit and give probative effect to evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent people in the conduct of their affairs. Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded. Notice may be taken of facts within the general knowledge of the community. 
(1)  Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager or other appropriate hearing officer or body may appeal to the city commission, provided that a written request for such an appeal shall be filed within seven days of the date of the decision to be appealed. The city commission shall schedule a hearing on the appeal within eight days of the receipt of the request for appeal by the city clerk. The hearing shall be scheduled and held before the entire city commission or a committee thereof, as the city commission shall determine. The factual record made in the hearing below shall constitute the basic record for the appeal. The city commission may, but need not, allow the presentation of additional evidence by a majority vote. Argument as to relevant factual and legal issues shall be permitted. The decision of the city commission shall be by majority vote. The commission may affirm, reverse or modify any action taken relative to a license. The decision of the city commission shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, 1-6-14) 
Sec. 22-298. - Preliminary breath test. 
    A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a person is or was operating a pedicab upon a public highway or other place open to the public or generally accessible to a pedicab, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, and that the person by the consumption of alcoholic liquor may have affected his or her ability to operate a pedicab may require the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. A pedicab operator's refusal to take or failure to properly take a preliminary chemical breath analysis as required by this section is a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, 1-6-14) 
Secs. 22-299-22-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - SMOKING LOUNGES 

Sec. 22-321. - Definition. 
    For purposes of this article a "smoking lounge"shall be considered a tobacco specialty retail shop, cigar bar, hookah lounge and/or bar, any establishment where electronic devices are used in the delivery of concentrated nicotine liquid through vapor, and any other types of smoking facility. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07,  2, 10-20-14) 
Sec. 22-322. - Operational requirements. 
(a)  A smoking lounge must be approved by the State of Michigan Department of Community Health as a Tobacco Specialty Retail Store or cigar bar and possess a valid exemption of the State of Michigan smoking prohibition of Section 12603, Public Act 368 of 1978. Smoking lounges not possessing a valid state exemption as a tobacco specialty retail store or cigar bar are not permitted. 
(b)  Any tobacco specialty retail store or cigar bar must be located on premises that are physically separated from any areas of the same or adjacent establishments in which smoking is prohibited and where smoke does not infiltrate into those nonsmoking areas. Physically separated means an area that is enclosed on all sides by any combination of solid walls, windows, or doors that extend from the floor to the ceiling. 
(c)  The ventilation system in the smoking lounge shall be, at a minimum, capable of preventing any smoke from migrating into any other portion of the building hosting the smoking lounge or into any other building or premises in the vicinity of the smoking lounge. 
(d)  Operating permits issued under this article shall not be transferable except as provided herein. There shall be no transfer of any State of Michigan exemption permit under the Dr. Ron Davis Act of 2009 (MCL 333.12601, et. seq., as amended) from another jurisdiction into the City of Plymouth without the city clerk's, director of public safety's and fire marshall's approval of a smoker's lounge operating permit application for the prospective transferee. This approval or denial shall be based on the same procedure and terms as set forth in this article. 
(e)  Each operating permit issued under this article is a separate and distinct license, and no person shall exercise any of the privileges granted under any license other than that which he/she holds. A separate operating permit shall be issued for each specific smoking lounge business within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07,  2, 10-20-14) 
Sec. 22-323. - Manager; change of manager. 
    At least one registered manager who has been identified on the operating permit application and/or smoking lounge manager registration form shall be on premises at all times that the business is open. It shall be unlawful for any person not identified on the smoker's lounge license operating permit application to work as a manager of a smoking lounge business unless the proposed manager or operator has submitted a registration form with the individual's legal name and any aliases, home address, telephone numbers, date of birth, and driver's license number. All managers must be over the age of 18 years old. The licensee shall be responsible for notifying the city of any proposed change in management and insuring that the proposed new manager has obtained the required approval before working or serving as a manager of the licensed establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07,  2, 10-20-14) 
Sec. 22-324. - Fee for smoking lounge operating permit and manager registration. 
    A non-refundable fee for the application of a smoking lounge operating permit and smoking lounge manager registration shall be set by resolution of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07,  2, 10-20-14) 
Sec. 22-325. - Hours of operation. 
    Hours of operation are limited to 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07,  2, 10-20-14) 
Sec. 22-326. - Age restrictions. 
    No one shall be allowed on the premises of a smoking lounge business unless the individual is the age of 18 years or older. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07,  2, 10-20-14) 
Sec. 22-327. - Location. 
(a)  A smoking lounge business may be allowed as a special use in the B-1, B-2, B-3 and ARC zoning districts. A smoking lounge business shall not be located any nearer than 500 feet to any residential zoning district, school, religious institution, park, childcare facility, firearm dealer or business selling alcohol. 
(b)  A smoking lounge business shall not be located any nearer than 1,320 feet (one-quarter mile) to any other smoking lounges. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07,  2, 10-20-14) 
Sec. 22-328. - Standards of conduct. 
    The following standards of conduct shall be adhered to by managers and employees of any smoking lounge business: 
(1)  No manager, employee or representative of the licensee shall serve or engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises, including but not limited to: any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor, beverages, liquids or compounds. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages in any smoking lounge business. The licensee's manager and/or employees shall immediately remove any person who opens or consumes alcoholic beverages on the premises or parking areas of the smoking lounge business. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to permit the use, sale or presence of controlled substances (as defined under MCL 333.7212, et. seq, of Public Health Code as amended, or a rule promulgated under the Act or Code) on the licensed premises. The manager and/or employees shall immediately remove any person possessing, distributing, selling consuming and/or using controlled substances on the licensed premises. 
(4)  There shall be no live entertainment, dance floor or karaoke allowed in a smoking lounge business. 
(5)  It is the duty of the licensee to ensure that at least one manager is on duty and on the premises at all times during the hours of operation (10:00 a.m.-12:00 a.m.). 
(6)  It is the duty of the licensee and managers of the premises to ensure that any doors to public areas on the premises remain unlocked during business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07,  2, 10-20-14) 
Sec. 22-329. - Compliance with laws. 
    The business licensee, the manager and employees shall comply with all federal and state laws and the City of Plymouth Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to, building and fire codes. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07,  2, 10-20-14) 
Sec. 22-330. - Right of entry. 
    The filing of an application for a smoker's lounge operating permit shall constitute consent of the applicant and licensee and his/her agents, managers and/or employees to permit the city's police and fire department, community development department or any other department or agent of the city to conduct routine inspections of any licensed smoker's lounge business during the hours the establishment is conducting business and during any time that employees or managers are on the premises. The city police department and fire services shall be allowed unannounced access to the smoking lounge premises to inspect for violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07,  2, 10-20-14) 
Sec. 22-331. - Revocation and suspension of a license. 
(a)  Any operating permit issued by the city may be immediately suspended or revoked by the city manager, director of public safety, fire marshall or inspector, building official, or their designees for cause as hereindefined. In either case, a hearing shall be scheduled to be held by the city manager or the city manager's designee. The hearing shall be held in accordance with one of the following provisions: 
(1)  If there is no immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare, the hearing shall be held to determine whether the operating permit should be suspended or revoked. The holder of the operating permit shall be notified of the time, date and place of the hearing and shall be notified of the reason or reasons for the proposed suspension or revocation. The operating permit holder shall be entitled to be represented by counsel, to submit evidence, to cross-examine testifying witnesses, and to make arguments concerning the factual and legal issues. The hearing officer or body shall render a written decision stating the reason for the decision. 
(2)  If there is an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the operating permit may be suspended prior to the hearing. If a license or permit is suspended prior to the hearing, a hearing shall be commenced as soon as it is practical, but in no case more than ten days after suspension. The hearing shall be held to determine whether to terminate or extend the suspension or whether the suspension should be converted into a revocation of the operating permit. The holder of the operating permit shall be notified of the time, date and place of the hearing and shall be notified of the reason or reasons for the already-imposed suspension and for any contemplated future action. The operating permit holder shall be entitled to be represented by counsel, to submit evidence, to cross-examine testifying witnesses, and to make arguments on factual and legal issues. The hearing officer or body shall render a written decision stating the reasons for the decision. 
(b)  In any hearing held pursuant to the provision of this article, the rules of evidence shall be followed as far as practicable, but a hearing officer or body may admit and give probative effect to evidence of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent people in the conduct of their affairs. Irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded. Notice may be taken of facts within the general knowledge of the community. 
(1)  Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager or other appropriate hearing officer or body may appeal to the city commission, provided that a written request for such appeal shall be filed within seven days of the date of the decision to be appealed. The city commission shall schedule a hearing on the appeal within eight days of the receipt of the request for appeal by the city clerk. The hearing shall be scheduled and held before the city commission or a committee thereof, as the city commission shall determine. The factual record made in the hearing below shall constitute the basic record for the appeal. The city commission may, but need not, allow the presentation of additional evidence by a majority vote. Argument as to relevant factual and legal issues shall be permitted. The decision of the city commission shall be by majority vote. The commission may affirm, reverse or modify any action taken relative to a license. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07,  2, 10-20-14) 
Sec. 22-332. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person, firm or corporations convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a civil infraction, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 as well as the penalties provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07,  2, 10-20-14) 
Sec. 22-333. - Existing smoking lounge operations. 
    Any smoking lounge that was in existence at the time of the enactment of the 180-day moratorium (September 2, 2014), shall be required to abide by and comply with all federal and state laws, and city ordinances but may continue to operate without having to comply with this article so long as the smoking lounge maintains its current physical location, size, and ownership. In the event there is any change to the current physical location, size, or ownership, then the smoking lounge will immediately have to be in compliance with all of the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2014-07,  2, 10-20-14) 
Chapter 26 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 26-1. - City cemetery board-Membership. 
(a)  The cemetery board of trustees heretofore established for the operation, control and regulation of the city's cemeteries or burial grounds is hereby continued. The cemetery board shall consist of six members, one of whom shall be the city manager ex officio, and five of whom shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city commission. 
(b)  The first five appointive members of the cemetery board of trustees shall be appointed, two for a term of one year, two for a term of two years, and one for a term of three years, beginning on and dating from July 1 following such appointments. Thereafter, succeeding appointments shall be made for a term of three years. Vacancies for any reason shall be filled for the remainder of the term by the mayor, with the approval of the city commission. 
(Code 1982,  1.131; Ord. No. 93-9,  1(1.131), 12-20-93) 
Sec. 26-2. - Same-Duties, meetings. 
    It shall be the duty of the cemetery board of trustees to make such recommendations to the city commission as are necessary and expedient for the proper control, maintenance and improvement of city cemeteries. Such board shall hold its annual meeting during the month of May of each year, at which meeting a chairman shall be elected for a term of one year. Additional meetings may be held at the call of the chairman. 
(Code 1982,  1.132; Ord. No. 2006-05,  1, 12-18-06) 
Sec. 26-3. - Cemetery superintendent-Designation. 
    The city manager shall be the superintendent of city cemeteries and shall enforce the schedule of fees for cemetery services and collect the same, such schedule of fees for cemetery services and the prices of lots or burial rights to be fixed and established from time to time by resolution of the city commission. The cemetery board of trustees shall have the power and authority to make necessary and reasonable rules or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent and purposes of this chapter, subject to the approval by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1982,  3.22; Ord. No. 00-10, 10-2-00) 
Sec. 26-4. - Same-Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the superintendent to: 
(1)  Employ a sexton and such other employees as are necessary for the care of the cemeteries. 
(2)  Keep a complete and accurate record, at his office in the city hall, of the name of the deceased, the subdivision, lot and section on which burial is made, the date of burial and the name of the undertaker conducting the funeral. 
(Code 1982,  3.23) 
Sec. 26-5. - Sexton's duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the sexton to: 
(1)  Demand and examine the burial permit and to refuse burial until an interment order shall have been issued by the city clerk. 
(2)  Hold the sole and exclusive right in person or through competent employees to dig and fill all graves and to reopen a grave upon request of a duly authorized and competent party, after having first received a written permit and the approval of the city clerk. 
(3)  Qualify and act in the capacity of a police officer in enforcing and abiding by the terms of this chapter and by arresting any person while in the cemetery in violation of the city Code. 
(Code 1982,  3.24) 
Sec. 26-6. - Clerk's duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to: 
(1)  Keep a plat and plat book of the cemeteries, on which shall be shown all lots that are for sale. 
(2)  Sell such lots as are designated by the cemetery board of trustees at the price and under the restrictions designated by the city commission, and to issue a certificate of ownership upon the payment of the whole amount, naming such special restrictions as are embodied in this chapter, signed by the city clerk and stamped with the seal of the city. 
(3)  Enter into contract with any person desirous of purchasing a lot in a city cemetery, collecting as a down payment on the purchase price, amounts in accordance with established schedules. 
(4)  Record the transfer of title from one owner to another after a request for transfer has been made and authorized by the cemetery board of trustees. 
(5)  Collect all money in payment for lots, interment fees, annual care and for all services rendered by the employees of the cemetery in the performance of their duties as regulated by the board, and such monies so collected shall be deposited with the city treasurer and reported to the city commission. 
(Code 1982,  3.25) 
Sec. 26-7. - Treasurer's duties; perpetual care fund. 
    It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to deposit all sums in payment of lots or burial rights and in the payment of cemetery services in the cemetery fund of the city, except such sums as are provided by perpetual care, which shall be held and invested as provided by state laws governing such trust funds. The amount of 25 percent of the sale price for each lot hereafter sold shall be deposited in a fund for perpetual care for such lot or lots. An account shall be kept of all receipts and disbursements in connection with the acquisition, operation and maintenance of city cemeteries. 
(Code 1982,  3.26; Ord. No. 84-1,  1(3.26), 1-3-84; Ord. No. 98-5, 8-3-98) 
Sec. 26-8. - Interments. 
    Cemeteries or burial grounds within the city shall be owned, operated, regulated and controlled only by the city, subject, however, to applicable laws of the state and no interment shall be made in any other place in the city. 
(Code 1982,  3.21) 
Sec. 26-9. - Sales of lots. 
    All cemetery lots shall be sold and interments shall be made subject to such bylaws, rules and regulations as may from time to time be adopted by the cemeteries board of trustees and approved by the city commission. Lots shall not be used for any other purposes than as a burial place for the burial of the human dead. 
(Code 1982,  3.27) 
Sec. 26-10. - Rules, regulations. 
    The following rules and regulations are incorporated in and made a part of this chapter: 
(1)  The grave of an adult in any public burying ground in the city shall be at least five feet deep, and that of a child shall be at least four feet deep. Burial boxes over four feet in length shall be classed as adult burials. 
(2)  The burial of two or more persons in a single grave is prohibited, except mother and babe if buried at the same time, or in case of infants. 
(3)  Strangers are not allowed to approach the grave at a funeral. 
(4)  Under no condition will the city assume responsibility for error in opening graves. Orders from undertakers will be construed as orders from the owners. 
(5)  Flowers and emblems will be removed from graves as soon as they become unsightly and no responsibility for their return to lot owners will be assumed by the city. 
(6)  No firearms will be allowed in the cemetery, except in case of military funerals and on Memorial Day, without written permission from the superintendent of the cemetery. 
(7)  No lots may be purchased or sold or rights transferred for speculative purposes. 
(8)  No grave will be opened or body disinterred except by order of husband, wife, father, mother, son or daughter of the deceased and then only for good cause, and the city reserves the right to refuse any such request. This provision does not apply when disinterment is ordered by a duly authorized public official. 
(9)  Neither the purchase price nor the perpetual care agreement contemplates the repair or replacement of any monument or marker nor the repair of damages caused by the elements. 
(10)  Monuments will not be allowed on lots not fully paid for. 
(11)  All foundation work for monuments and markers will be placed by the employees of city cemeteries at rates specified in schedules adopted as herein provided. 
(12)  The material used in the construction of mausoleums, vaults, monuments and markers and permanent corner posts must be of recognized durable granite or standard bronze. Each marker shall consist of one part or piece only, provided that the above rule will not apply to lots on which it is desired to put in markers to match other markers already on the lot. 
(13)  No vertical joints will be allowed in monument work. 
(14)  Unsightly, ill proportioned monuments and stone work are prohibited and all appendages such as photographs, books and other objects of curiosity are prohibited. 
(15)  At any time when a monument, private vault or mausoleum becomes unsafe, in the opinion of the superintendent, a notice of such condition will be mailed to the last known or recorded address of the owner and the structure removed or repaired at the expense of the owner or owners. 
(16)  For the use of the receiving vault there shall be a fixed charge as specified in schedules adopted as herein provided. Persons owning private vaults are hereby forbidden to charge for their use to other parties. The fees for the use of the vaults must be paid to the city clerk and permit obtained before the body is placed in the vault. If the remains of any person placed therein shall become offensive or detrimental to public health, the superintendent shall have the right to cause the body to be immediately buried. 
(17)  Contractors and workmen engaged within cemeteries on any class of work whatsoever will be held responsible for the damage done by them to any cemetery properties. 
(18)  Material for any class of work will not be permitted on the grounds unless accompanied by workmen to erect same, except by special arrangement with the cemetery superintendent. 
(19)  Roadways must be satisfactorily protected against damage from heavily loaded vehicles. 
(20)  Rolling of stones across any section of lots must be done under the supervision and orders of the superintendent. In all cases, planks must be provided, by persons furnishing stones or monuments, for properly protecting the lawns. 
(21)  All unsightly material or debris accumulating from any class of work must be removed at once and on the completion of the work all derricks, tools, etc., must be removed immediately, and the ground left in as good a condition as found by the contractor. 
(22)  No stone work shall be brought into the cemetery on Friday after 5:00 p.m., and no work shall be commenced on that day that cannot be finished, and the dirt and debris entirely removed before the hour of closing. 
(23)  No person shall remove any object from any place in the cemetery or make any excavation without the consent of the superintendent of the cemetery. 
(24)  No person shall obstruct any drive, walk or alley or in any way injure, deface or destroy any grave, vault, tombstone, monument, enclosure, building, fence, basin, fountain, bridge, seat, flower, tree, shrub, vine, lot or any other thing in or belonging to any public burying ground in the city. 
(25)  If any tree, shrub or vine situated on any lot by means of its roots, branches or in any other way becomes a detriment to adjacent lots, paths or avenues, or inconvenient to visitors, the superintendent shall have the right to remove the same. 
(26)  Any seat, urn or similar object placed on a lot shall be removed without notice to the owner when such seat or urn becomes a nuisance or unsightly or uncared for. Any iron or wood object placed on a lot by permission of the superintendent shall be kept painted and in neat condition. 
(27)  When a lot is uncared for and becomes unsightly or a nuisance or detrimental to other lots, by order of the cemetery board of trustees, the superintendent and employees will enter such lot and clean up and make same presentable and the cost of such work collected from the owner or made a lien on such lot. 
(28)  No trees, shrubs or vines shall be placed upon any lot except by approval of the board of trustees and the superintendent. 
(29)  No equipment other than the equipment of a city cemetery shall be used at interments in a city cemetery, except by permission of the superintendent. 
(30)  The use of plastic cemetery vaults shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1982,  3.28; Ord. No. 98-5, 8-3-98) 
Chapter 30 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; zoning, ch. 78. 
State Law reference- Housing and slum clearance projects, MCL 125.651 et seq., MSA 5.3011 et seq.; housing corporation law, MCL 125.901 et seq., MSA 5.3057(1) et seq.; urban redevelopment corporations, MCL 125.901 et seq., MSA 5.3058(1) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1-30-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAX INCREMENT FINANCING PLAN 

Sec. 30-24. - Purpose. 
    The city, in 1983, pursuant to Act 197, Public Act of Michigan, 1975 as amended (the "Act") adopted a tax increment finance plan and formed the downtown development authority to help spur development in the declining downtown business district. In 2006, the city commission determined that while many goals of the original plan have been accomplished, there are numerous challenges still remaining, and the development area still must have significant development activity in order to stimulate the business climate and avoid further decline. The downtown development authority has invested in long-term infrastructure development and it is determined that the public interests would be served by continuing these investments and to maintain the existing infrastructure, as well as participating with events, marketing, promotions, retention and recruitment activities. The downtown development authority plan, as amended (including the 2006 plan amendments) has been reviewed and adopted by the city commission and the downtown development authority board and they have determined that the plan meets the requirements of what is commonly known as the DDA Act. 
(Ord. No. 06-04,  2, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 30-25. - Determination. 
    The city commission has reviewed and adopted the tax increment financing plan that is included in the development plan (as amended) and has determined that the tax increment financing plan is feasible to carry out the development plan and that the DDA has the ability to arrange for financing of major capital projects. 
(Ord. No. 06-03,  3, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 30-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Base year assessment roll means the base year assessment roll prepared by the city assessor in accordance with section 30-29. 
    Captured assessed value means the amount in any one year by which the current assessed value as finally equalized of all taxable property in the development area exceeds the initial assessed value. 
    Development area means the following boundaries of the downtown development district: 
Beginning at the intersection of the north line of Church Street and the east line of Union Street; thence south along the east line of Union Street to the north line of Lot 19, Fralick's Addition; thence east along the north line of Lot 19 to the east line of Lot 19; thence south along the east line of Lot 19 to the north line of Lot 11, May Subdivision; thence east along the north line of Lot 11 to the west line of Elizabeth Street; thence south along the west line of Elizabeth Street to the south line of Lot 14, May Subdivision; thence west along the north line of George B. Shafer's Subdivision, a distance of 204.6 feet to the east line of Lot 240, Assessor's Plat No. 9; thence south along Lot 240 a distance of 165.00 feet to the north line of Ann Arbor Trail; thence west along the north line of Ann Arbor Trail to the east line of Lot 710, Assessor's Plat No. 20; thence south along the east line of Lot 710 to the north line of Lot 733, Assessor's Plat No. 20; thence west along the north line of Lot 733 to the east line of Lot 734, Assessor's Plat No. 20; thence south along the east line of Lot 734 to the south line of Maple Avenue; thence west along the south line of Maple Avenue to the east line of Deer Street; thence south along the east line of Deer Street to the southwest corner of Lot 763, Plymouth Plat No. 21; thence west along the south line of Lots 759 and 760, Assessors Plymouth Plat No. 21, a distance of 130.94 feet; thence north along the west line of Lot 760, a distance of 132.65 feet to the south line of Wing Street; thence west along the south line of Wing Street to the west line of Lot 131, Nash's Plymouth Subdivision; thence north along the west line of Lot 131 to the south line of Maple Avenue; thence west to the west line of Lot 285a2b1, Plymouth Plat No. 12; thence north along the west line of Lot 285a2b1 a distance of approximately 148 feet to the south line of Lot 285a1, Plymouth Plat No. 12; thence west along the south line of Lot 285a1 a distance of approximately 105 feet to the west line of Lot 285a1, Plymouth Plat No. 12; thence north along the west line of Lot 285a1 a distance of approximately 82 feet to the north line of Lot 285a1; thence east along the north line of Lot 285a1 to the southwest corner of Lot 288, Plymouth Plat No. 12; thence north along the west line of Lot 288 to the north line of Ann Arbor Trail; thence east along the north line of Ann Arbor Trail to the southeast corner of Lot 347, Plymouth Plat No. 13; thence northerly along the west line of South Harvey Street to the south line of Church Street; thence east along the south line of Church Street to the west line of Lot 191, Plymouth Plat No. 8; thence southeast along the west line of Lot 191; thence east along the south line of Lot 191; thence northeast along the east line of Lot 191 to the north line of Church Street; thence southeasterly along the north line of Church Street to the point of beginning at Church and Union Streets. 
    Development plan means the Development Plan and Tax Increment Financing Plan, dated October 1983 as transmitted to the city commission by the downtown development authority for public hearing, as modified by action of the city commission and confirmed by this article, copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
    Downtown development authority (DDA) means the city downtown development authority. 
    Initial assessed value means the initial assessed value as defined in Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq., MSA 5.3010(1) et seq.). 
    Project fund means the downtown development authority project no. 1 fund established pursuant to section 30-31. 
    Taxing jurisdiction means each unit of government levying an ad valorem property tax on property in the development area. 
(Ord. No. 83-5,  1; Ord. No. 92-6,  1, 4-6-92) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 30-27. - Approval and adoption of development plan. 
    The development plan as amended by the city commission is hereby approved and adopted. The duration of the plan shall be now be extended to December 31, 2033 or until such time as the last series of bonds pursuant to the development plan are paid, except as it may be extended by subsequent amendment of the plan and this article. A copy of the plan and all amendments thereto shall be maintained on file in the city clerk's office and cross-indexed to this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-5,  2; Ord. No. 06-04,  4, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 30-28. - Boundaries of development area. 
    The boundaries of development area no. 1 as set forth in the development plan are hereby adopted and confirmed. 
(Ord. No. 83-5,  3) 
Sec. 30-29. - Preparation of base year assessment roll. 
(a)  Within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article was derived, the city assessor shall prepare the initial base year assessment roll. The initial base year assessment roll shall list each taxing jurisdiction in which the development area is located, the initial assessed value of the development area on such effective date and the amount of tax revenue derived by each taxing jurisdiction from ad valorem taxes on the property in the development area. 
(b)  The assessor shall transmit copies of the initial base year assessment roll to the city treasurer, county treasurer, downtown development authority and each taxing jurisdiction, together with a notice that the assessment roll has been prepared in accordance with this article and the tax increment financing plan contained in the development plan approved by this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-5,  4) 
Sec. 30-30. - Preparation of annual base year assessment roll. 
    Each year within 15 days following the final equalization of property in the development area, the assessor shall prepare an updated base year assessment roll. The updated base year assessment roll shall show the information required in the initial base year assessment roll and, in addition, the captured assessed value for that year. Copies of the annual base year assessment roll shall be transmitted by the assessor to the same persons as the initial base year assessment roll, together with a notice that it has been prepared in accordance with this article and the development plan. 
(Ord. No. 83-5,  5) 
Sec. 30-31. - Establishment of project fund; approval of depository. 
    The treasurer of the downtown development authority shall establish a separate fund which shall be kept in a depository bank account or accounts in a bank or banks approved by the city treasurer, to be designated downtown development authority project no. 1 fund. All moneys received by the downtown development authority pursuant to the development plan shall be deposited in the project fund. All moneys in that fund and earnings thereon shall be used only in accordance with the development plan and this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-5,  6) 
Sec. 30-32. - Payment of tax increments to downtown development authority. 
    The city and county treasurer shall, as ad valorem taxes are collected on the property in the development area, pay that proportion of the taxes, except for penalties and collection fees, that the captured assessed value bears to the initial assessed value to the treasurer of the downtown development authority for deposit in the project fund. The payments shall be made on the date or dates on which the city and county treasurers are required to remit taxes to each of the taxing jurisdictions. 
(Ord. No. 83-5,  7) 
Sec. 30-33. - Use of moneys in the project fund. 
(a)  The money credited to the project fund and on hand therein from time to time shall annually be used in the following manner and following order of priority: 
(1)  Pay into the debt retirement fund, or funds, for all outstanding series of bonds issued pursuant to this plan an amount equal to the interest and principal coming due (in the case of principal whether by maturity or mandatory redemption) prior to the next collection of taxes, less any credit for sums on hand in the debt retirement fund. 
(2)  Establish a reserve account for payment of principal and interest on bonds issued pursuant to this plan, an amount, if any, required by the resolution authorizing a series of bonds. Any amounts to the credit of the reserve account at the beginning of a fiscal year in excess of the requirement of the preceding sentence shall be considered tax increment revenue for that year. 
(3)  Pay the city the amount of lease rental payments paid by the city to the municipal building authority for project elements acquired by the building authority. These payments shall be net of any revenues derived from the parking structure included in the project after paying of operating expenses from those revenues. 
(4)  Pay the administrative and operating costs of the downtown development authority (DDA) and city for the development area, including planning and promotion, to the extent provided in the annual budget of the DDA. 
(5)  Pay, to the extent determined desirable by the DDA and approved by the city, the cost of completing the remaining public improvements as set forth in the development plan to the extent those costs are not financed from the proceeds of bonds. 
(6)  Pay the cost of any additional improvements to the development as determined necessary by the DDA and approved by the city commission. 
(7)  Reimburse the city for funds advanced to acquire property, clear land, make preliminary plans, and improvements necessary for the development of the development area in accordance with this plan. 
(b)  Any tax increment receipts in excess of those needed under subsection (a) of this section shall revert to the taxing jurisdictions or used for future development activities within the development area, as defined in the development plan, pursuant to applicable provisions of Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq., MSA 5.3010(1) et seq.), as amended, and other laws. 
(Ord. No. 83-5,  8) 
Sec. 30-34. - Annual report. 
    Within 90 days after the end of each fiscal year, the downtown development authority shall submit to the city commission, with copies to each taxing jurisdiction, a report on the status of the project fund. The report shall include the amount and source of revenue in the account, the amount and purpose of expenditures from the account, the initial assessed value of the development area, the captured assessed value of the development area, the tax increments received and the amount of any surplus from the prior year, and any additional information requested by the city commission or deemed appropriate by the downtown development authority. The secretary of the downtown authority shall cause a copy of the report to be published once in full in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-5,  9) 
Sec. 30-35. - Refund of surplus tax increments. 
    Any surplus money in the project fund at the end of a year, as shown by the annual report of the downtown development authority, shall be paid by the authority to the city or county treasurer, as the case may be, and rebated by them to the appropriate taxing jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 83-5,  10) 
Secs. 30-36-30-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 30-56. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authority means the downtown development authority of the city. 
    Act 197 means Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq., MSA 5.3010(1) et seq.), as amended. 
    Board or board of directors means the board of directors of the authority, the governing body of the authority. 
    Chief executive officer means the mayor of the city. 
    Downtown district means the downtown district designated by this article as now existing or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 83-2,  2, 6-20-83) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 30-57. - Determination of necessity. 
    The city commission hereby determines that it is necessary for the best interests of the city to halt property value deterioration and increase property tax valuation where possible in the business district of the city, to eliminate the causes of that deterioration, and to promote economic growth by establishing a downtown development authority pursuant to Act 197. 
(Ord. No. 83-2,  3, 6-20-83) 
Sec. 30-58. - Creation of authority. 
    There is hereby created pursuant to Act 197, a downtown development authority for the city. The authority shall be a public body corporate and shall be known and exercise its powers under the title of Downtown Development Authority of the City of Plymouth. The authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court of this state and shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its incorporation as provided by this article and Act 197. The enumeration of a power in this article or in Act 197 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the authority. 
(Ord. No. 83-2,  4, 6-20-83) 
Sec. 30-59. - Description of downtown district. 
    The boundaries of the downtown district in which the authority shall exercise its powers as provided in Act 197 shall consist of the following: 
Beginning at the intersection of the north line of Church Street and the east line of Union Street; thence south along the east line of Union Street to the north line of Lot 19, Fralick's Addition; thence east along the north line of Lot 19 to the east line of Lot 19; thence south along the east line of Lot 19 to the north line of Lot 11, May Subdivision; thence east along the north line of Lot 11 to the west line of Elizabeth Street; thence south along the west line of Elizabeth Street to the south line of Lot 14, May Subdivision; thence west along the north line of George B. Shafer's Subdivision, a distance of 204.6 feet to the east line of Lot 240, Assessor's Plat No. 9; thence south along Lot 240 a distance of 165.00 feet to the north line of Ann Arbor Trail; thence west along the north line of Ann Arbor Trail to the east line of Lot 710, Assessor's Plat No. 20; thence south along the east line of Lot 710 to the north line of Lot 733, Assessor's Plat No. 20; thence west along the north line of Lot 733 to the east line of Lot 734, Assessor's Plat No. 20; thence south along the east line of Lot 734 to the south line of Maple Avenue; thence west along the south line of Maple Avenue to the east line of Deer Street; thence south along the east line of Deer Street to the southwest corner of Lot 763, Plymouth Plat No. 21; thence west along the south line of Lots 759 and 760, Assessors Plymouth Plat No. 21, a distance of 130.94 feet; thence north along the west line of Lot 760, a distance of 132.65 feet to the south line of Wing Street; thence west along the south line of Wing Street to the west line of Lot 131, Nash's Plymouth Subdivision; thence north along the west line of Lot 131 to the south line of Maple Avenue; thence west to the west line of Lot 285a2b1, Plymouth Plat No. 12; thence north along the west line of Lot 285a2b1 a distance of approximately 148 feet to the south line of Lot 285a1, Plymouth Plat No. 12; thence west along the south line of Lot 285a1 a distance of approximately 105 feet to the west line of Lot 285a1, Plymouth Plat No. 12; thence north along the west line of Lot 285a1 a distance of approximately 82 feet to the north line of Lot 285a1; thence east along the north line of Lot 285a1 to the southwest corner of Lot 288, Plymouth Plat No. 12; thence north along the west line of Lot 288 to the north line of Ann Arbor Trail; thence east along the north line of Ann Arbor Trail to the southeast corner of Lot 347, Plymouth Plat No. 13; thence northerly along the west line of South Harvey Street to the south line of Church Street; thence east along the south line of Church Street to the west line of Lot 191, Plymouth Plat No. 8; thence southeast along the west line of Lot 191; thence east along the south line of Lot 191; thence northeast along the east line of Lot 191 to the north line of Church Street; thence south easterly along the north line of Church Street to the point of beginning at Church and Union Streets. 
(Ord. No. 92-5,  1, 4-6-92) 
Sec. 30-60. - Board of directors. 
(a)  The authority shall be under the supervision and control of a board of directors consisting of the chief executive officer of the city and 12 members as provided by Act 197. The members shall be appointed by the chief executive officer subject to approval by the commission and shall hold office for the terms provided in Act 197. All members shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed. 
(b)  The authority may employ and fix the compensation of a director, subject to the approval of the city commission, and a treasurer and secretary. The director shall furnish bond in the amount of $100.00, and the treasurer shall furnish bond in such amounts as prescribed by the board. The bonds shall be in such form as may be approved by the board including coverage in the form of a blanket policy carried by the authority or the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-2,  6, 6-20-83; Ord. No. 89-6, 10-16-89) 
Sec. 30-61. - Powers. 
    Except as specifically otherwise provided in this article, the authority shall have all powers provided by law subject to the limitations imposed by law and herein. 
(Ord. No. 83-2,  7, 6-20-83) 
Sec. 30-62. - Fiscal year; adoption of budget. 
(a)  The fiscal year of the authority shall begin on July 1 of each year and end on June 30 of the following year, or such other fiscal year as may hereafter be adopted by the city. 
(b)  The board shall annually prepare a budget and shall submit it to the commission on the same date that the proposed budget for the city, if required by the city Charter, is submitted to the commission. The board shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been approved by the commission. The board may, however, temporarily adopt a budget in connection with the operation of any improvements which have been financed by revenue bonds where required to do so by the ordinance authorizing the revenue bonds. 
(c)  The authority shall submit financial reports to the commission at the same time and on the same basis as departments of the city are required to submit reports. The authority shall be audited annually by the same independent auditors auditing the city, and copies of the audit report shall be filed with the commission. 
(Ord. No. 83-2,  8, 6-20-83) 
Sec. 30-63. - Determination of accord. 
    The city commission of the City of Plymouth hereby determines that the development plan is in reasonable accord with the master plan of the city. Further, the city commission has determined that any changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections and utilities, if any, are reasonably necessary for the project and for the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 06-04,  5, 10-16-06) 
Secs. 30-64-30-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 30-86. - Preamble. 
(a)  There exists in the city the need for certain programs to alleviate and prevent conditions of unemployment to assist and retain local industries and commercial enterprises to strengthen and revitalize the city's economy. 
(b)  It is therefore necessary to provide the means and methods for the encouragement and assistance of industrial and commercial enterprises in locating and expanding in the city, to more conveniently provide needed services and facilities of such enterprises to the city and its residents. 
(c)  Act No. 338 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 (MCL 125.1601 et seq., MSA 5.3520(1) et seq.), as amended (Act No. 338), provides for the incorporation of an economic development corporation for the city to accomplish such purposes. 
(d)  An application has been filed pursuant to Act No. 338 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 (MCL 125.1601 et seq., MSA 5.3520(1) et seq.), as amended, for permission to incorporate an economic development corporation for the city. 
(e)  A public hearing on such application and any competing application has been held. 
(Code 1982,  1.271) 
Sec. 30-87. - Application approved. 
    The application under date of March 30, 1978, filed by Clifford W. Tait, Jack Wilcox and William A. Leonard to incorporate The Economic Development Corporation of the City of Plymouth and the proposed articles of incorporation for such corporation are approved and adopted. 
(Code 1982,  1.272) 
Sec. 30-88. - Publication of articles of incorporation. 
    The articles of incorporation shall be executed in duplicate and, upon execution the city clerk, be filed and published in accordance with section 31 of Act No. 338 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 (MCL 125.1601 et seq., MSA 5.3520(1) et seq.). 
(Code 1982,  1.273) 
Sec. 30-89. - Publication of adopting ordinance. 
    The city clerk is further directed to publish the ordinance from which this article was derived once in The Plymouth Observer-Eccentric, a newspaper of general circulation in the city promptly after passage of such ordinance and after such publication record such ordinance in the record of ordinances and certify in such record of ordinances the time and place of such publication. 
(Code 1982,  1.274) 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; law enforcement, ch. 46; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; zoning, ch. 78. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
DIVISION 1. - TREE ORDINANCE 

Sec. 34-1. - Legislative findings and intent of the division. 
    The protection of such natural resources is a matter of paramount public concern, as provided by Article IV, Section 52, of the Constitution of the State of Michigan and the Michigan Environmental Protection Act of 1970, MCL  691.1201 et seq. The city finds that growth and development resulting in increased demand upon natural resources has had the effect of encroaching upon, despoiling and/or eliminating many of the woodlands, trees, and associated forms of vegetation. These resources, if preserved and maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition, provide air quality protection, maintenance of water quality, reduction of flood surges and soil erosion, and protection of vital wildlife habitat. In addition, these resources provide important aesthetic, ecological, recreational and economic benefits to existing and future residents of the city and must, therefore, be protected. Trees are an asset to the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-06 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 34-2. - Purposes and definitions. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the protection, preservation and conservation of the city's woodland systems, natural corridors and heritage trees by providing a planting and reforestation program. 
(b)  Definitions. Terms not specifically defined in this chapter shall have the conventional meaning. The following words and phrases shall be defined as follows: 
    Basal area means the cross-sectional area of a tree trunk measured at four and one half feet above the existing grade. 
    Berm area means the area between the street and sidewalk of a property owner's home. 
    Building envelope means the area of the lot where a building may legally be constructed. The building envelope is defined by the required front yard, rear yard and side yard setbacks. 
    Building footprint means the area enclosed or to be enclosed by the exterior walls of a building. 
    Diameter breast height (DBH) means the diameter in inches of a tree measured at four and one-half feet above the existing grade. 
    Dripline means an imaginary vertical line, which extends downward from the outermost tips of the tree branches to the ground. 
    Front yard means the front yard is defined as the front yard setback, which is measured from the foundation of the street front of a home to the front property line. This does not include the side yards on corner lots. 
    Good cause shall mean not having enough room to plant a street tree or other similar reason under this division. The term "good cause" shall be narrowly construed. 
    Heritage tree is defined as any tree that is eighteen inch DBH or greater located on any lot within the front yard setback. 
    Impact means the effect of operations on any area. 
    Land clearing means the removal of a tree or trees from a lot. 
    Lot trees means trees located on the front yard of the lot. 
    Operations means the locating, moving or depositing of any material, or any construction use or activity, or a combination thereof, which in any way modifies the condition of land subject to this chapter. 
    Owner means any person who has dominion over, control of, or title to any land in the city. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization or legal entity of any kind, and all tree removal companies and persons removing trees on behalf of self or others. 
    Protected area means the area between the trunk of a regulated tree, extending to the dripline of the tree canopy. 
    Protective barrier means a physical structure limiting access to a protected area composed of tape or other suitable materials which ensures compliance with the intent of this chapter. 
    Regulated trees means trees and heritage trees. 
    Removal or remove means the cutting, injury and/or destruction of trees by any method on any lands subject to this chapter. 
    Street trees shall mean any tree that is planted in the area between the sidewalk and the street. 
    Transplant means the digging up of a tree from one place on a property and the planting of the same tree in another place on the same property or off-site property approved by the City. 
    Tree means a woody plant with an erect perennial trunk which at maturity is 13 feet or more in height and which has a more or less definite crown of foliage. 
    Tree credit shall mean the credit given to a property owner who maintains existing trees on its property. 
    Tree fund means a fund to be exclusively used for activities associated with street and public area tree inventory protection, maintenance and planting. 
(Ord. No. 17-06 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 34-3. - Street trees. 
(a)  Installation of street trees: 
(1)  It is the policy of the city to have residential homeowners to install one tree, as set forth in Table 1 of this division, for every lot or parcel on the berm between the sidewalk and street. This section shall only apply where the property engages in new construction or renovation construction of an existing home. 
(2)  If the residential property owner maintains an existing tree(s) in the berm area, or moves a tree on their property to the berm area, so long as it is a tree as described in Table 1 of this division, this provision of the ordinance shall be deemed completed. 
(3)  The street tree shall be installed in the middle of the berm between the driveways on each lot or site condominium development for single-family residential projects. 
(4)  When the installation of the street tree is deferred until after construction of housing units, the city shall require a performance guarantee for tree planting. 
(5)  Nothing in this division shall compel a residential property owner who does not have a street tree on the berm area at the time of the enactment of this division, to plant a street tree. 
(b)  Removal of street trees. 
(1)  A residential property owner my petition the city administration to remove a street tree for good cause, as defined herein. This section applies to new construction, renovated home construction or existing homes with street trees that are in the ground at the time of the enactment of this division. 
(2)  When a residential property owner request the city administration to remove a street tree when the street tree's roots cause disruption to the sidewalk or to the sewer line, the city administration shall grant the request of the property owner to remove the tree. 
(3)  If a residential property owner removes a street tree, he or she must replace the removed street tree with a new street tree from Table 1. 
(Ord. No. 17-06 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 34-4. - Retention of lot trees. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to provide that if a property owner removes a heritage tree in the front yard that is six [inch] diameter breast height (DBH) or greater, the owner must replace the tree. If multiple heritage trees are removed, the same amount of trees must be replaced. If multiple heritage trees are removed and the same number of trees is not replaced, then the property owner shall pay a fee to the city for the tree fund. 
(b)  Property owners should use their best efforts to maintain heritage trees in their front yards and the overall tree line lots. Existing trees outside of the building footprint in the front yard that are greater than six inch DBH that are planned to be removed shall be replaced on the site with one tree in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Removed trees between six and 18 inch DBH shall be replaced at a rate of 25 percent of the total diameter breast height (DBH) or pay three times the amount of the cost to purchase and install a tree 25 percent of the DBH of the tree removed into the tree fund. 
(2)  Replacement trees shall be located on the site in question to provide the optimum enhancement, preservation, and protection of the area and may include replacement in the front, side or rear yards. 
(3)  Trees that are dead or diseased, with no visible growth as determined by the building official, are exempt from replacement requirements. 
(c)  This division does not apply to trees located in the rear yard and side yards of a residential property. 
(Ord. No. 17-06 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 34-5. - Tree fund. 
(a)  The city commission shall establish a tree fund consistent with this division. The proceeds of the tree fund shall be used for the replacement of street trees in city parks, or at the request of property owners who do not have street trees located in the berm area to complete a street canopy and can demonstrate a financial hardship in paying for planting a street tree. The city commission shall establish the amount required under the tree fund from time to time. The amount shall be no more than the actual cost of a replacement tree and installation cost. 
(b)  Should a property owner who is engaged in new construction on a residential lot retain existing heritage trees on their property, the property owner will be entitled to a tree credit as outlined below: 
(1)  Existing lot trees shall be indicated on a building permit or lot survey. 
(2)  The credit shall apply only to trees preserved with new construction. 
(3)  To obtain credit, the preserved trees shall be arranged to meet the intent of this section, be at least 2.5-inch caliper in size for deciduous trees, six feet in height for evergreen trees. 
(4)  Each deciduous tree preserved that is between 2.5 to 7.9-inch caliper in size and evergreen tree that is between six feet to 19 feet shall be calculated as one required tree, two credits for deciduous trees with a caliper of eight inches or greater and evergreen trees greater than 19 feet. 
(5)  During construction, tree protection fencing shall be placed ten feet beyond the drip line of the tree. The ground area on or within the drip line shall be maintained with vegetative landscape material or pervious surface cover. 
(6)  The city may allow pedestrian pathways, driveways or parking within the drip line upon determination that the setback from the trunk of the tree is suitable to reasonably ensure protection of the tree and the public. 
(7)  Storage of soils or other materials on or within the dripline is prohibited. 
(8)  If trees are lost within three years after completion of the construction, the property owner shall replace with new trees equal to the number of tree credits granted. 
(9)  Tree credits may be given to a property owner who plants street trees on the property owner's berm. 
(c)  Dead, diseased or discretionally removed trees that are not replaced require payment into the tree fund. 
(d)  The city administration shall, from time to time, establish the amount of credit a residential property owner is entitled to when complying with the tree credit portion of the tree ordinance. The city commission shall review and either approve or reject the findings of the administration. 
(e)  The city administration shall, from time to time, establish the amount of money a residential property owner shall pay when removing a tree and not replacing the same. The city commission shall review and either approve or reject the findings of the administration. 
(Ord. No. 17-06 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 34-6. - Installation and maintenance provisions. 
(a)  All street trees and lot trees and other trees located on a residential parcel of property shall be maintained in a healthy, neat and orderly state free from refuse and debris. 
(b)  Any dead, diseased street trees, lot trees or trees located in the berm area or front yard that are removed discretionally shall be removed and replaced within six months. 
(c)  Property owners should make a reasonable effort to install similarly sized trees to those being replaced; however, replacement plantings shall be at least 25 percent of the caliper or height of the tree being replaced, or the minimum size established in Table 1 whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 17-06 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 34-7. - Plant material spacing and size. 
Minimum plant spacing and sizes at time of installation shall be in accordance with Table 1: 
Table 1: Minimum tree size and spacing 
Type of Tree Material Minimum Plant Sizes Spacing Requirements Deciduous canopy trees 21/2 inch caliper 25 ft. on-center Ornamental trees 2 inch caliper 
6 ft. height (clump form) 15 ft. on-center  
The American Standard for Nursery Stock (as published by American-Hort) may apply to all replacement trees. 
(Ord. No. 17-06 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 34-8. - Trees that are not permitted. 
    The following trees are not permitted as they split easily; their wood is brittle and breaks easily; their roots clog drains and sewers; and they are unusually susceptible to disease or insect pests: 
Table 2: Prohibited Trees 
Boxelder Acer negundo Silver Maple Acer saccharinum Tree of Heaven Ailanthus altissma Catalpa Catalpa species Autumn and Russian-olive Elaeagnus species Mulberry Morus species Poplar Populus species Buckthorn Rhamnus species Willow Salix species Siberian Elm Ulmus pumila  
(Ord. No. 17-06 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 34-9. - Waiver from requirements. 
(a)  The city administration may determine that dimensional conditions unique to the parcel, or other factors, would prevent development of off-street parking area that a street tree or lot tree on the front yard is not required. 
(b)  If such determination is made, the city administration may waive, in whole or in part, this section. Criteria which shall be used when considering a waiver shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Existing natural vegetation. 
(2)  Topography. 
(3)  Existing and proposed building placement. 
(4)  Building heights. 
(5)  Adjacent land uses. 
(6)  Distance between land uses. 
(7)  Dimensional conditions unique to the parcel. 
(8)  Traffic sight distances. 
(9)  Financial hardship. 
(10)  Width of berm. 
(c)  Should the city administration deny a waiver to the residential property owner, the residential property owner has 30 days to appeal the decision to the city commission. The failure to timely appeal the decision to the city commission will result in the affirmance of the denial of the waiver. 
(Ord. No. 17-06 , 10-16-17) 
Secs. 34-10-34-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BLIGHT 

Sec. 34-26. - Purpose. 
    Consistent with the letter and spirit of Act No. 344 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1945 (MCL 125.71 et seq., MSA 5.3501 et seq.), as amended, and Act No. 208 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1949 (MCL 125.941 et seq., MSA 5.3521 et seq.), as amended, it is the purpose of this division to prevent, reduce or eliminate blight or potential blight in the city by the prevention or elimination of certain environmental causes of blight or blighting factors which exist or which may in the future exist in the city, and to rehabilitate already blighted areas in the city. 
(Code 1982,  9.76) 
Sec. 34-27. - Causes of blight or blighting factors. 
    It is hereby determined that the following uses, structures, conditions and activities are causes of blight, or blighting factors which, if allowed to exist, will tend to result in blighting and undesirable neighborhoods, and which if alleviated or remedied will tend to rehabilitate already blighted areas. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained any of these causes of blight or blighting upon any premises in the city, owned, leased, rented or occupied by any such person. 
(1)  In any area other than those having a valid junkyard permit or used car license, the storage upon any premises of junk automobiles is prohibited. For the purposes of this article, the term "junk automobiles" shall include any motor vehicle which is not licensed for use upon the highways for a period in excess of 30 days, or which does not have license plates attached thereto, and shall also include, whether so licensed or not any motor vehicle that is inoperative for any reason for a period in excess of 30 days. 
(2)  In any area zoned for residential purposes, the storage upon any premises of any building materials or construction upon such premises and such materials are intended for use in connection with such construction. Building materials shall include but shall not be limited to lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws, fence posts and fencing material of either wood or metal or any other materials used in constructing any structure or fence. 
(3)  In any area other than those having a valid junkyard permit, the storage or accumulation of junk, trash, rubbish or refuse of any kind, except domestic refuse stored in such manner as not to create a nuisance for a period not to exceed 15 days. The term "junk" shall include but shall not be limited to, parts of machinery or parts of motor vehicles, unused stoves or other appliances stored in the open, remnants of wood, metal or any other material or other cast-off material of any kind whatsoever whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use. 
(4)  In any area, the existence of any structure or part of a structure which because of fire, wind or other natural disaster, or physical deterioration is no longer habitable as a dwelling, nor useful for any other purpose for which it may have been intended. 
(5)  In any area, the existence of any vacant dwelling, commercial building, garage or other out building unless the same are kept securely locked, with windows kept glazed or neatly boarded up, and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by vandals or unauthorized members of the public. Provided, however, that the existence of any vacant boarded up building for a period in excess of six months shall be deemed to be a cause of blight or a blighting factor. 
(6)  In any area, the existence of any partially completed structure unless such structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid and subsisting building permit issued by the city, and unless such construction is completed within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1982,  9.77) 
Sec. 34-28. - Enforcement and violations. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the city director of building safety and inspection or by such other person as may be designated by the mayor. 
(b)  The owner, if known, and the occupant of any premises upon which any one or more of the causes of blight or blighting factors set forth in section 34-27 is found to exist shall be notified in writing to remove and eliminate such causes of blight or blighting factors from such premises within ten days after service of notice upon him. Such notice may be served personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner at the address shown on the latest city tax rolls, and to the occupant at the address of the premises involved. If the owner or occupant cannot be served personally or by certified mail, a copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises and published once in the official newspaper of the city. Additional time may be granted by the enforcement office where in his opinion bona fide efforts to remove or eliminate such causes of blight or blighting factors are being made. 
(c)  Failure of the owner and/or occupants to comply with such notice within the time set forth in the notice shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1982,  9.78) 
Secs. 34-29-34-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 34-51. - Determination. 
    Whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public; offends public decency; interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous any street, highway, navigable lake or stream; or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of this article. 
(Code 1982,  9.1) 
Sec. 34-52. - Prohibition. 
    No person shall commit, create, or maintain any nuisance within the city. 
(Code 1982,  9.1) 
Sec. 34-53. - Enumeration. 
    The following acts, conduct, omissions or conditions are hereby declared to be dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of the city, to be nuisances and to be unlawful: 
(1)  The permitting to run at large within the limits of the city of cattle, sheep, swine, horses, or other animals, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, or other domesticated poultry, or the keeping within the city of any animals, fowl or poultry under conditions causing offensive or noisome odors. 
(2)  The permitting or maintaining of any place in which a gaming table or other gambling device or apparatus is operated or any game of skill or chance or partly of skill or chance is played for hire, gain or reward by either the owners, operators, players or participants. 
(3)  The riding of bicycles by persons, other than the City of Plymouth or other on-duty police officers, upon any public sidewalk in the business or retail districts of the city. 
(4)  The printing, painting, staining, or impressing on or the nailing, posting, tacking, or otherwise attaching to, on, or upon, any telephone, telegraph, electric light or power pole, any tree or shrub or other installation, located in any street, highway or alley in the city of any advertising of any kind or nature whatsoever. 
(5)  The operation or the pushing or hauling of any engine tractor, machine, or conveyance having wheels with iron or steel flutes or lugs on, upon, along or across any paved street within the city without protecting the pavement of such street by planks or other covering to prevent injury to the same. 
(6)  The firing or causing to be fired, by any person, other than a police or peace officer of any rifle, revolver, pistol, or other gun or weapon in any of the public streets, alleys, parks, cemeteries or other public places in the city. 
(7)  The casting or depositing of ashes, dirt, stones, bricks, old automobiles or parts thereof, metals, paper, trees or cuttings therefrom, bottles, cans, garbage, waste, refuse or any other excess or abandoned material by any person upon lands not his own or upon any public street, highway, alley, park, cemetery, or other public place or property of the city within or outside of the city limits, provided, however, the deposit of such materials upon lands not owned by the depositor shall not be unlawful if done with the consent of the owner, person or official in control of such land. 
(8)  The obstructing of or the discharge into or the depositing in any watercourse, drain or sewer of the city, or in any drain or sewer connecting with those of the city, of any oil, grease, inflammable liquid, chemical, substance or material damaging or harmful to city watercourses, drains or sewers, or detrimental to the operation thereof or injurious to the health of the city's inhabitants by reason of discharge or deposit. 
(9)  The driving of any motor or other vehicle upon any city owned property, either within or without the city limits, other than upon highways, roads, streets, or alleys or upon parking areas, without authority of the city manager or city commission. 
(10)  The littering or maintaining or keeping of litter of any waste materials such as ashes, dirt, stones, bricks, old automobiles or parts thereof, metals, paper, trees or cuttings therefrom, bottles, cans, garbage, waste products or debris or any other excess or abandoned materials by any person upon premises of which he is the owner, occupant, or of which he is in charge, or upon any adjacent public street or alley; provided, however, that the keeping on the premises of suitable covered metal or plastic containers, in good condition, to hold such waste material until the same is removed from such premises shall not be construed to be a violation of this section. 
(Code 1982,  9.68; Ord. No. 97-3,  1, 5-19-97) 
Sec. 34-54. - Abatement generally. 
(a)  Where no other procedure is made specifically applicable by another provision of this article, any structure, condition or activity prohibited by this article may be abated by the city manager in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  The city manager shall first investigate the existence of the alleged nuisance to determine whether or not a nuisance exists and to further determine the person who has created or is committing or maintaining such nuisance. 
(2)  He shall then give written notice to the person responsible for the creation, commission or maintenance of such nuisance, specifying in particular the nature thereof, the corrective action to be taken to abate the same and the time limit for abatement of such nuisance, which shall be a reasonable time but not to exceed 15 days from the time the notice is served. Such notice shall be served in accordance with section 1-14 of the city Code. 
(3)  If, at the expiration of the time limit in such notice, the person responsible for the commission, creation or maintenance of any nuisance shall not have complied with the requirements thereof, the city manager shall carry out the requirements of such notice. 
(b)  The cost of such abatement shall be a debt owed the city by the person responsible for the commission, creation or maintenance of such nuisance and if the nuisance is attributable to the use, occupancy or ownership of any land or premises within the city, shall be charged against such premises in accordance with the provisions of section 14.22 of the city Charter. 
(Code 1982,  9.2) 
Sec. 34-55. - Abatement of specific nuisances; impounding. 
(a)  All nuisances described in section 34-54 shall be promptly abated. If it is necessary for the city police to take charge of animals or poultry, written notice shall be given to the owners or persons responsible therefor, if known, and such persons may secure the release of same upon payment of all charges and costs for the capture, custody, feeding and care thereof. 
(b)  In case such animals or poultry are not claimed within five days after being taken, a five-day notice of sale shall be posted upon the public bulletin boards of the city and at the time fixed such animals or poultry shall be sold to the highest bidder, and the balance of the money received therefor, after payment of all of such charges and costs and the expenses of sale, shall be deposited with the city treasurer who shall hold such funds and pay same to the former owner of the property so sold, upon due proof of his right thereto; provided, however, claim for any such money must be made within two years of the date of sale from which derived, otherwise, such money shall become part of the general fund for the use and benefit of the city. 
(c)  If the city shall be put to any cost or expense in the abatement of any nuisance, or in repairing any damage occurring as expense in an action against any person responsible for the commission or existence of the nuisance. 
(Code 1982,  9.69) 
Sec. 34-56. - Remedies severable. 
    Any action taken by the city to abate any nuisance under the provisions of any section of the city Code, shall not affect the right of the city to institute proceedings against the person committing, creating or maintaining any nuisance for violation of this Code nor affect the imposition of the penalty prescribed for such violation. As an additional remedy, upon application by the city to any court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the nuisance abated and/or the violation or threatened violation, restrained and enjoined. 
(Code 1982,  9.3) 
Sec. 34-57. - Remedies cumulative. 
    Proceedings under this article to collect the city's costs and expenses in abating nuisances shall not be a bar to criminal prosecutions under this Code and such prosecutions shall not preclude the recovery of such costs and expenses, the intent being that remedies and proceedings hereunder shall be cumulative to the end that nuisances may be promptly and economically abated. 
(Code 1982,  9.70) 
Secs. 34-58-34-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS STRUCTURES 

Sec. 34-71. - Prohibition. 
    No person shall maintain any structure which is unsafe or which is a menace to the health, morals or safety of the public. 
(Code 1982,  9.11) 
Sec. 34-72. - Notice and hearing. 
    The city commission may, after notice to the owner and after holding a public hearing thereon, condemn such structure by giving notice to the owner of the land upon which such structure is located, specifying in what respects such structure is a public nuisance and requiring such owner to alter, repair, tear down or remove the same within such reasonable time, not exceeding 60 days, as may be necessary to do or have done the work required by such notice. Such notice may also provide a reasonable time within which such work shall be commenced. 
(Code 1982,  9.12) 
Sec. 34-73. - Abatement. 
    If, at the expiration of any time limit in the notice issued under this division, the owner has not complied with the requirements thereof, the city manager shall carry out the requirements of such notice. The cost of such abatement shall be charged against the premises and the owner thereof in accordance with the provisions of section 14.22 of the Charter. 
(Code 1982,  9.13) 
Sec. 34-74. - Emergency abatement. 
    The city manager may abate any public nuisance under this division, if the public safety requires immediate action, without preliminary order of the city commission. Thereafter the cost of abating such nuisance shall be charged against the premises and the owner thereof in accordance with the provisions of section 14.22 of the Charter. 
(Code 1982,  9.14) 
Secs. 34-75-34-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NOISE ORDINANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2011-01, adopted Jan. 17, 2011, amended former Div. 3,  34-86-34-97, in its entirety. Former Div. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 98-1,  1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. 2000-03, 7-17-00. 

Sec. 34-86. - Scope. 
    Excessive sound and vibration are serious hazards to the public health, welfare safety and quality of life. A substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive sound and vibration may be substantially abated. The people of Plymouth have a right to and should be ensured an environment free from excessive sound and vibration that may jeopardize their health, welfare or safety or degrade their quality of life. It is the policy of the City of Plymouth to prevent excessive stationary sound and vibration which may jeopardize the health, welfare or safety of its residents or degrade the quality of life. This division shall apply to the control of all stationary sound and vibration originating in the city. This division is not designed to impede any person's First Amendment rights of freedom of speech. This division is not designed to impede the growth or economic health of the commercial or industrial sectors of the city. This division is designed to prohibit excessive sound and vibrations that are hazards to the public health, welfare, safety and quality of life only. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 1-17-11) 
Sec. 34-87. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this division apply to all sources of sound except: 
(1)  Aircraft in flight or in operation at an airport; 
(2)  Railroad equipment in operation on railroad rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 1-17-11) 
Sec. 34-88. - Purpose. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to create, assist in creating, permit, continue, or permit the continuance of any excessive, unnecessary, or unusually loud noise, or any noise which annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or which injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 1-17-11) 
Sec. 34-89. - Definitions. 
    The following acts, among others are declared to be loud, disturbing, injurious, and unnecessary and unlawful noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. Each such act which either continues or is repeated more than one-half hour beyond its inception shall be considered to be and may be prosecuted as multiple separate violations of this division: 
(1)  Excessive or unreasonable noise. Any sound that is plainly audible for a distance of more than 75 feet from the source. If the sound source under investigation is a sound amplification or reproduction device, the enforcement officer need not determine the title of a song, specific words, or the artist performing the song. The detection of the rhythmic bass component of the music may be sufficient to constitute excessive or unreasonable noise. 
(2)  Plainly audible. Any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided hearing faculties. As an example, if the sound source under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification or reproduction device, the detection of the rhythmic bass component of the music is sufficient to verify plainly audible sound. The noise enforcement officer need not determine the title, specific words, or the artist performing the song. 
(3)  Horns and signal devices. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, street car or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control or to give warning of intent to get under motion, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(4)  Radio, electronic sound producing devices and musical instruments. The playing of any radio, television, compact disk player, tape player, MP3 player, musical instrument, or amplified music or sounds in such a manner or with such volume, at any time or place, so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity. The operation of any such musical instruments or electronic sound producing device in such a manner as to be plainly audible for a distance of more than 75 feet from the source shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(5)  Loud vehicles. The operation of any automobile, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair or so loaded or constructed as to cause loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other unreasonable noise, including the noise resulting from exhaust, which plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the vehicle and unreasonably disturbing to the quiet, comfort or repose of other persons. The modification or elimination of any noise abatement device on any motor vehicle or engine or the failure to maintain the same so that the noise emitted by such vehicle or engine is increased above that emitted by such vehicle as originally manufactured. 
(6)  Hawking. The hawking of goods, merchandise or newspapers in a loud and boisterous manner. 
(7)  Whistle or siren. The blowing of any whistle or siren, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger. 
(8)  Engine exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, or stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which effectively prevents loud or explosive noises. 
(9)  Construction noises. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, or the excavation of streets and highways, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., unless a permit therefore is first obtained from the building department. 
(10)  Devices to attract attention, The use of any drum, loud speaker, amplifier, or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention for any purpose. 
(11)  Places of public entertainment. Except as otherwise permitted by the city commission as hereinafter, prescribed, the use, operation or permitting the use or operation of any radio or receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, CD player, MP3 player, amplifier or other machine or device designed for the production or reproduction of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of others in the vicinity, or with a volume louder than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which the device is operated and who are voluntary listeners. The operation of any of the above-named devices between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m., or in such a manner that the noise is plainly audible at a distance of 75 feet from the source of the noise will be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. The operation of any of the above named devices between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. is prohibited and a violation of this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 1-17-11) 
Sec. 34-90. - Exceptions. 
    None of the prohibitions herein shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles. Any authorized police, fire or emergency medical vehicle while engaged in emergency activities. 
(2)  Highway and utility maintenance and construction. Necessary excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways by or any public utility installation by or on behalf of the city, county, county road commission, or any public utility or agency of the state, during the night or on Sunday, when the public safety, welfare and convenience necessitates the performance of the work at such time. 
(3)  Public address. The reasonable use of stationary amplifiers or loud speakers for public addresses which are non-commercial in character or for business or commercial purposes so long as they do not unreasonably disturb persons on adjacent noncommercial property. 
(4)  City approved activities. City approved or sponsored events, parades, festivals or fairs. 
(5)  Athletic, musical, or cultural activities or events (including practices and rehearsals) conducted by or under the auspices of public or private schools. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 1-17-11) 
Sec. 34-91. - Liability of owner, lessee, or occupant. 
    If the person responsible for an activity which violates this division cannot be determined, the owner, lessee or occupant of the property on which the activity is located shall be deemed responsible for the violation. A person found responsible under this division shall be guilty of a civil infraction punishable by a fine of $50.00 to $500.00 plus costs. For a second offense within a two-year period, the fine shall be $100.00 to $500.00 plus costs. For third and subsequent offenses within a two-year period, the fine shall be $200.00 to $500.00 plus costs. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 1-17-11) 
Sec. 34-92. - Electronically amplified sound systems in vehicles. 
    No person operating or in control of a parked or moving vehicle, including motorcycles and mopeds, shall operate or permit the operation of an electronically amplified sound system in or on the vehicle so as to produce sound that is plainly audible more than 50 feet from the vehicle, except when a specific permit is first granted by the city commission. The term plainly audible shall mean any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided hearing faculties. 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 1-17-11) 
Sec. 34-93. - Violations and fine schedule. 
    Any person who shall violate subsection 34-92, except when a specific permit is first granted by the City Commission or when one of the exceptions enumerated in section 34-90 shall be found to apply, shall be guilty of a civil infraction. The fine schedule for violations of section 34-92 occurring within one calendar year will be as follows: 
First offense ..... $70.00 
Second offense ..... 100.00 
Third offense ..... 200.00 
Fourth offense and subsequent violations ..... 500.00 
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 1-17-11) 
Secs. 34-94-34-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SMOKE 

Sec. 34-101. - Dense smoke prohibited. 
    No person shall operate any stove, furnace, boiler or combustion apparatus of any kind, nor shall any person owning any stove, furnace, boiler or combustion apparatus of any kind, permit the same to be operated, in a manner so as to emit dense smoke and/or the ingredients thereof; provided, that the emission of dense smoke and/or the ingredients thereof for a period of 20 minutes in any one hour, once in every 24 hours, when a new fire is being kindled, shall not constitute a violation of this section; and, provided further that the emission of dense smoke and/or the ingredients thereof for a period aggregating eight minutes in any one hour and not exceeding two minutes of continuous emission, shall not be deemed a violation of this section. 
(Code 1982,  9.41) 
Sec. 34-102. - Smoke measurement. 
    For the purpose of defining the term "dense smoke" which shall constitute a prohibited density hereunder, the standards established by the "Ringelmann Smoke Chart," 1955 Edition, are hereby adopted, as published by the Department of Interior, Bureau of Mines (IC 7718) with its accompanying publication written by Ralph Rudolph Kudlich and revised by L.R. Durdick, as published by Bureau of Mines, Publication-Distribution Section, 4800 Forbes Street, Pittsburgh 13, Pennsylvania, in accordance with Department of Interior Public Notice Number 84932. Smoke of a density equal to or greater than the density described as number two on the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, shall be considered and held to be "dense smoke" as the term is used in this division. 
(Code 1982,  9.42) 
Secs. 34-103-34-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 

Sec. 34-126. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-03, adopted May 4, 2015, repealed former  34-126 in its entirety which pertained to the adoption by reference of soil erosion and sedimentation regulations and derived from Ord. No. 92-1,  1(12.1), 2-18-92; Ord. No. 2008-01,  1, 3-17-08. 
Sec. 34-127. - County enforcing agency. 
    The Department of Public Services Land Resource Management Division of Wayne County shall become the county enforcing agency in regard to Part 91, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control, of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended (Part 91), being 324.9101 et seq. of the Michigan Compiled Laws and the Administrative Rules promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality as amended, within the municipal limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-1,  1(12.2), 2-18-92; Ord. No. 2008-01,  2, 3-17-08; Ord. No. 2015-03, 5-4-15) 
Sec. 34-128. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-03, adopted May 4, 2015, repealed former  34-128 in its entirety which pertained to fees and bonds and derived from Ord. No. 92-1,  1(12.3), adopted Feb. 18, 1992. 
Secs. 34-129-34-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE 

Sec. 34-150. - Short title. 
    This division of chapter 34 shall be known and cited as the illicit discharge elimination program. 
(Ord. No. 18-06 , 12-17-18) 
Sec. 34-151. - Statement of purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This division establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this division are: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal storm sewer system by stormwater discharges by any user. 
(2)  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal storm sewer system. 
(3)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 18-06 , 12-17-18) 
Sec. 34-152. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Authorized enforcement agency means the City of Plymouth, through its municipal services department by its director of municipal services and his/her authorized representatives, which shall specifically include all inspectors and code enforcement, and any other individual designated by the city manager of the City of Plymouth to enforce this division. Where applicable the terms may also mean the director of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality or his/her designated official, and/or the United States EPA Administrator or his/her designated official. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    City means the City of Plymouth. 
    Clean Water Act means the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.  1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Construction activity means activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of five acres or more requiring an issued permit and small construction activities impacting one to five acres of land deemed to operate under a national permit. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    County means the County of Wayne. 
    Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illegal discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in section 34-156. 
    Illicit connections mean either of the following: 
(1)  Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited, to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency, or 
(2)  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
    Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(l4). 
    MS4 means a municipal separate storm sewer system. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), or by the State of Michigan under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C.  1342(b) and codified in the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act Protection at MCL 324.101 et seq., that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States or State of Michigan, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Person means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
    Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Storm sewer system or storm drainage system means a publicly owned facility by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
    Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Stormwater pollution prevention plan means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
    Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
(Ord. No. 18-06 , 12-17-18) 
Sec. 34-153. - Applicability. 
    This division shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed or undeveloped lands unless expressly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 18-06 , 12-17-18) 
Sec. 34-154. - Enforcement, responsibility for administration. 
    This division shall be enforceable by the city code enforcement officer at the direction of the director of municipal services or other authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 18-06 , 12-17-18) 
Sec. 34-155. - Minimum standards. 
    The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this division are minimum standards; therefore, this division does not intend or imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 18-06 , 12-17-18) 
Sec. 34-156. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the storm drain system or watercourses, any materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited; however, the following discharges are exempt from prohibition as described: 
(1)  The discharges and flows from firefighting activities if they are identified as not being a significant source of pollutants to the waters of the state. 
(2)  Discharges specified in writing by the director of municipal services as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Dye testing, when there has been verbal notification to the director of municipal services and state department of environmental quality procedures have been followed. 
(4)  Discharges permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(5)  The following discharges or flows if they are identified as not being a significant contributor to violations of water quality standards: water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources; landscape irrigation runoff, lawn watering runoff, and irrigation waters; diverted stream flows and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; rising groundwaters and springs; uncontaminated pumped groundwater, except for groundwater cleanups specifically authorized by NPDES permits; foundation drains, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains and basement sump pumps; air conditioning condensation; waters from noncommercial car washing; street wash water; dechlorinated swimming pool water from single-, two- or three-family residences. Other swimming pools shall not be discharged to stormwater or to surface waters of the state without NPDES permit authorization from the MDEQ. 
(b)  Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(1)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(2)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3)  A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to a storm drain system or MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(c)  Prohibition of direct dumping or disposal of materials into the MS4. The direct dumping of materials or discharges into the MS4 is prohibited except for those illicit discharges identified as not being a significant contributor to violations of water quality standards. 
(Ord. No. 18-06 , 12-17-18) 
Sec. 34-157. - Right of entry. 
    The director of municipal services and the city's code enforcement officer, or other authorized enforcement agency shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing of suspected non-stormwater discharges in accordance with the provisions of this article. Refusal of reasonable access to the director of municipal services, the city's code enforcement officer, and/or representatives of the authorized enforcement agency to any part of the premises is a violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 18-06 , 12-17-18) 
Sec. 34-158. - Suspension of storm sewer system access. 
(a)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The code enforcement officer at the direction of the director of municipal services or other authorized enforcement agency may seek immediate injunctive relief to suspend storm sewer system discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the storm sewer system or the waters of the United States or this state. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the storm sewer system or waters of the United States or this state, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the storm sewer system in violation of this article may have their storm sewer system access terminated by order of the district court, or other court of competent jurisdiction, if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The code enforcement officer or the director of municipal services will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its storm sewer system access. The violator may petition the city engineer for reconsideration and hearing. 
(Ord. No. 18-06 , 12-17-18) 
Sec. 34-159. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
    Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city engineer prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 18-06 , 12-17-18) 
Sec. 34-160. - Monitoring of discharges. 
    The director of municipal services has the right to require non-residential dischargers to install monitoring equipment as necessary, in accordance with court order, if a non-stormwater discharge is suspected. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(Ord. No. 18-06 , 12-17-18) 
Sec. 34-161. - Requirements to prevent, control, and reduce storm water pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
    The director of municipal services or his designee will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 18-06 , 12-17-18) 
Sec. 34-162. - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or water of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the director of municipal services within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Ord. No. 18-06 , 12-17-18) 
Sec. 34-163. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Whenever the director of municipal services or his designee determines that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this division, the city may issue a notice of violation to the responsible person and the owner of the property where the violation is occurring-requiring compliance within a period set forth within the notice. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination of hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and 
(5)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
(b)  Abatement of a violation. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the city may issue a municipal civil infraction citation and may seek an order of the district court, or file a civil suit with a court of competent jurisdiction requiring the restoration to be completed within an established deadline and authorizing the city or its designee to complete the work at the violator's expense. 
(c)  Penalties. Violations of this division shall be a municipal civil infraction as set forth within section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 18-06 , 12-17-18) 
Sec. 34-164. - Cost of the abatement of the violation. 
    In the event the violator fails to correct the violation as required, and the city undertakes the corrective action in accordance with an order of the district court, or other court of competent jurisdiction, within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The court order may provide that if the amount due is not paid within a timely manner, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Unpaid assessments may be placed on the city's delinquent tax roll and may be collected as unpaid taxes. 
(Ord. No. 18-06 , 12-17-18) 
Sec. 34-165. - Remedies not exclusive. 
    The remedies listed in this division are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state, or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies, including, but not limited to circuit court actions in law or equity. 
(Ord. No. 18-06 , 12-17-18) 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION AND EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; zoning, ch. 78. 
State Law reference- State fire prevention act, MCL 29.1 et seq., MSA 4.559(1) et seq.; crimes related to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq., MSA 28.397 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq., MSA 28.437 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 38-26. - General responsibility. 
    The fire department shall be charged with the prevention and extinguishment of fires, the protection of life and property against fire, the removal of fire hazards, the performance of other public services of an emergency nature assigned to it, and the conducting of an educational fire prevention program. 
(Code 1982,  1.81) 
Sec. 38-27. - Department rules. 
    The fire chief shall adopt rules and regulations for the government of the department, subject to the approval of the city manager, which shall be entered in a book of fire department rules and which may be changed and repealed by the fire chief upon notice to and approval by the city manager. Such rules and regulations shall designate the chain of command for the department so that the responsibility for the operation of the department shall immediately and automatically be vested in the ranking officer or member of the department present. 
(Code 1982,  1.82) 
Sec. 38-28. - Enforcement generally. 
    The fire marshal and fire inspector or members of the fire department shall enforce all applicable city and state fire prevention laws, regulations, codes and ordinances covering fires, the storage and use of flammables and explosives, the installation and maintenance of fire alarm systems, the maintenance and regulation of fire exits and all other matters and conditions affecting the prevention of fires, the preservation of property and the safety of persons within the city. 
(Code 1982,  9.202) 
Sec. 38-29. - Enforcement of applicable provisions. 
    It shall be the duty of the fire department to enforce all state laws and provisions of this Code governing the following: 
(1)  The prevention of fires. 
(2)  The storage and use of explosives and flammables. 
(3)  The maintenance of fire alarm systems, both automatic and private, and all fire extinguishing equipment. 
(4)  The maintenance and use of fire escapes. 
(5)  The maintenance of fire protection and the elimination of fire hazards in all buildings and structures. 
(6)  The maintenance and adequacy of fire exits from factories, schools, hotels, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theatres and all other places in which numbers of persons work or congregate for any purpose. 
(7)  Structures erected and uses conducted on premises located within the fire limits. 
(Code 1982,  1.83) 
Sec. 38-30. - Other duties. 
    The fire department shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Investigate the origin, cause and circumstances of all fires. 
(2)  Issue all orders necessary for the enforcement of state laws and provisions of this Code. 
(3)  Require and supervise from time to time fire drills from all schools and educational institutions as required by law. 
(Code 1982,  1.84) 
Sec. 38-31. - Age restrictions. 
    All firefighters, except the chief of the fire department, shall be not less than 21 nor more than 55 years of age, and able-bodied, provided that upon request of the fire chief and with the approval of the city manager, the age limit of 55 may be waived from year to year. The commission may require that each firefighter must satisfy certain minimum requirements of height, weight, education, and other qualifications which may be specified, and each firefighter must pass a satisfactory physical examination at least once each year. 
(Code 1982,  1.85) 
Sec. 38-32. - Fire marshal. 
    The fire chief shall be, ex officio, the fire marshal. The fire marshal and any of the officers or members of the fire department shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1982,  9.201) 
Secs. 38-33-38-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 38-56. - Adoption of fire prevention code. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of section 3 of Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909 (MCL 117.1 et seq., MSA 5.2071 et seq.), as amended, the International Fire Code (2015 Edition), published by the International Code Council, and the Michigan Fire Prevention Code, Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1941 (MCL 29.1 et seq., MSA 4.559(1) et seq.), as amended, are hereby adopted by reference; provided, however, that in case any provision of such codes shall differ from any requirement of this Code, the provision imposing the highest standards of safety shall be followed and enforced, and; provided further, that chief of the fire department or chief of the bureau of fire prevention or the bureau of fire prevention as used in such code shall mean the fire chief or the fire marshal or office of fire marshal, as the case may be. Complete printed copies of the International Fire Code (2015 Edition), published by the International Code Council, and Michigan Fire Prevention Code, adopted in this section, are available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 94-11,  1, 11-21-94; Ord. No. 98-9,  1, 12-12-98; Ord. No. 2015-02, 3-16-15; Ord. No. 17-07 , 11-6-17) 
Sec. 38-57. - Adoption of fire control measures and regulations governing conditions which could impede or interfere with fire suppression forces. 
    There is hereby adopted by the city the fire control measures and regulations as set forth in this section for the purpose of controlling conditions which could impede or interfere with fire suppression forces: 
(1)  Authority at fires and other emergencies. The fire official or his duly authorized representatives, as may be in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life and/or property, are empowered to direct such operations, as may be necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks, or other hazardous conditions or situations or of taking any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of their duty. The fire official may prohibit any person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene and may remove or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or object from hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately and shall not reenter the area until authorized to do so by the fire official. 
(2)  Interference with fire department operations. It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of travel of any fire department emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere with, attempt to interfere, conspire to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any fire department operation. 
(3)  Compliance with orders. A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of the fire official or interfere with the compliance attempts of another individual. 
(4)  Vehicles crossing fire hose. A vehicle shall not be driven or propelled over any unprotected fire hose of the fire department when laid down on any street, alleyway, private drive or any other vehicular roadway, without the consent of the fire official in command of the operation. 
(5)  Definition of authorized emergency vehicle. Authorized emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those which are defined and authorized under the laws of the state. 
(6)  Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles. Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, giving audible and visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately drive the vehicle to a position as near as possible and parallel to the righthand edge or curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle shall have passed, unless the otherwise directed by the fire official or a police officer. 
(7)  Vehicles following fire apparatus. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, other than one on official business, to follow closer than 500 feet from any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm, or to drive any vehicle within the block or immediate area where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(8)  Unlawful boarding or tampering with fire department emergency equipment. A person shall not without proper authorization from the fire official in charge of the fire department emergency equipment, cling to, attach himself to, climb upon or into, board, or swing upon any fire department emergency vehicle, whether the emergency vehicle is in motion or at rest, or sound the siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps or any equipment or protective clothing on, or a part of, any fire department emergency vehicle. 
(9)  Damage or injury to fire department equipment or personnel. It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt, or conspire to damage or deface any fire department emergency vehicle at any time, or to injure, or attempt to injure, or conspire to injure fire department personnel while performing departmental duties. 
(10)  Emergency vehicle operation. The driver of any emergency vehicle, as defined in subsection (5) of this section, shall not sound the siren thereon or have the front red lights on or disobey any existing traffic regulation, except when such vehicle is responding to an emergency call or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire. Tactical strategies such as, but not restricted to, move-ups do not constitute an emergency call. The driver of an emergency vehicle may: 
a.  Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of existing traffic regulations. 
b.  Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
c.  Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
d.  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
The exceptions granted in this subsection to an emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle, while in motion, sounds audible signal bell, siren or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle. 
(11)  Blocking fire hydrants and fire department connections. It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or restrict the access of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and fire department connections that are located on public or private streets and access lanes, or on private property. If upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation, obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the fire official shall proceed to remove the same. Costs incurred in the performance of necessary work shall be paid from the municipal treasury on the certification of the fire official and with the approval of the administrative official. The legal authority of the municipality shall institute appropriate action for the recovery of such costs. 
(12)  Hydrant use approval. A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of the fire department having jurisdiction for fire suppression purposes. This subsection shall not apply to the use of such hydrants by a person employed by, and authorized to make such use by, the water company having jurisdiction. 
(13)  Yard systems. All new and existing oil storage plants, lumberyards, and education or institutional complexes and similar occupancies and uses involving high fire or life hazards and which are located more than 150 feet from a public street or which require quantities of water beyond the capabilities of the public water distribution system shall be provided with properly placed fire hydrants. Such fire hydrants shall be capable of supplying fire flows as required by the fire official and shall be connected to a water system in accordance with accepted engineering practices. The fire official shall designate and approve the number and location of sufficient fire hoses and equipment housed in accordance with the approved rules and may require the establishment of trained fire brigade when the hazard involved requires such measures. Private hydrants shall not be placed into or removed from service until approved by the fire official. 
(14)  Maintenance of fire suppression equipment. A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of the fire prevention code except for the purpose of extinguishing fires, training or testing purposes, recharging or making necessary repairs, or when permitted by the fire official. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as permitted in this subsection, it shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished. Defective and nonapproved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the fire official. 
(15)  Street obstructions. A person shall not erect, construct, place, or maintain any bumps, fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses or any other type of obstruction in or on any street within the boundaries of the municipality. The word "street" as used in this article, shall include, but not be limited to, private streets or access lanes, as well as all public streets and highways within the boundaries of the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 94-11,  1, 11-21-94; Ord. No. 98-9,  1, 12-12-98; Ord. No. 2015-02, 3-16-2015) 
Sec. 38-58. - Establishment of limits. 
    That limits referred to in section F-3003.2 of the B.O.C.A. National Fire Prevention Code in which the storage of explosives, ammunition and blasting agents is prohibited are hereby established as follows: The limits shall be the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-11,  1, 11-21-94) 
Sec. 38-59. - Violation and penalty. 
    Any person, corporation, partnership or other legal entity who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of misdemeanor and may be fined as prescribed in section 1-13. 
(Ord. No. 94-11,  2, 11-21-94) 
Secs. 38-60-38-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EMERGENCY RESPONSE COST RECOVERY 

Sec. 38-81. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to enable the city to require reimbursement from those responsible (either intentionally or accidentally) for the leaking, spilling or otherwise allowing certain dangerous or hazardous substances or materials to escape containment, thereby requiring containment, cleaning and disposal by the city and/or its agents. 
(Ord. No. 92-10,  2(9.219(1)), 5-18-92) 
Sec. 38-82. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous or hazardous substances or materials means any materials or substances that have been identified by city, state or federal laws or regulations to be dangerous or hazardous, and shall include but not be limited to such substances as chemicals and gases, explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiologic (biologic) agents, flammables and corrosives, or substances and materials obnoxious by reason of odor, spilled, leaked or otherwise released from their container. 
    Emergency response means the providing, sending and/or utilizing public service, police, firefighting and rescue services by the city to an incident which involves the release of a dangerous or hazardous substance or material. 
    Expense of an emergency response means the direct and reasonable costs incurred by the city making an appropriate emergency response to an incident, including the costs of providing police, firefighting and rescue services, department of public works and/or other city personnel at the scene of an incident, and all administrative costs, directly related to such incident, which may accrue after the occurrence of such incident. These costs further include the salaries or wages of the personnel responding to the incident and the costs of equipment and materials which are used at the incident. 
(Ord. No. 92-10,  2(9.219(2)), 5-18-92) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 38-83. - Duty to remove, and clean up. 
    It shall be the duty of any person and any other entity which causes or controls leakage, spillage or any other dissemination of dangerous or hazardous substances or materials to immediately remove such and clean up the area of such spillage in such a manner that the area involved is fully restored to its condition before such occurrence. The fire department and engineering department will inspect such site to make sure the cleanup is in compliance with local, state and federal guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 92-10,  2(9.219(3)), 5-18-92) 
Sec. 38-84. - Failure to remove, clean up. 
    Any person who fails to comply with section 38-83 shall be liable to and shall pay the city for its costs and expenses, including the costs incurred by the city of any party which it engages, for the complete abatement, clean up, and restoration of the affected area. Costs incurred by the city shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, actual labor costs of city personnel, including worker's compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative overhead, costs of equipment operation, costs of materials obtained directly by the city, and cost of any contract labor and materials. 
(Ord. No. 92-10,  2(9.219(4)), 5-18-92) 
Sec. 38-85. - Submittal of bill. 
    The city finance department shall, within ten days of receiving itemized costs incurred for emergency response, submit a bill for same by first class mail or personal service to the person liable for these expenses as enumerated under this article. Such bill shall require full payment in 30 days from date of billing. 
(Ord. No. 92-10,  2(9.219(5)), 5-18-92) 
Sec. 38-86. - Enforcement. 
(a)  If any person fails to reimburse the city as provided and such person is the owner of the affected property, the city shall have the right and power to add any and all costs of cleanup and restoration to the tax roll as to such property, and to levy and collect such costs in the same manner as provided for the levy and collection of real property taxes against such property. 
(b)  The city shall also have the right to confiscate any vehicle and its contents at the time of the incident where such costs cannot be added to the tax roll, i.e. nonresident or nontaxpayer of the city. The city shall also have the right to bring an action in the appropriate court to collect such costs if it deems such action to be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 92-10,  2(9.219(6)), 5-18-92) 
Sec. 38-87. - Liability. 
    The ranking fire, police, emergency management, building department, department of public works, or other duly authorized official of the city, in charge of the scene, shall not be liable for any costs or damages incurred as a result of enforcement of any provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 92-10,  2(9.219(7)), 5-18-92) 
Sec. 38-88. - Personnel, equipment, material, agent costs. 
(a)  A schedule of personnel, equipment and material costs shall be formulated by each of the affected city departments, a copy of which shall be maintained on file in the appropriate department and in the finance department. The schedule of costs shall be revised and upgraded on an annual basis, to reflect any increases in personnel, equipment, or material costs. 
(b)  Noncity agent costs shall be that which is actually charged for the services rendered by an outside city agent or agency. 
(Ord. No. 92-10,  2(9.219(8)), 5-18-92) 
Chapter 42 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; housing code,  18-401 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Elliot-Larsen civil rights act, MCL 37.2101 et seq., MSA 3.548(101) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISCRIMINATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 42-26-42-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FAIR HOUSING 

Sec. 42-36. - Sale, lease or rental of housing. 
    It shall be unlawful for an owner, lessee or sublessee of real property, or any agent or representative thereof, to refuse to sell, exchange, rent or lease any housing accommodation or living quarters of any sort, within the city, because of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, age, sex, height, weight, familial status or marital status. 
(Code 1982,  9.271) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 37.2102, MSA 3.548(102). 
Sec. 42-37. - Lending. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discriminate in the lending of money, guaranteeing of loans, accepting of mortgages or otherwise making available funds for the purchase, acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any housing accommodations or living quarters of any sort within the city because of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry, age, sex, height, weight, familial status or marital status. 
(Code 1982,  9.272) 
Sec. 42-38. - Real estate broker, salesman. 
    It shall be unlawful for any real estate broker or salesman to refuse to make available for inspection or to refuse to accept offers to purchase, offers to lease or any other proposed agreements with reference to the sale, exchange or lease of real property because of race, color, age, sex, height, weight, familial status, marital status, religion, national origin or ancestry. 
(Code 1982,  9.273) 
State Law reference- Discrimination in real estate transaction, MCL 37.2502, MSA 3.548(502). 
Sec. 42-39. - Terms of privileges. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or sublessee of real property or any other person concerned with transactions in real property to discriminate because of race, color, age, sex, height, weight, familial status, marital status, religion, national origin or ancestry with reference to the terms, conditions or privileges of the sale, rental or lease of any housing accommodations or living quarters of any sort within the city or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith. 
(Code 1982,  9.274) 
Sec. 42-40. - Publication indicating certain preferences. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to publish, circulate, issue or display or cause to be published, circulated, issued or displayed, any communication, notice, advertisement or sign of any kind relating to the sale, rental or lease of real property within the city indicating exclusion of or preference for any person or group of persons based upon race, color, age, sex, height, weight, familial status, marital status, religion, national origin or ancestry. 
(Code 1982,  9.275) 
Sec. 42-41. - False or substantially misleading statements. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally present false or substantially misleading statements to the authorities charged with enforcement of this division or to sign a complaint for violation of this division based upon false or substantially misleading information. 
(Code 1982,  9.276) 
Sec. 42-42. - Inducement of violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, by threats, intimidation, coercion, extortion or conspiracy, to induce or attempt to induce any person owning an interest in real property in the city, to violate the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1982,  9.277) 
Sec. 42-43. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This division shall not be construed as barring any religious or denominational institution or organization, or any charitable or educational organization which is operated, supervised or controlled by or in connection with a religious organization, from limiting admission to or giving preference to persons of the same religion or denomination, or from making selections for the purpose of promoting the religious principles for which it is established or maintained. 
(b)  The provisions of this division shall not apply to the owner of a dwelling house, apartment building, or multiple housing facility of any sort in which such owner or members of his immediate family reside, who rents or leases two or less housing units in such dwelling house, apartment building or multiple housing facility. 
(Code 1982,  9.278) 
Sec. 42-44. - Permissible transactions. 
    Nothing in this division shall be construed as prohibiting any person from imposing any and all conditions and requirements relative to any of the transactions hereinabove described, provided such conditions do not concern race, color, religion, age, sex, height, weight, familial status, marital status, national origin or ancestry, and provided such conditions are imposed uniformly, regardless of race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry. Nothing in this division shall be construed as prohibiting the owner, lessee or sublessee of real property, or any person concerned in real estate transactions, from exercising absolute discretion in establishing the terms and conditions of the sale, exchange, lease or rental of real property or in any transactions involving real property, provided such terms and conditions do not concern race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry. Nothing in this division shall be construed as requiring an owner, lessee or sublessee of real property to offer such property to the public at large before selling or renting same. 
(Code 1982,  9.279) 
Sec. 42-45. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine as prescribed in section 1-13. 
(Code 1982,  9.280) 
Chapter 46 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; environment, ch. 34; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 46-26. - Functions. 
    The police work of the city shall consist of the following functions: 
(1)  The operation of motor and foot patrol units for routine investigations and the general maintenance of law and order. 
(2)  The maintenance of the central complaint desk at central police headquarters, the maintaining and supervising of police records, criminal and noncriminal identification, property identification, custody of property and the operation of detention quarters. 
(3)  The investigation of crimes, elimination of illegal liquor traffic and vice, and the preparation of evidence for the prosecution of criminal cases and offenses in violation of this Code. The police department shall enforce all provisions of this Code for which any penalty is provided, as well as all other laws applicable to and in force within the city. 
(4)  The prevention and control of juvenile delinquency, the handling of cases in which women are involved, the removal of crime hazards and the coordination of community agencies interested in crime prevention. 
(5)  The control of traffic, traffic education programs, school patrols and coordination of traffic violation prosecutions. 
(Code 1982,  1.71) 
Sec. 46-27. - Department rules. 
    The chief of police may prescribe rules for the government of police officers of the city, subject to approval by the city manager, which shall be entered in a book of police department rules and orders and may be amended or revoked by the chief of police upon written notice to the city manager. Such rules may establish one or more divisions within the police department, each of which divisions may be charged with performing one or more of the functions of the police department enumerated in section 46-26. Any such divisions shall be supervised by an officer of the police department, who shall be responsible for the particular functions of the police department assigned to the particular division supervised by him. It shall be the duty of all members of the police force to comply with such rules and orders while effective. Such rules and regulations shall designate the chain of command for the department so that in the absence or disability of the chief, the responsibility for the operation of the department shall immediately and automatically be vested in the next ranking officer or member of the department present. 
(Code 1982,  1.72) 
Secs. 46-28-46-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 

Sec. 46-51. - Return to owner. 
    The department of police shall be charged with the custody of such unclaimed personal property as may come into its possession which shall be kept for a period of two months unless the identity of the owner shall sooner be discovered. If the identity of the owner shall be learned while such property is in the custody of the department of police, the department shall notify the owner in writing that unless he shall reclaim the same within 30 days from the date such notice is given that he shall have forfeited any claim to the return of such money or personal property. Any person making a claim for the return of lost money or personal property shall establish his ownership to the satisfaction of the department of police and such money or personal property shall be returned to him upon payment of the cost of any advertising by the finder or expenses of storage incurred by the department. 
(Code 1982,  1.76) 
Sec. 46-52. - Return to finder. 
(a)  After any lost money or lost personal property has been in the custody of the department of police for two months, the owner has not been found or has abandoned his claim to the property, and there is no claim of ownership pending against such property, the same may be returned by the department of police to the finder thereof, if such finder has complied with the provisions of this Code regarding lost property in all respects. 
(b)  The department of police shall cause any property remaining in its custody to which there are no claims pending and no finder having any rights therein, except money, to be sold at public auction, reserving the right to reject any or all bids. 
(1)  Notice of the time and place of such sale shall be given by publishing notice thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. Such notice shall set forth a full description of such property. 
(2)  The department of police is hereby authorized to deliver and convey such property to the successful purchaser upon payment of the full purchase price without any warranty or representation as to title and with the understanding that if the rightful owner recovers such property in an action at law against such purchaser that the liability of the city shall be limited to the amount paid by the purchaser for such property. 
(3)  The proceeds of all such sales and any money which shall have been held for three months against which there is no claim pending either by any purported owner or by the finder thereof, shall be paid over by the department of police to the city treasurer to the credit of the general fund. 
(4)  Any such property not sold at public auction for want of bid shall be removed, destroyed or disposed of at the discretion of the chief of the department of police. 
(c)  The chief of the department of police may destroy any dangerous weapons or other articles which may be dangerous to store. 
(Code 1982,  1.77) 
Sec. 46-53. - Records. 
    The department of police shall keep a permanent record of all unclaimed personal property, the date taken into possession by the department and the final disposition thereof. 
(Code 1982,  1.78) 
Sec. 46-54. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to perishable produce which may be sold within four hours if unclaimed. This division shall not apply to abandoned motor vehicles, guns, munitions, spirits, or alcoholic spirits, which shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1982,  1.79) 
Chapter 50 - MULTICHANNEL SERVICE PROVIDERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 

Sec. 50-1. - Scope. 
    This chapter shall be effective within the geographical limits of the city, including any areas subsequently annexed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  3, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-2. - Construction. 
    This chapter shall be construed in light of applicable federal and state laws and regulations governing multichannel service practices which specifically includes cable television. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  2, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    A/B switch or input selector switch means any device that enables a viewer to select between a multichannel service and off-the-air television signals. Such a device may be more sophisticated than a mere two-sided switch, may utilize other multichannel system interface equipment, and may be built into television receivers. 
    Access channel or nonbroadcast channel means a government, education, or public channel which is carried on a multichannel system, but which is not part of any institutional network. 
    Activated channel means a channel engineered at the headend of the cable system for the provision of services generally available to residential subscribers of the cable system, regardless of whether such services actually are provided, including any channel designated for governmental, educational, or public use. 
    Alternative user charge means a charge used in place of a franchise fee that the commission requires as payment for the privilege of using the streets, easements, public ways, or rights-of-way, of the city in order to construct, maintain, and operate a multichannel system. An alternative user fee is not based on an MCS provider's gross annual revenues (as is the case in a franchise fee), but rather is based on the value of the city property that an MCS provider is using to construct, maintain, and operate its multichannel system. 
    Annual gross revenues means any and all compensation which is derived from the operation of the MCS system, and which is attributable to the subscribers or customers within the city. Further, the term "annual gross revenues" means any and all compensation, in whatever form (except as exempted by this definition), exchange or otherwise derived from all multichannel services, MCS operations, and MCS-related activities within the city including, but not limited to, revenues from subscriber rates, pay television, premium channels, service tiers, service clusters, institutional networks, advertising, installations, rebates or commissions received from travel or home shopping services, or commercial access. Also, unless prohibited or preempted by either federal or state law, annual gross revenues shall mean any, and all, compensation from all ancillary multichannel services, MCS operations, and MCS-related activities within the city, including, but not limited to, sale of MCS or MCS equipment, advertising stuffers inserted into periodic billing statements or other notices, rental or sale of video discs, rental or sale of video cassettes, rental or sale of descrambling converters, or other devices, rental or sale of remote control devices (including those with volume control), rental or sale of A/B or input switches, rental or sale of interactive games or software, rental or sale of digital radio equipment, sale of satellite antenna dishes, sale of satellite antenna-received programming for a programmer or distributor of services, or from revenues received as the billing agent, collector, or retailer of satellite antenna-received service. However, "annual gross revenues" does not mean any taxes imposed and/or assessed by law on subscribers (including state sales taxes, but excluding any state or local franchise fees) which an MCS provider is obligated to collect and pay in full to the applicable authorities. 
    Applicant means a person submitting an application or proposal to the city for a license or franchise (where required) to operate a multichannel system under the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter, and any state regulations. 
    Application or proposal are synonymous for the purposes of this chapter. An application or proposal means the process by which the applicant submits a request and indicates a desire to be granted a license or franchise (where required) for all, or a part, of the city. An application or proposal includes all written documentation, and verbal statements and representations, in whatever form or forum, made by an applicant to the commission/franchising authority concerning the construction, rendering of services, maintenance, or any other matter pertaining to the proposed multichannel system. 
    Assignment of a franchised MCS provider's franchise or transfer of a franchised MCS provider's franchise means any transaction or action which effectively or actually changes operational or managerial control from one person or entity to another. 
    Auxiliary equipment means equipment supplied by the MCS provider (such as a converter, remote control unit, or input selector switch), which enhances or assists in the reception or provision of multichannel service. 
    Basic cable television service means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals. 
    Cable advisory committee means the cable advisory committee for the city. 
    Cable channel or cable television channel or data channel means a portion of the electromagnetic or light frequency spectrum which is capable of delivering a television channel (as the term "television channel" is defined by the FCC regulation). 
    Cable operator or operator means any person or group of persons who: 
(1)  Provides cable television service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest (at least ten percent) in such cable system; or 
(2)  Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
    Cable service means: 
(1)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service; and 
(2)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming service. 
    Cable system or cable television system means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video, voice or data programming, and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the city. However, such terms do not include the following: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more broadcast stations; 
(2)  A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management unless such facility or facilities uses any public rights-of-way; 
(3)  A facility or a common carrier which is subject, in whole, or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system (other than for purposes of Section 621(c) of the CCPA, codified at 47 USC 541) to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video, voice, or data programming or service directly to subscribers; or 
(4)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility. 
    CCPA means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984. 
    Charge means a one-time or nonregularly occurring cost paid by the subscriber, and which is associated with the installation, maintenance, service, or repair of the multichannel service. 
    Collection charge means a charge or fee imposed on a customer by an MCS provider for such provider's efforts at collecting, or attempting to collect, a past due account. 
    Commercially impracticable means with respect to any requirement applicable to an MCS provider, that it is commercially impracticable for such an MCS provider to comply with such requirement as a result of a change in conditions which is beyond the control of such an MCS provider, and the nonoccurrence of which, was the basic assumption on which the requirement was based. 
    Commission or commission/franchising authority means the city commission or its lawful successor, which is the lawful legislative body for the city. 
    Converter means any electric, electronic, or other device, separate and apart from the subscriber's receiver that is capable of converting or changing signals to a frequency not intended to be susceptible to interference within the television, video, or data receiver of a subscriber, and by an appropriate channel or other type of selector may also permit a subscriber to view or otherwise use signals delivered at designated dial locations, or such other reception and use allocations as may be applicable and required for the practical use of the signal. 
    Customer means a potential subscriber, or actual subscriber, or actual user of the services and/or facilities of the multichannel system provided by an MCS provider. 
    DBS means direct broadcasting satellite. 
    DBS provider or direct broadcast satellite provider means any person who delivers and/or provides multichannel services from a satellite to a subscriber's residence through the use of a small earth or satellite station. 
    Decoder or descrambler means a device which enables a subscriber to convert a scrambled signal into a viewable or otherwise useable signal. 
    Disaster emergency or disaster or emergency means an imminent, impending, or actual natural or humanly induced situation wherein the health, safety, or welfare of all, or a representative portion of the residents of the city is threatened. A disaster emergency (by illustration) may include a snowstorm, flood, tornado, severe thunderstorm, hazardous waste infiltration, petroleum, munitions, nuclear explosion, or aircraft crash. 
    Drop means a small branch of cable, or other transmitting medium which connects the terminals on the back of the subscriber's receiver to the feeder cable or future technical equivalent on the street, easement, rights-of-way, or public way. 
    Easement means and includes any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means, to the city for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever, including cable television, or any other MCS provider. The term "easement" shall include a private easement used for the provision of cable service or any other multichannel service. 
    FCC or Federal Communications Commission means the federal administrative agency, or lawful successor, authorized to oversee cable television and other multichannel regulation on a national level. 
    Fiber optics means very thin and pliable cylinders, or strands of glass or plastic, or any future developed technical equivalent, used to carry wide bands of multiple frequencies. 
    Franchise means the initial authorization, or subsequent renewal granted by the commission/franchising authority in order for a person to construct, operate, and maintain a franchised MCS system in all, or part, of the city. 
    Franchise expiration means the date of expiration, or the end of the term of a franchised MCS provider, as provided under a franchise agreement. 
    Franchise fee means a fee or charge that the city requires as payment for the privilege of using the streets, rights-of-way, public ways, and easements of the city in order to construct, maintain, and operate a franchised MCS system. 
    Franchised MCS provider means a person that is awarded a franchise by the commission/franchising authority to construct and operate a franchised multichannel system, within all, or part, of the city. The term "franchised MCS provider" specifically includes the term "cable operator." 
    Franchising authority or commission/franchising authority means the city commission. This definition specifically includes the situation wherein the commission in its franchising authority capacity grants a franchise, or renews a franchise, or approves a franchise transfer by an applicant for an MCS franchise, or a franchised MCS provider. 
    Headend means the electronic control center, where incoming signals, including those of television broadcast stations are amplified, modulated, filtered, converted, or in any way processed or converted for redistribution to subscribers. The headend processes the multichannel system's return capability and provides interface between the subscriber and any institutional networks or any other networks, transmission, or retransmission facilities. 
    Hub means the satellite or remote receiving, processing and/or transmitting facility, enabling the signal to be extended beyond the physical/electronic capabilities of the multichannel electronics and/or to serve as a remote switching facility. 
    Institutional network means a communications network which is constructed and operated by the MCS provider and which is generally available only to subscribers who are not residential subscribers. 
    Late charge means a charge which is added to a subscriber's account or bill for nonpayment of a previously due and delinquent account. 
    MCS means multichannel service. 
    MCS provider or multichannel service provider means any person who: 
(1)  Provides multichannel communications service over a multichannel system and directly or indirectly owns a significant interest in such multichannel system; or 
(2)  Otherwise controls or is responsible through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a multichannel system. 
The term "MCS provider" or "multichannel service provider" specifically includes the terms "cable operator," "DBS operator" or "direct broadcast satellite provider," "MDS provider" or "multipoint distribution system provider," "MMDS provider," and "SMATV operator." 
    MDS means multipoint distribution system. 
    MDS provider or multipoint distribution system provider means any person who is authorized by the FCC to transmit (via super high frequency) specialized multichannel programming or data or facsimile transmission to subscriber-selected locations. 
    Multichannel programming service or multichannel service means: 
(1)  The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service; and 
(2)  Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. 
    Normal business hours means the weekday or weekend hours when an MCS provider's customer service office is regularly open for processing customer service inquiries, requests, and/or complaints. 
    Other programming service means information that an MCS provider (specifically including a cable operator) makes available to all subscribers generally. 
    Pay-per-view or premium channel means the delivery over the multichannel system of audio and/or video signals in an unintelligible form to subscribers for a fee or charge (over and above the charge for standard or basic service) on a per program, or per channel basis where such unintelligible or unusable form for viewing is made intelligible only to subscribers paying a separate fee or charge for the viewing or use of the signals. 
    Proposed abandonment of multichannel service or proposed withdrawal of multichannel service or proposed cessation of multichannel service means the anticipated, contemplated, imminent, or expected (either voluntary or involuntary) disruption, discontinuance, desertion, or removal of an MCS provider's operation and provision of multichannel service from all, or part, of the city for a projected period exceeding three months in duration. 
    Public, educational or governmental access facilities means: 
(1)  Channel capacity designated exclusively for public, educational or governmental use; and 
(2)  Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity. 
    Public way means any public street, public way, public place, or rights-of-way, now laid out or dedicated, and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in the area served by the MCS provider. 
    Rate means the monthly, bimonthly, quarterly, semiannual, annual, or other periodic price paid by a subscriber in order to receive standard or basic, tiered, clustered, premium, or pay-per-view multichannel service. 
    Revocation, termination, or nonrenewal means an official act by the city whereby the commission/franchising authority removes, repeals, or rescinds previously approved authorization for a licensed or franchised MCS provider to conduct the running of a multichannel system within the city. 
    Service cluster means the grouping, aligning, or packaging of one or more multichannel programming services by category (such as sports and/or news), or by rate, or by some other identifiable method, and charging a separate price or rate for each service cluster. 
    Service day means any day or other 24-hour period, other than a Sunday, in which employees of the MCS provider regularly respond to service requests and calls. 
    Service outage means the loss of picture or sound on all standard or basic subscriber channels, or one or more auxiliary programming channels (including tiers and clusters), and which is not caused by the subscriber's television receiver or by the subscriber. 
    Service tier means a category of multichannel service or other programming service provided by an MCS provider, and for which a separate rate is charged by an MCS provider. 
    SMATV means satellite master antenna television. 
    SMATV operator or satellite master antenna television operator means any person who: 
(1)  Provides multichannel service over an SMATV system; or 
(2)  Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management of an SMATV system. 
    SMATV system means a private multichannel system not crossing any public rights-of-way and which is located on private property, and serving private dwellings. Multichannel programming services are obtained via an earth station, amplification, and a distribution system. 
    Standard multichannel service means the lowest priced or least comprehensive service cluster or service tier available to residential subscribers. 
    Street means the surface of, and the space above and below a public street, road, highway, freeway, land, path, public way or place, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive, or other easement now or hereafter held by the city (including any street, as defined, which is acquired by eminent domain) for the purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rights-of-way now or hereafter held by the city (including any easements or rights-of-way acquired by eminent domain) which shall, with their proper use and meaning, entitle the city and MCS provider to the use thereof for the purpose of installing or transmitting multichannel system transmissions over poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduits, viaducts, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may ordinarily be necessary and pertinent to a multichannel system. 
    Subscriber means a person lawfully receiving multichannel service delivered by the MCS provider. 
    USC means United States Code. 
    User means a person utilizing a multichannel system and/or its equipment for purposes of production and/or transmission of material, as contrasted with receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity. 
    Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. 
    Workday means a day in which the city offices are regularly open for business. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  5, 9-21-92) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 50-4. - Statement of intent. 
(a)  The commission recognizes the United States Congress' intent in approving the CCPA (expressed in section 601, codified at 47 USC 521). As such, the commission reaffirms and adopts those principles and ideals as part of the city's intent with respect to cable television and expands its intent to cover all MCS providers. 
(b)  As expressed by congress, and adopted by the commission, its intent is as follows: 
(1)  Establish a local policy concerning communications and technologies; 
(2)  Establish franchise procedures and standards which encourage the growth and development of cable systems which assure that cable systems are responsive to the needs and interests of the city; 
(3)  Establish guidelines for the exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of cable systems; 
(4)  Assure that cable communications provide, and are encouraged to provide, the widest diversity of information and services to the public; 
(5)  Establish an orderly process for franchise renewal which protects cable operators against unfair denials of renewal where an operator's past performance and proposal for future performance meet the standards set by the CCPA, and this chapter; and 
(6)  Promote competition in cable communications and minimize unnecessary regulation that would impose an undue economic burden on cable systems. 
(c)  In addition to principles and ideals listed in subsection (b) of this section, the commission also expresses that its intent covers the following: 
(1)  Creating a set of regulations, standards, and procedures for MCS providers; 
(2)  Creating a comprehensive customer service and consumer protection policy for MCS providers; 
(3)  Providing for access and inspection of an MCS provider's books and records in order to monitor compliance with local, state, and federal laws, and any franchise agreement (if one has been granted); 
(4)  Creating a thorough construction and installation policy for an MCS provider's system; 
(5)  Providing for the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city in light of the MCS provider's construction, operation, and maintenance; 
(6)  Providing for emergency override capability, so that citizens of the city may be warned of a potential, imminent, actual disaster or emergency situation that exists in the area; 
(7)  Creating a thorough procedure for collecting and monitoring franchise fees and alternative user charges; 
(8)  Creating a viable alternative to franchise fees in case such fees, or their collection, are ruled invalid, unenforceable, or unconstitutional; 
(9)  Creating a thorough default and revocation procedure for licensed and franchised MCS providers; 
(10)  Providing for continuity of services in the event of city acquisition, abandonment, withdrawal, cessation of service, revocation, termination, nonrenewal, or expiration of an MCS provider; and 
(11)  Creating a performance review procedure in order to assist the city in its periodic evaluation of a franchised MCS provider's performance. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  6, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-5. - Administration; delegation of powers and authority. 
(a)  The commission/franchising authority is hereby designated the officer of the city which is responsible for the continuing administration of this chapter. 
(b)  Unless prohibited by federal or state law, the commission/franchising authority may delegate its powers and authorities with respect to an MCS provider to a duly authorized representative of the city, including specifically the cable advisory committee, the city manager, or an outside consultant. 
(c)  However, the commission/franchising authority may never delegate its franchising or revocation power to another person. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  7, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-6. - Applicability to an MCS provider. 
    Unless exempted entirely from this chapter, or exempted under one or more provisions of this chapter, or granted relief (by the commission/franchising authority) from one or more provisions and/or requirements of this chapter, then this chapter shall be applicable to an MCS provider, and this chapter shall have full effect and be enforceable in its entirety. Moreover, a nonexempt MCS provider shall be expected to comply with this chapter no later than nine months after the ordinance from which this chapter was derived becomes effective, except where a different compliance date is given or noted. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  8, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-7. - Exemption for certain MCS providers. 
(a)  Recognizing the inherent technological differences between various types of MCS providers, and taking into account a number of financial, operational, and maintenance considerations, the commission/franchising authority exempts certain MCS providers from complying with the provisions contained in this chapter. 
(b)  MCS providers who are exempted from complying with the provisions of this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  An MCS provider who provides multichannel service to fewer than 250 subscribers; 
(2)  An MCS provider who provides multichannel service to no more than two multiple-unit dwellings; 
(3)  An MCS provider who provides multichannel service to, or in conjunction with operating a hotel, motel, time-share facility, or recreational vehicle camp (but does not include service to a mobile home, or manufactured home park); 
(4)  An MCS provider who does not cross the rights-of-way (as defined or interpreted by either the FCC or an applicable court) in providing multichannel service to its subscribers; or 
(5)  An MCS provider who is exempted from this chapter as a result of an applicable judicial ruling. 
(c)  It is expressly understood that an exempted MCS provider remains exempted only as long as it meets one or more of the specifications of this particular section. 
(d)  It also is expressly noted that the extent of the exemption for a qualified MCS provider is only for this chapter. Consequently, such an exempted MCS provider is expected to abide by, and comply with, any other applicable city, state, or federal laws and regulations, including any applicable federal, or state consumer protection, or customer service laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  9, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-8. - Nonexempt MCS providers seeking relief from this chapter. 
(a)  Any MCS provider affected by this chapter may file a written petition, at any time, with the commission/franchising authority seeking relief from one or more provisions of this chapter. The relief requested may specifically include the delay in implementation (as to the petitioning MCS provider only) of one or more provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  In order to receive any relief from one or more of the provisions of this chapter, a nonexempt MCS provider must satisfactorily demonstrate to the commission/franchising authority that at least one of the following facts exist: 
(1)  The provision and/or requirement is expressly prohibited by federal law, the FCC, or state law; 
(2)  Where applicable, that the provision in question materially affects, and is in conflict with an expressed right that is specifically noted in an existing franchise agreement (but only for the term of the existing franchise); 
(3)  That the imposition of such provisions and/or requirements will create such an undue economic hardship on an MCS provider so as to imperil or eliminate an MCS provider's ability to provide multichannel service to a majority of current subscribers; or 
(4)  That the MCS provider has its own construction, maintenance, operation, or customer service policy, which the commission/franchising authority deems comparable to, or exceeding, any provision and/or requirement from which the MCS provider seeks relief. 
(c)  Unless delegated to another authorized representative of the city, the commission/franchising authority shall have the responsibility of determining whether an MCS provider's construction, maintenance, operation, or customer service policy, is comparable to, or exceeds, a similar provision in this chapter. 
(d)  As an alternative to seeking an exemption, or requesting relief, an MCS provider may petition for clarification on the precise intent and effect that one or more provisions or sections of this chapter has on the petitioning MCS provider. 
(e)  In accordance with this chapter, the commission/franchising authority may charge the petitioning MCS provider with the actual costs for processing such a petition, including any costs incurred by outside consultants who are retained by the city to review an MCS provider's petition. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  10, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-9. - Failure to enforce chapter. 
    A nonexempt MCS provider shall not be excused from complying with any of the requirements of this chapter, or any subsequently adopted amendments to this chapter, by any failure of the commission/franchising authority on any one or more occasions to seek, or insist upon compliance with such requirements or provisions. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  11, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-10. - MCS providers, assignees subject to present and future ordinances. 
(a)  Any nonexempt MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee shall be subject to, and expected to comply with, all ordinances now or hereafter adopted and in effect within the city, including this chapter, to the extent that such MCS provider has not received an exemption or relief from such ordinances. 
(b)  Any nonexempt MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee shall be subject to, and expected to comply with, all federal and state laws, and with all rules issued by all applicable regulatory agencies now or hereafter in existence. 
(c)  Any nonexempt MCS provider, its assignee, or transferee shall be subject to all lawful exercise of the city's police power. 
(d)  With respect to future ordinances noted in this section, nothing contained herein prevents an MCS provider from exercising any, and all, of its administrative, and legal rights as to the constitutionality, applicability, and enforceability of such future ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  12, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-11. - Repeal of prior inconsistent resolutions and ordinances. 
    To the extent that there is any prior resolution or ordinance which in part, or in whole, is directly inconsistent with this chapter, then such part, or such whole, of the prior resolution or ordinance shall be repealed to the extent of the inconsistency; provided, however, that this section shall not affect the continuing validity and applicability of any existing franchise agreement with an MCS provider classified as a cable operator until the effective date of its termination, or the effective date of any new or renewal franchise agreement entered into by such MCS provider and the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  13, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-12. - Resolution of inconsistencies with federal or state rules, regulations or laws. 
(a)  In any case of an actual inconsistency between any provision or section of this chapter, and any provision or section of a federal or state rule, regulation, or law, then the federal or state rule, regulation, or law shall not only supersede the effect of this chapter, but also control in any local application. 
(b)  The above subsection specifically includes any situation wherein an applicable federal or state judicial decision creates an actual inconsistency with any provision or section of this chapter. In such a situation, the federal or state judicial decision shall not only supersede the effect of this chapter, but also control in any local application. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  14, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-13. - Resolution of conflicts between this chapter and an existing franchise agreement. 
(a)  Where there is a conflict (actual or apparent) between this chapter and an existing and applicable franchise agreement, this chapter shall control, and prevail, unless administratively, or judicially determined invalid, unenforceable, or unconstitutional. 
(b)  In the case where a franchised MCS provider receives an exemption from one or more provisions or sections of this chapter, then this chapter should specifically note such exemption or relief, and to the extent that such an exemption or relief is inconsistent with a provision contained in this chapter, then the specifically noted exemption or relief language contained in the franchise agreement controls. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  15, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-14. - Arbitration. 
    If the commission/franchising authority and a franchised MCS provider agree to such, and the federal or state law does not expressly prohibit such, then arbitration or settlement mediation may be used to resolve any dispute that arises out of this chapter or franchise agreement. The terms and conditions relating to the arbitration or settlement mediation process (including possible cap on costs expended by both parties, composition of the hearing panel, and liability, if any for costs expended) shall be stated with specificity in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  16, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-15. - Criminal penalties. 
    Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  17, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-16. - Retained rights and authorities. 
(a)  Subject to preemption by, or other approval authority of, the FCC or any other federal or state governmental entity or agency, the commission/franchising authority retains the authority to provide for: 
(1)  The regulation and control of any multichannel system within the geographical limits of the city, and within the limits prescribed by applicable law; 
(2)  The award and grant of an MCS franchise (where required) subsequent to review of an application or proposal by the commission/franchising authority; 
(3)  The periodic review and/or amendment or repeal of all, or part, of this chapter; and 
(4)  If mutually agreed to with a franchised MCS provider, the periodic review and/or amendment of any existing franchise agreement. 
(b)  The commission/franchising authority, to the extent permitted by section 623 of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 543), retains the power to approve the rates or charges associated with the providing of multichannel service classified as cable service by an MCS provider classified as a cable operator. 
(c)  Subject to preemption by, or other approval authority of, the FCC, or any other federal or state governmental entity or agency, the commission/franchising authority retains the jurisdiction to enforce all laws and regulations relating to multichannel customer service practices and consumer protection. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  18, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-17. - Right to charge an MCS provider for costs associated with enforcement. 
(a)  In addition to any other rights the commission/franchising authority may have under this chapter, the commission/franchising authority specifically reserves the right to charge an MCS provider for any, and all, costs associated with enforcing this chapter. 
(b)  At any time the commission/franchising authority exercises its right, the commission/franchising authority must ensure that any costs charged to the MCS provider are no more than the actual administrative, professional, technical, legal, consulting, or financial charges incurred by the city. The reimbursable costs however, may include the comparable charges for any in-house work done by the city. Moreover, before the commission/franchising authority exercises its right, it may receive a recommendation from the cable advisory committee as to whether costs should be charged to an MCS provider. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  19, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-18. - Indemnity. 
(a)  To the extent permitted by law, a nonexempt MCS provider shall at all times defend, indemnify, protect, save harmless, and exempt the city, the city manager, the cable advisory committee, the commission/franchising authority, their officers, agents, servants, and employees from any, and all, penalties, damages, or charges arising out of claims, suits, demands, causes of action, or award of damages whether compensatory or punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in equity, which might be claimed now or in the future, which may arise out of, or be caused by, the construction, erection, location, products performance, operation, maintenance, repair, installation, replacement, removal or restoration of the multichannel system within the city by a negligent act or omission of an MCS provider, its agents or employees, contractors, subcontractors, independent contractors, or implied or authorized representatives. With respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced herein, attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and expert witness fees are included as those costs which may be recovered by the commission/franchising authority. 
(b)  The city, the city manager, the cable advisory committee, and the commission/franchising authority specifically reserve the right to retain counsel of their own choice, at their own expense. 
(c)  If an MCS provider obtains counsel for the city, the city manager, the commission/franchising authority or the cable committee, then any one of them shall have the right to approve counsel. 
(d)  Neither the city, the city manager, nor the commission/franchising authority shall unreasonably withhold its approval of counsel. 
(e)  With respect to an MCS provider's own defense of such actions, noted in this section, it is understood, that such MCS provider reserves the right to select and retain, without the commission/franchising authority's approval, counsel of the MCS provider's choice, at such provider's expense. 
(f)  Where arbitration is permitted in a franchise agreement, or agreed to in writing by the MCS provider and commission/franchising authority, the arbitration provisions shall specify to what extent costs are to be borne by either the commission/franchising authority, and the MCS provider. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  26, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-19. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  An MCS provider shall secure and maintain, for as long as it provides multichannel service to subscribers, public liability, property damage insurance, and umbrella coverage in at least the following amounts: 
(1)  Public liability: $2,000,000.00 per person/per occurrence; 
(2)  Property damage: $2,000,000.00 per any one claim; 
(3)  Umbrella liability: $4,000,000.00 with up to a $50,000.00 deductible and/or base insurance. 
(b)  An MCS provider's public and personal liability and property damage insurance policy shall specifically include the city, the city manager, the commission/franchising authority, their officials, agents, employees or representatives as additional insureds. 
(c)  The public and personal liability and property damage insurance policy shall be issued by an agent or representative of an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, and which has one of the three highest or best ratings from the Alfred M. Best Company, and which is acceptable to the commission/franchising authority, or has been rated acceptable by the state. 
(d)  Whenever needed to protect the interests of the citizens of the city, the commission/franchising authority may require an MCS provider to provide insurance for greater amounts than already listed. 
(e)  The public liability and property damage insurance policy shall contain an endorsement obligating the insurance company to furnish the commission/franchising authority with at least 30 days' written notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance. 
(f)  Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to the commission/franchising authority at least 15 days before the expiration of the insurance which such policies are to renew or replace. 
(g)  Before a multichannel system provides multichannel service to subscribers, the MCS provider shall deliver the policies or certificates representing the insurance to the commission/franchising authority, and each policy or certificate delivered shall be accompanied by evidence of payment of the premium thereon. 
(h)  If the state permits an MCS provider to self-insure, then the MCS provider may exercise its right and self-insure as long as the minimal insurance amounts outlined in this section are met and maintained. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  27, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-20. - Worker's compensation insurance. 
(a)  An MCS provider shall secure and maintain for as long as it provides multichannel service to subscribers, worker's compensation insurance, in accordance with the laws of the state. 
(b)  An MCS provider shall extend coverage of such worker's compensation insurance to all employees. 
(c)  Annually, a certificate shall be filed with the commission/franchising authority by either the insurance carrier or MCS provider showing such insurance to be in force. 
(d)  If such worker's compensation insurance is canceled, revoked, not renewed, or otherwise terminated, then either the insurance carrier or MCS provider shall notify the commission/franchising authority, in writing, within five working days of such cancellation, revocation, nonrenewal, or termination. 
(e)  If the state permits the MCS provider to self-fund workers' compensation insurance, then the MCS provider may exercise its right and self-fund as long as minimal state workers' compensation insurance requirements are met. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  28, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-21. - Performance and construction/completion bond. 
(a)  An MCS provider shall furnish to the commission/franchising authority, in an amount totalling at least $100,000.00, a performance bond or security bond executed by a surety licensed to do business in this state. The purpose of the performance bond is to ensure performance of any requirements imposed by this chapter on an MCS provider. Further, the purpose is to guarantee that should the MCS provider not fulfill any obligations imposed by this chapter (or where applicable a franchise agreement), then the surety will make whole (to the extent of the policy) any monetary losses incurred by the city. 
(b)  An MCS provider shall furnish to the commission/franchising authority, a construction/completion bond prior to the time it commences a construction, upgrade, rebuild, or repair/maintenance project that has a capital construction cost or outlay exceeding $50,000.00 in value. The amount of the bond shall equal at least 90 percent of the projected capital construction cost or outlay. The construction/completion bond shall remain in force at all times, unless relief is granted or a reduction schedule is detailed in an agreement between the commission/franchising authority, and the MCS provider. 
(c)  The construction/completion bond or security bond shall specifically guarantee that an MCS provider will timely abide by its construction, upgrade, rebuild, or repair/maintenance schedule for the multichannel system and/or any timetable for technical and service improvements or additions to the multichannel system as may be committed to, or agreed upon, from time to time, by the commission/franchising authority and MCS provider. 
(d)  If the city draws on a performance or completion bond or cash deposit as a result of an MCS provider's failure to timely discharge its obligations, or failure to construct and activate the multichannel system, or failure to complete a multichannel system upgrade or rebuild or repair/maintenance, then the MCS provider shall be required, within 30 days, to replenish the completion and performance bond or security bond to the minimal level required by the commission/franchising authority. 
(e)  Based upon such reasons as the commission/franchising authority might feel are necessary to protect the public interest, and welfare, the commission/franchising authority may raise the minimal amount of the performance bond. 
(f)  The performance bond or security bond, shall be in force at all times unless relief is granted or a reduction schedule is detailed in an agreement, between the MCS provider and the commission/franchising authority. 
(g)  In lieu of a performance bond, and construction/completion bond, the commission/franchising authority may accept a written guarantee of an MCS provider pledging the full faith and credit of the affected MCS provider should there be a breach in a material franchise term, or failure to meet any construction schedule. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  29, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-22. - Policy with respect to reports and records. 
(a)  The commission/franchising authority recognizes that advances in technology, and the adoption and application of multichannel laws, rules, regulations, and court decisions may have a profound effect and impact on an MCS provider in any given year. 
(b)  Consequently, it is incumbent that the commission/franchising authority take measures to reduce the risk that multichannel service or the multichannel system will be adversely affected in any given year. 
(c)  Therefore, the evaluation of legal, technical, financial, and character qualifications of an MCS provider is viewed as a constant undertaking on the part of the city. As a result, the commission/franchising authority requires that the operator maintain and retain all records and reports necessary for the commission/franchising authority to determine compliance with the obligations imposed on an MCS provider, and to determine the MCS provider's (legal, technical, financial, and character) qualifications. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  30, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-23. - Furnishing of reports. 
(a)  At any time the FCC or another federal or state agency requires or requests the submission of reports, data, or other information by a nonexempt multichannel service provider, then such MCS provider shall, at the same time, without a separate or specific request, submit those reports, data, or other information to the commission/franchising authority. However, unless specifically authorized by the state, an MCS provider shall not be required to submit state or federal tax returns, or any information exempted under federal privacy laws, including Section 631 of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 551). 
(b)  With respect to the reports required by this chapter, it is noted that a nonexempted MCS provider shall timely submit any required report including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  An annual compliance statement in the manner set forth in this chapter; 
(2)  A periodic gross revenue statement in the manner set forth in this chapter; 
(3)  Preventative maintenance reports in the manner set forth in this chapter; 
(4)  Copies, if applicable, of the MCS provider's FCC Form 395-A (or successor form), or any supplemental forms relating to equal employment opportunity, and fair contracting practices; and 
(5)  Any other reports or information required by another section of this chapter, or by the commission/franchising authority which are necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  31, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-24. - Books and records. 
(a)  An MCS provider shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts, and records of the business and operations under, and in connection with, the MCS system. 
(b)  The commission/franchising authority shall have the right to review (either by mail or at the MCS provider's local office) all records (pertaining to an MCS provider's cable and/or multichannel operations) on five working days' written notice, unless specifically exempted by the commission/franchising authority. Such review, unless mutually agreed upon, or judicially ordered should occur within the MCS provider's normal business hours. 
(c)  The commission/franchising authority shall have the right to hire, at its own expense, an independent certified public accountant, or other business or financial expert, to review the books and records of an MCS provider. If after a financial audit it is determined that the MCS provider has underpaid amounts owed to the city, then the city may require the MCS provider to reimburse the city for the actual cost of the audit. 
(d)  A false entry into the books and/or records of an MCS provider, made by an MCS provider, of a material and substantial fact shall constitute a material violation of this chapter. 
(e)  An MCS provider, at the local office shall keep complete and accurate books and records of the key aspects of the multichannel system's operation for at least the preceding three years in such a manner that all matters pertaining to the city can be easily produced and/or verified at the city's request. Also, the MCS provider shall keep, at its local office any other applicable records and information that may be required by any other federal or state agency having jurisdiction over MCS providers. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  32, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-25. - Annual compliance statement required. 
(a)  Within 180 days from the date that the ordinance from which this chapter was derived becomes effective, the commission/franchising authority shall develop an MCS provider's compliance statement in an effort to determine whether such MCS provider is complying with the various provisions and/or requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Prior to December 1, of each calendar year, the city shall furnish to each MCS provider, a compliance statement. 
(c)  Prior to December 31, of each calendar year, each nonexempt MCS provider shall return to the commission/franchising authority a completed and executed (by owner or officer) compliance statement. 
(d)  There shall be no charge or fee associated with returning the annual compliance statement. However, if the MCS provider supplies incomplete information which requires independent verification by the city or a consultant hired by the city, then the MCS provider may be required to reimburse the city for all costs associated with the independent verification. Moreover, failure to submit a statement by the deadline, or the provision of false information within a statement, may subject an affected MCS provider to any, and all, penalties and fines listed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  36, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-26. - Applicability of state consumer sales practices laws. 
    In addition to any and all requirements of this chapter, any MCS provider shall comply with, and abide by, all applicable provisions of any state law concerning consumer sales practices. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  37, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-27. - Notification of customer's and MCS provider's rights and responsibilities-General policy. 
(a)  The commission/franchising authority recognizes that it is critical that a customer of an MCS provider fully understands and realizes the rights and responsibilities of both the customer and MCS provider with respect to the provision, maintenance, and repair of multichannel service. 
(b)  Further, the commission/franchising authority believes that if sufficient information is provided to a customer on certain customer service practices such as rates, billing periods, number and types of services provided, and rules concerning equipment use and return, then that customer will have the information necessary to make an informed decision on what, if any, multichannel services to subscribe to, and receive. 
(c)  In order to provide customers with the variety of information needed to make an informed decision, and to ensure that customers are notified of their, and the MCS provider's rights and responsibilities with respect to the multichannel system, an MCS provider must provide a customer with a written notice of a customer's and MCS provider's rights and responsibilities with respect to the provision of multichannel service. 
(d)  The notice of a customer's and MCS provider's rights and responsibilities with respect to the provision of multichannel service shall be provided at the time of initial installation. Thereafter, a subscriber shall be provided with a written notice at least once every 12 months. If however, an MCS provider amends, repeals, adds, deletes, modifies, or makes other changes to any customer service practice that is required in this chapter, then such MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with such written notification at least 30 days prior to the effective date of such amendment, repeal, addition, deletion, modification, or other change. 
(e)  Unless expressly prohibited by the state, an MCS provider may comply with the notice requirements by providing such notice over the MCS system, on a channel clearly designated for the dissemination of such information. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  38, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-28. - Same-Provision of multichannel service; minimum contents. 
(a)  At the time an MCS provider is required to furnish an initial or annual notice, such notice shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  An up-to-date listing of the specific multichannel services provided clearly indicating and isolating the standard and/or basic, premium, and informational services offered, as well as the service tiers or service clusters offered; 
(2)  Notification of a subscriber's ability to purchase or lease, from the MCS provider, a lock box, parental control mechanism, or other device which will prohibit the viewing of a particular multichannel service during a period selected by the subscriber; 
(3)  Pursuant to FCC regulations, a subscriber's ability of purchasing or using an A/B or input selector switch; 
(4)  A comprehensive listing and explanation of all rates and charges (including rates for standard or basic and premium channels/services, particular service tiers or service clusters, current discount or promotional fees, installation charges, and security deposits, if any); 
(5)  If service clustering is available, then a description and explanation of any penalties, credits, restrictions, upcoming (within 60 days of the notice) service clustering changes or differing alignments, or other pertinent information; 
(6)  A comprehensive listing and explanation of all billing options available; 
(7)  The customer service office hours and telephone number in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this chapter; 
(8)  The billing practices of an MCS provider in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this chapter; 
(9)  The specific customer complaint/inquiry resolution policy that is adopted and followed by an MCS provider and which is consistent with the parameters set forth in this chapter; 
(10)  If applicable, and permitted, the rules and regulations for using any facilities, including a studio or mobile van of an MCS provider; 
(11)  The method of securing a voluntary disconnection in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this chapter; 
(12)  The extent of the credit/refund policy in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this chapter; 
(13)  The equipment use and return policy together with any required security deposits in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this chapter; and 
(14)  The additional rights of blind, hearing-impaired or ambulatory impaired customers in a manner consistent with the specific policy set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  The notice shall be written in plain, simple to understand English. The notice shall contain no fine print, and any exclusions, limitations, or caveats shall be clearly indicated as such in the notice. 
(c)  The notice may be delivered to a subscriber via an insert in the subscriber's periodic invoice, or through a special mailing, or over an MCS channel clearly designated for the dissemination of such information to be run continuously for a minimum duration of one week each calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  39, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-29. - Billing practices. 
(a)  Within the notice that is required by this chapter, subscribers shall be informed of at least the following practices of an MCS provider: 
(1)  Billing procedures (including payments necessary to avoid discontinuance of service); 
(2)  Payment due and delinquent dates; 
(3)  Amount or percentage of late charges, if any; 
(4)  Advance billing options; 
(5)  Resolution procedures for billing disputes, complaints, and inquiries; 
(6)  Refund policy for service interruptions, substandard signal quality, or uncontracted service; 
(7)  Current service rates in a detailed and understandable format; 
(8)  Procedure and amount of charges for installation, reconnection or relocation of an MCS provider's facilities and/or equipment; 
(9)  Current schedule and explanation for any billed charges or other nonregularly occurring fees invoiced to subscribers; 
(10)  Any lower-income or fixed-income rates together with any qualifications to obtain such rates; and 
(11)  Any current promotional rates, including discount rates, and incentive rates. 
(b)  Existing subscribers shall be informed of the items listed in subsection (a) of this section at least once every 12 months. 
(c)  Whenever there is a change in an MCS provider's billing practices or payment requirements, all subscribers must be notified in writing at least 30 days before such billing practices or payment requirements become effective. 
(d)  In any case where a subscriber requests a cancellation or reduction of service within 30 days after the notification of a scheduled rate or charge adjustment, then the subscriber's liability for the newly implemented rate or charge shall cease from the moment that the rate or charge adjustment becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  40, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-30. - Billing credit or refunds. 
(a)  An MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with credit for a service outage or interruption exceeding six hours in duration. 
(b)  Where not expressly prohibited by the state, the commission/franchising authority may prescribe rules for giving credit to a subscriber in cases of substandard signal or picture quality. 
(c)  In the case of a charge for unsolicited service, an MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with an adjustment or billing credit on the next available billing statement. Moreover, in such a case, an MCS provider shall not consider a subscriber delinquent for failure to pay a charge for unsolicited service. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  41, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-31. - Negative option promotional packages. 
(a)  An MCS provider may not bill or invoice any subscriber for any multichannel service that is not affirmatively requested by the subscriber. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, a subscriber's affirmative request need not be in writing, but an MCS provider relying on an oral request must keep an accurate, precise, and exact record of the date, and time on which, and the CSR, or service technician to whom, the request was made. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, a subscriber shall be deemed to have affirmatively requested a multichannel service if: 
(1)  The subscriber voluntarily makes payment for the multichannel service after an initial free trial period; and 
(2)  There was included, in the notice or advertising material describing the service, a statement clearly advising the subscriber that such subscriber has incurred no obligation to pay for such service, and that such subscriber need not take any action to avoid incurring any such obligation. 
(d)  Should a subscriber be charged for a multichannel service in violation of this section, the MCS provider shall provide a subscriber with an adjustment or billing credit on the next available billing statement. Moreover, in such case, an MCS provider shall not consider a subscriber delinquent for failure to pay a charge for a nonaffirmatively requested multichannel service. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  42, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-32. - Multiple changes of service tiers or service clusters within a 360-day period. 
(a)  To prevent possible bait-and-switch tactics, and to promote stability with respect to multichannel services provided on a multichannel system, an MCS provider may not switch any particular multichannel service from one service tier or service cluster more than twice during any 365-day period. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section should be construed as mandating any particular programming service being provided to a subscriber. Nor should this section be construed as requiring any particular programming service be provided on a particular tier or cluster. Rather, this section is designed to promote tier or cluster stability, so that a subscriber may choose a tier or cluster that best suits the subscriber's individual programming needs. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  43, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-33. - Supplemental disclosure contained within billing statement. 
(a)  To the extent permitted by federal and state law, and as both a matter of customer service and consumer protection, the commission/franchising authority is authorized to implement supplemental disclosure rules for information contained within a billing statement under certain circumstances. 
(b)  The circumstances referred to in subsection (a) of this section are the following: 
(1)  Should the MCS provider choose to designate any applicable franchise fee as a separate item on a subscriber's billing statement; 
(2)  Should the MCS provider choose to designate any required or voluntary public, educational, or governmental (PEG) access fees as a separate item on a subscriber's billing statement; or 
(3)  Should the MCS provider choose to designate any, or all, contributions to the city as a separate item on a subscriber's billing statement. 
(c)  Though not exhaustive, the commission/franchising authority may require the following types of supplemental disclosure to be contained within the billing statement: 
(1)  An MCS provider's actual cost for any, and all, multichannel services provided over the multichannel system; 
(2)  An MCS provider's aggregate cost for the multichannel services provided over the multichannel system; 
(3)  Any, and all components that are part of the MCS provider's rate or charge base; or 
(4)  The portion or percentage of a subscriber's bill or invoice that is forwarded or otherwise paid (as an administrative charge) to the MCS provider's parent company. 
(d)  In those instances where the commission/franchising authority requires supplemental disclosure, the commission/franchising authority shall give the affected MCS provider no less than 270 days' written notice prior to the initial billing cycle that such supplemental disclosure shall be contained within a subscribers' billing statement. However, if the MCS provider deletes the subject information from the billing statement within 270 days, the commission/franchising authority's previous action will automatically be rescinded. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  44, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-34. - Customer service hours; capabilities of customer service office; telephones. 
(a)  In order to facilitate the needs of the local customers, a nonexempt MCS provider shall maintain a customer service office which is both within the city, and easily accessible to customers. An MCS provider may be exempted from the requirement of maintaining a local customer service office, if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The affected MCS provider provides multichannel service to fewer than 250 subscribers; and 
(2)  The affected MCS provider can satisfactorily demonstrate to the commission/franchising authority, that such MCS provider can fashion a means of ensuring that a customer's service and billing inquiries/complaints are resolved within the time frames established in this chapter. 
(b)  The customer service office shall be open at least 40 hours per week (exclusive of holidays). 
(c)  Within the 40 hours per week that a customer service office must be open, an MCS provider must provide office hours either on at least two evenings (after 5:00 p.m.), or on Saturdays. 
(d)  The customer service office should have an adequate and knowledgeable staff in order to handle the vast majority of customer service inquiries, specifically including, but not limited to: billing inquiries, refunds, service outages, equipment service and repair, payment of bills and other charges, and inquiries from disabled or physically-impaired customers. 
(e)  MCS providers shall make available to customers a monthly, bimonthly, or weekly multichannel programming service guide, listing and/or detailing the programs and services available during the time period. In addition to providing a programming service guide via the mail, or a newspaper, or third party, the MCS provider may disseminate the information over a multichannel designated as a program preview or program listing channel. 
(f)  At least annually, any nonexempt MCS provider shall certify to the commission/franchising authority that each customer service representative (CSR) has taken and passed an MCS provider-implemented course designed to train CSRs to handle their jobs in a courteous, efficient, and responsive manner. The requirement of this subsection only, shall not apply to an MCS provider who either has five or fewer employees, or a single CSR. 
(g)  A nonexempt MCS provider shall maintain at least one toll-free and/or local telephone number to accommodate normal business inquiries. 
(h)  A nonexempt MCS provider shall maintain a separate 24-hour toll-free telephone number to facilitate calls concerning repair of equipment and extended interruption of service. During any hours that the customer service office is open, the MCS provider must have or make available in-house personnel to address a customer's inquiries. During other hours, a telephone may be manned by an automatic answering device, provided that in the case of any reported loss of any level of service the use of an answering device or answering service still results in an initial phone call by the MCS provider within 60 minutes, in order to at least determine the extent of the outage. The MCS provider shall not be required to make in-person telephone contacts to subscribers at a rate which exceeds 60 calls per hour, and shall not be required to make such calls between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. The requirement of this subsection only, shall not apply to an MCS provider who either has five or fewer employees, or a single CSR. 
(i)  A nonexempt MCS provider shall maintain a 24-hour recorded message, updated daily, which reports and informs citizens of the street and facilities which are, or will be, affected by the MCS provider's work on its system. 
(j)  A nonexempt MCS provider shall have adequate staff and/or extension lines (except during special marketing promotion periods, peak billing cycles, and service outages), in order to handle an average of 20 phone calls of five minutes duration per hour. The requirement of this subsection only, shall not apply to an MCS provider who either has five or fewer employees, or a single CSR. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  45, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-35. - Special service requirements for blind, hearing-impaired, or ambulatory-impaired customers. 
    In addition to any other requirements mandated by this chapter, or by federal or state law, an MCS provider shall comply with the following special service requirements for blind, hearing-impaired, or ambulatory-impaired customers: 
(1)  Provide wheelchair accessibility to an MCS provider's customer service office; 
(2)  For any customer declared legally blind by the state, an MCS provider must provide, if requested by such customer, large type, braille, voice synthesized or functionally equivalent notices, bills, and other pertinent multichannel system information; 
(3)  Provide at a nondiscriminatory cost, a special closed-captioned converter for the hearing impaired; 
(4)  Provide at a nondiscriminatory cost, a remote control device and/or converter for wheelchair subscribers or subscribers with a permanent medical or physical ambulatory impairment; 
(5)  Where applicable, provide modified or special instructions for use of equipment by individuals who have physical impairments; and 
(6)  In times of a disaster emergency or other instances requiring an emergency alert, mandating an all channel video blanking capability, so that all channels would be blanked simultaneously with the audio alert signal, in order to increase the likelihood that hearing and sight-impaired customers would be alerted. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  46, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-36. - Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited. 
(a)  An MCS provider shall not, as to rules, regulations, rates, charges, provision of service, or use of a provider's facilities and equipment, make, allow, or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person, nor subject any person to prejudice or disadvantage on the basis of age, race, creed, color, sex, national origin, handicap, religious affiliation or location of residence. 
(b)  Consistent with section 621(a)(3) of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 541(a)(3)), MCS providers classified as cable operators shall not deny cable service, or the extension of cable service, to any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides. 
(c)  Subsection (a) of this section, however, does not prohibit an MCS provider from offering a promotional or incentive discount rate or charge as long as the rate or charge does not exceed 120 days in length. 
(d)  Subsection (a) of this section, also does not prohibit an MCS provider from denying service based on location of residence, if that residence is outside the parameters for line extension as detailed in a franchise agreement (if applicable). 
(e)  Subsection (a) of this section also does not prohibit an MCS provider from implementing a carefully designed no-frills service tier or service cluster for lower-income, and/or fixed income individuals. 
(f)  Subsection (a) of this section also does not prohibit an MCS provider from making agreements or entering into multichannel service agreements with multiple dwelling unit owners (including hotel, motel, and mobile park owners) to provide multichannel service under a bulk billing or other type of arrangement. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  47, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-37. - Use of equipment, return of equipment, security deposits, return. 
(a)  Prior to formally delivering any equipment, including auxiliary equipment (such as a converter, input selector switch, or video control recorder) to a customer, an MCS provider shall have tested a representative sample (at least ten percent) of such equipment to make sure that it is in proper working order. 
(b)  If needed for proper operation, or requested by a customer, an MCS provider shall deliver to a customer, handwritten or typed instructions detailing the proper use of rented, loaned, or purchased equipment. Unless required by another section of this chapter, an MCS provider may comply with this section by delivering the manufacturer's instructions to a customer. 
(c)  An MCS provider is not required to seek a security deposit from a customer for use or rental of the MCS provider's equipment. 
(d)  An MCS provider shall comply with any, and all, applicable state rules concerning security deposits. 
(e)  If the state is silent on the security deposit for a particular piece of equipment, the MCS provider shall be prohibited from charging any security deposit for equipment which exceeds the replacement cost to the MCS provider. Where a security deposit is used to generate revenue for an MCS provider then such security deposit shall not be used to satisfy any other account or bill that the MCS provider may have with the subscriber, unless authorized by the subscriber. 
(f)  An MCS provider shall be prohibited from charging any security deposit for multichannel service which exceeds twice the basic monthly rate. 
(g)  An MCS provider shall return a security deposit (together with any interest earned) after the equipment is satisfactorily returned, or the subscriber maintains a satisfactory payment history (which is determined as no payment delinquencies within the preceding 12-month period). 
(h)  A customer shall maintain any equipment rented or leased from an MCS provider in good working order, and operate such equipment only in the manner specified by the MCS provider or manufacturer of the equipment. 
(i)  A customer shall totally and fully reimburse an MCS provider for any damage or loss to an MCS provider's equipment that is due to the customer's failure to properly maintain and operate such equipment. 
(j)  A customer shall be relieved from any responsibility for reimbursing an MCS provider for equipment which malfunctions or does not operate due to a hidden or latent defect in the equipment, or for equipment which fails to operate, or improperly operates due to natural occurrences conditioned by the normal wear and tear of such equipment, or for equipment damaged or destroyed by an act of nature, and which is not covered by a customer's home or apartment insurance policy. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  48, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-38. - Service inquiry logs; exemptions. 
(a)  An MCS provider shall be required to keep and maintain service inquiry logs, subject to any limitations imposed by state or federal law, including (for MCS providers classified as cable operators) any subscriber privacy limitations imposed by the CCPA. 
(b)  The purpose of the service inquiry logs is to assist the city and the cable advisory committee in assessing the type, degree, and resolution of customer service requests, inquiries, and complaints. 
(c)  At a minimum, the service inquiry logs should contain the following: 
(1)  The time and date of initial receipt of any service request, inquiry, or complaint, together with the time and date of initial response to that service request, inquiry or complaint; 
(2)  The nature of the service request, inquiry, or complaint; 
(3)  The precise action taken by an MCS provider in order to resolve the service inquiry, request, or complaint; 
(4)  Whether the service request, inquiry, or complaint was resolved by allowing a credit or refund of some sort; and 
(5)  The area, location, or quadrant of the city where the service request, inquiry, or request was generated. 
(d)  In addition to any other right of inspection that the commission/franchising authority may possess, the commission/franchising authority, the cable advisory committee, and any other person shall have the right to review and inspect a compilation of such logs. However, neither the commission/franchising authority nor the cable advisory committee, nor any other person shall have the right of access, review, or inspection for any service inquiry logs or any information contained within service inquiry logs that are otherwise protected from access, review, or inspection by state or federal law. 
(e)  This section does not require MCS providers to maintain service inquiry logs on scheduled installations. 
(f)  For purposes of this section only, the requirements and provisions shall not apply to MCS providers who have five or fewer employees, or a single service technician. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  49, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-39. - Restoration of a subscriber's property. 
(a)  At any time an MCS provider (in furtherance of its right to construct, operate, and maintain a multichannel system), disturbs the yard, residence, or other real or personal property of a subscriber, such MCS provider shall ensure that the subscriber's yard, residence, or other personal property is returned, replaced, and/or restored to a condition that is sufficiently comparable to the condition that existed prior to the commencement of the work. 
(b)  The costs associated with both the disturbance and the return, replacement, and/or restoration shall be borne by the MCS provider. This subsection also requires the MCS provider to reimburse a subscriber or private property owner, for any damage caused by the MCS provider, its subcontractor, or its independent contractor, in connection with the disturbance of a subscriber or private property owner's property. 
(c)  The types of acts specifically included in this section are the following: 
(1)  Removal of a subscriber's sod, lawn, plants, shrubbery, flowers, trees, driveway, or fence to install, trench, repair, replace, remove, or locate cable or other equipment of an MCS provider; 
(2)  Installation or removal of cable or other equipment of an MCS provider within a subscriber's residence which requires drilling, excavating, plastering, or the like on the part of the MCS provider; 
(3)  Temporarily relocating or moving a piece of personal property or a fixture of a subscriber (such as a motor vehicle, fence, air conditioning or heating unit, or the like), in order to perform some sort of construction, maintenance, or repair on the multichannel system; or 
(4)  Permanently removing an MCS provider's cable or equipment due to either the revocation, termination, or nonrenewal of a franchise (if applicable), or the abandonment, withdrawal, or cessation, of multichannel service to any portion of the city. 
(d)  The requirements imposed upon the MCS provider extend to any subcontractor or independent contractor that the MCS provider might employ to perform the tasks outlined in this section. 
(e)  In light of the foregoing, an MCS provider has the authority and responsibility to trim trees of a private property owner (including a subscriber) only to the extent necessary to prevent the branches of the trees from coming in contact with the MCS provider's wires and cables. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  51, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-40. - Service inquiries, requests, complaints, and response times; new installations or reconnections of service; exemptions. 
(a)  Except in times of a natural or manmade emergency, or an appointment scheduled with the mutual consent of a subscriber, an MCS provider shall respond to the service inquiries, requests, and complaints of subscribers, within such MCS provider's normal business or service hours, and within the time schedules detailed in subsections (b) through (g) of this section. Moreover, except in emergency situations, an MCS provider shall inform the customer whether the service call is scheduled for the morning, afternoon, or evening hours. If the service call has to be canceled or rearranged, then the MCS provider shall make every effort to notify the customer as soon as possible, and shall reschedule the service call for a time within 24 hours of the cancellation. 
(b)  In the case of a signal or service interruption, a nonexempt MCS provider shall respond to, and make repairs as are necessary to resume the signal or service to the subscriber within 24 hours or one service day from the time the nonexempt MCS provider first received notification of the signal or service interruption. 
(c)  In the case of a blank or no-picture situation, a nonexempt MCS provider shall respond to, and make repairs as are necessary to return the multichannel service system picture within 12 hours or one-half service day from the time the nonexempt MCS provider first received notification of the blank or no-picture situation. 
(d)  In the case of a defective, improperly operating, or nonoperating piece of equipment which does not result in a loss of signal, a nonexempt MCS provider shall respond to, and make repairs as are necessary to correct the problem within 36 hours or 11/2 service days from the time the MCS provider first received notification of the defective, improperly operating, or nonoperating piece of equipment. 
(e)  In the case of repair to a piece of equipment in a subscriber's residence, or repair to the cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent), the repair should be completed, and the situation resolved, at the conclusion of the first service visit. If the repair is not completed and resolved within three visits, and if as a result of the insufficient repair, a situation remains wherein there is a visually or audibly detected degradation of a multichannel signal, then the MCS provider must immediately, and completely replace all drop cable (coaxial, fiber or its functional equivalent), and/or any necessary MCS provider equipment. 
(f)  In no case shall a subscriber's service request or inquiry go unresponded or unattended to for more than 12 hours or one-half service day from the time the MCS provider first received notification of the service inquiry or request. Moreover, except in emergency situations, all requests and inquiries shall be handled or corrected within 36 hours or 11/2 service days from the time the MCS provider first received notification. If a cancellation of a service call occurs, then the MCS provider shall reschedule the call in a manner consistent with the guidelines expressed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(g)  A complaint/inquiry regarding loss of all channels comprising a service level cluster, or tier will be responded to, and corrected, within six hours from the time the MCS provider first received notification of the loss of all channels comprising a service level, or service tier, or service cluster. 
(h)  In case of a dispute concerning the precise time that the MCS provider received notification, or the precise circumstances surrounding the MCS provider receiving the notification, or whether notification was received at all, the commission/franchising authority shall reserve the right and authority to settle such a dispute. The commission/franchising authority may delegate such a function to the cable advisory committee. 
(i)  New installations, upgrades, or reconnections of multichannel service by an MCS provider shall be performed and completed within five service days of a customer requesting such a new installation, upgrade, or reconnection. 
(j)  For purposes of this section only, the requirements and provisions shall not apply to MCS providers who have five or fewer employees, or a single service technician. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  52, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-41. - MCS providers required to maintain sufficient repair parts and sufficient repair personnel; exemptions. 
(a)  Except in times of natural or manmade emergency, an MCS provider shall, at all times, have access to, and be able to secure, sufficient maintenance and repair parts and equipment for the MCS system, so that the MCS provider can respond to, and correct, all subscriber service interruptions within the time periods specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Having access to, and being able to secure sufficient maintenance and repair parts and equipment, is necessary to promptly restore a subscriber's multichannel service, and avoid delays caused by having to obtain needed parts and equipment. 
(c)  Except in times of natural or manmade emergency, or strike (whose duration has been less than 72 hours), an MCS provider shall have sufficient maintenance and repair personnel, so that the MCS provider can respond to, and correct, subscriber service interruptions within the time periods specified in this chapter. 
(d)  An MCS provider shall annually certify the commission/franchising authority that each service technician has taken and passed an MCS provider-implemented course designed to train service technicians to handle their jobs in a courteous, efficient, and responsive manner. Also, the course should be designed to provide continuing education to service technicians in changes in technology, repair/maintenance procedures and related matters. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the other requirements and provisions in this section, an MCS provider shall maintain at least one service technician on call 24 hours per day. 
(f)  For purposes of this section only, the requirements and provisions shall not apply to MCS providers with no more than two service technicians. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  53, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-42. - Disconnection for nonpayment. 
(a)  A subscriber shall not be considered delinquent in payment until at least 45 days after the posting of the bill to the subscriber, and payment has not been received by an MCS provider. 
(b)  Before disconnection of a subscriber's multichannel service (either physically or electronically) takes place, the following must occur: 
(1)  The subscriber must in fact be delinquent in payment of multichannel service; and 
(2)  At least five days have elapsed after a separate written notice of impending disconnection has been personally served upon the subscriber; or 
(3)  At least eight days have elapsed after mailing a separate written notice of impending disconnection to the subscriber; or 
(4)  At least five days have elapsed after the subscriber has either signed for, or refused to accept, a separate written notice of impending disconnection. 
(c)  The written notice of disconnection must expressly and clearly state the amount that is owed by the subscriber to an MCS provider, the minimum amount required to be paid to avoid disconnection, and the date and place where such payment must be made. 
(d)  Disconnection of service must occur both on a normal service day, and within normal business hours of an MCS provider, unless the subscriber is given the opportunity to pay the full amount of the past due account. 
(e)  An MCS provider who physically retrieves its equipment including converter, remote control unit, or digital audio tuner, from a subscriber, must do so within both a normal service day and normal service hours of an MCS provider. 
(f)  Receipt of a bad check from a subscriber, in response to a written notice of disconnection, does not constitute payment, and the affected MCS provider need not give the subscriber further notice prior to disconnecting multichannel service. 
(g)  An MCS provider may add a reasonable collection charge to the subscriber's bill if the applicable provisions of this chapter, and any applicable state regulations, are followed. 
(h)  Unless authorized by the subscriber, an MCS provider shall not apply a security deposit on the rental or lease of a specific piece of equipment in order to satisfy a subscriber's past due or delinquent account. 
(i)  Any refund due a subscriber after such a disconnection shall be made within 60 days of the disconnection for nonpayment. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  54, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-43. - Voluntary disconnections and downgrades. 
(a)  At any time, a subscriber may request that a particular service tier, service cluster, pay channel, premium channel, informational service, or the entire multichannel service be disconnected. 
(b)  Where provided by an MCS provider, a subscriber may request a downgrade from a particular level of service to a less comprehensive level of service, or a less expensive level of service. 
(c)  From the date that such a subscriber makes such a request for either a disconnection or downgrade, then the MCS provider shall have 72 hours or three service days, whichever is longer, to disconnect or downgrade the service tier, pay channel, premium channel, informational service, or entire multichannel service. If an MCS provider does not disconnect or downgrade service within 72 hours, a subscriber's obligation to pay for such service shall cease, or in the case of a downgrade, a subscriber's obligation to pay for the more comprehensive and/or higher priced service shall cease. 
(d)  For a service cluster, premium channel or informational service which is voluntarily disconnected, a subscriber shall pay a pro rata share of the monthly rate for such service cluster, premium channel or informational service. 
(e)  No separate disconnect or downgrade charge may be passed on to a subscriber if the subscriber chooses to take advantage of a lower-priced service tier/cluster or an optional service tier/cluster. However, to prevent subscriber abuse of this voluntary disconnection, or downgrade policy, a subscriber shall be charged a minimum one month's full rate for any one service tier/cluster which is disconnected and/or downgraded at least three times within a span of 180 days. 
(f)  If, however, an MCS provider's equipment is, or has been damaged by a subscriber, prior to such disconnection, then the MCS provider may charge the subscriber with the entire cost for such damage, provided that the MCS provider notifies the subscriber within ten days of the disconnection. A subscriber shall not be required to pay for equipment failure, if the circumstances fall within the normal wear and tear guidelines established in this chapter. 
(g)  Any refund due a subscriber after disconnection (both for nonpayment and voluntary) shall be made within 60 days after such disconnection. 
(h)  In no event will this section be viewed as abridging the rights and remedies afforded by the subscriber complaint/inquiry resolution process outlined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  55, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-44. - Protection of subscriber privacy. 
(a)  An MCS provider shall abide by any, and all, subscriber privacy rules or regulations of the federal or state governments. 
(b)  For MCS providers classified as cable operators, such operators shall also abide by, and comply with, any subscriber privacy protection requirements and procedures listed in section 631 of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 551). 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  62, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-45. - Resolution of complaints/inquiries. 
(a)  An MCS provider is required to develop a comprehensive complaint/inquiry resolution policy that is consistent with the rules and regulations outlined in this chapter. 
(b)  An MCS provider's complaint/inquiry resolution policy shall be reduced to writing, and such policy shall be available upon request, to any person. In any event, a subscriber shall receive notice of such policy in the method that is prescribed by this chapter. 
(c)  The commission/franchising authority shall establish a neutral, third-party appeal process, to handle complaints/inquiries that are not satisfactorily resolved at the MCS provider level. 
(d)  An MCS provider's complaint/inquiry resolution policy shall contain at least the following minimal standards: 
(1)  The initial response to a complaint/inquiry shall occur no later than 24 hours after receipt of the complaint/inquiry; 
(2)  Every attempt will be made to resolve the complaint/inquiry within 72 hours after receipt of the complaint/inquiry; 
(3)  Complaints/inquiries that fall into the category of service inquiries shall abide by the procedure set forth in this chapter; 
(4)  Informing subscribers of the credit/refund policy which is consistent with this chapter, and any applicable state regulations; and 
(5)  Informing subscribers of the billing disputes policy which is consistent with this chapter, and any applicable state regulations. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  63, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-46. - Policy with respect to continuity of multichannel service provisions. 
(a)  The commission/franchising authority declares that as part of its right to establish multichannel customer service guidelines, it has the duty to ensure continuity of multichannel service for all subscribers. In that light, the commission/franchising authority also determines that it may take appropriate measures in order to ensure that no portion of the city is threatened or faced with a disruption, interruption, or discontinuance of multichannel service due to the actions of any MCS provider. 
(b)  In addition to the principles and ideals enumerated in subsection (a) of this section, the commission/franchising authority also expresses that its policy covers the following: 
(1)  Providing for continuity of multichannel service upon acquisition by the city; 
(2)  Providing for continuity of service in the event of a proposed abandonment, withdrawal, or cessation of multichannel service by an MCS provider; 
(3)  Providing for continuity of service in the event of revocation, termination, or nonrenewal of a franchised MCS provider's franchise; 
(4)  Providing for continuity of service if a transaction occurs that affects the ownership or control of the MCS provider, such as an assignment, sale, transfer, or merger; 
(5)  Providing for continuity of service upon an expiration of a franchise; 
(6)  Preventing disruption of multichannel service which would provide a hardship on those subscribers who rely on a multichannel system as their primary or secondary source for information; and 
(7)  Preventing the interruption or cessation of multichannel service which would disrupt or eliminate the diversity of programming choices enjoyed by subscribers of a multichannel system, and thereby restricting their ability to receive information. 
(c)  Whenever any situation occurs (including those mentioned above) which threatens the city and subscribers with the loss or interruption in the continuity of multichannel service, then the commission/franchising authority may direct the MCS provider for a period of up to 24 months to do everything in its power to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted multichannel service of the same quality, mix, and level regardless of the circumstances. 
(d)  During the interim period, the commission/franchising authority shall work with the MCS provider in order to secure a new multichannel system owner, or rectify the problem, so that the threat of loss of continuity is removed at the earliest possible instance. 
(e)  During any interim period in which the MCS provider continues to provide multichannel service to subscribers, the MCS provider is entitled to all revenues collected, except any sums owed (including franchise fees, alternative user charges, and taxes) to the city or to other persons. 
(f)  If the threat of loss of continuity is not resolved within 24 months, the commission/franchising authority may extend the interim period on a month-to-month basis until the situation is satisfactorily resolved. Also, in such a circumstance, the commission/franchising authority may adopt any emergency rules or procedures which will ensure that the subscribers will receive continuous, uninterrupted multichannel service of the same quality, mix, and level. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  64, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-47. - Continued use of individual antennas protected. 
(a)  The commission/franchising authority does not intend to prohibit the erection or continued use of individual television antennas within the city so long as the individual television antennas conform to any and all applicable zoning and/or land use regulations. Consequently, no person shall be required to receive multichannel service, or to physically connect to a multichannel system. 
(b)  It is also noted that no person shall be penalized or fined (through either a home sales contract, deed of restrictive covenants, or other type of agreement) for failing or refusing to receive multichannel service, or physically connecting to a multichannel system. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  65, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-48. - Periodic multichannel subscriber surveys. 
(a)  At least every three years after the adoption of this chapter, the city and any affected MCS provider shall conduct a survey of current subscribers of that particular MCS provider in order to ascertain the degree of customer satisfaction with the subscriber sensitive aspects of the multichannel system including (but not limited to) billing practices, response times, programming choices available and receivable, responsiveness to inquiries, and use, availability, and accessibility of any customer service office. 
(b)  If the survey results indicate or demonstrate that the customer service practices set forth in this chapter are not sufficient to meet reasonable or identified projected city needs, the commission/franchising authority may take whatever measures are appropriate in order to rectify the deficiency or insufficiency in a particular customer service practice by one or more MCS providers. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  66, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-49. - Construction schedule and construction-related requirements. 
    In order to establish minimum uniform standards, the commission/franchising authority requires any MCS provider to adopt the following minimal construction schedule and construction-related requirements: 
(1)  Construct, install, maintain, and repair the multichannel system in accordance with the requirements noted in this chapter; 
(2)  Use streets and public ways, as set forth in this chapter; 
(3)  Where applicable, remove franchise property from public streets, as set forth in this chapter; 
(4)  Adopt the construction standards, as set forth in this chapter; 
(5)  Adopt the system expansion standards, as set forth in this chapter; 
(6)  Adopt the construction schedule as referred to in this chapter; 
(7)  Abide by, and act in strict accordance with, all current technical codes adopted by the city, or the state, or the United States, as noted in this chapter; and 
(8)  Maintain all permits and licenses, as noted in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  71, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-50. - Construction of good quality. 
    During any phase of construction, installation, maintenance, and repair of the multichannel system, the MCS provider shall use materials of good and durable quality and all such work shall be performed in a safe, thorough, and reliable manner. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  72, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-51. - Conditions on use of streets and public ways. 
(a)  All wires, conduits, cable (coaxial, fiber, or functional equivalent), and other property and facilities of an MCS provider shall be so located, constructed, installed, and maintained so as not to endanger or unnecessarily interfere with usual and customary use, traffic and travel upon the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the city. 
(b)  If an MCS provider's system creates a hazardous or unsafe condition or an unreasonable interference with property, at its own expense such MCS provider shall voluntarily, or upon the request of the commission/franchising authority, remove that part of the system that creates the hazardous condition from the subject property. 
(c)  An MCS provider shall not place equipment where it will interfere with the rights of property owners or with gas, electric or telephone fixtures, or with water hydrants or mains, or with wastewater lift stations, or any other service or facility that benefits the city's or its residents' health, safety, or welfare. 
(d)  An MCS provider, at either its own expense or that of a private contractor, shall protect rights-of-way and easements, and support or temporarily disconnect or relocate in the same street or other public way, any property of such MCS provider when necessitated by reason of: 
(1)  Traffic conditions; 
(2)  Public safety; 
(3)  A street closing; 
(4)  Street construction or resurfacing; 
(5)  Change or establishment of street grade; 
(6)  Installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, storm drains, lift stations, force mains, power or signal lines; or 
(7)  Any improvement, construction or repair related to the city's or its residents health, safety, or welfare. 
(e)  It shall be the responsibility of an MCS provider (acting alone or in conjunction with another person) to locate and mark or otherwise visibly indicate and alert others to the location of its underground cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) before employees, agents, or independent contractors of an MCS provider install cable in the marked-off area. 
(f)  An MCS provider shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit, temporarily remove, raise or lower the cable wires to allow the moving of the building. The expense of temporary removal shall be paid by the person requesting it, and such MCS provider may require payment in advance. The affected MCS provider shall be given not less than 15 days' notice of a contemplated move to arrange for temporary wire changes. 
(g)  For any new installations occurring after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived, and at the time that an MCS provider rebuilds or upgrades the multichannel system, all trunk or feeder cable (coaxial, fiber, or functional equivalent) shall be placed underground. Further, where both power and utilities are presently underground, multichannel system cable shall be placed underground also. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  73, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-52. - Duty to remove franchised properties from the public streets. 
(a)  This section is applicable to any MCS provider required to maintain a franchise to operate within the city. 
(b)  Whenever the following occurs: 
(1)  A franchised MCS provider ceases to operate all, or part, of the multichannel system for a continuous period of six months; 
(2)  A franchised MCS provider ceases and fails to construct the multichannel system outlined in the application, or proposal for renewal, or renewal franchise agreement; 
(3)  The commission/franchising authority elects not to renew the franchise pursuant to the provisions set forth, in this chapter; or 
(4)  The franchised MCS provider's franchise is revoked pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
Then, unless the city or another MCS provider uses such multichannel system, under the continuity provisions outlined in this chapter, the affected franchised MCS provider shall promptly remove its multichannel system property from the streets, public ways, and private property located within the city. 
(c)  If not removed voluntarily by a franchised MCS provider, the commission/franchising authority may notify such franchised MCS provider that if removal of the property is not accommodated within 270 days, or substantial progress towards removal is not made within 210 days, then the commission/franchising authority may order officials or representatives of the city to remove such franchised MCS provider's system property at that franchised MCS provider's expense. The performance and/or construction bond, irrevocable letter of credit, cash deposit, or full faith and credit guarantee required as set forth in this chapter shall be available to pay for such work. 
(d)  If officials or representatives of the city remove a franchised MCS provider's system property, and such franchised MCS provider does not claim the property within 90 days of its removal, then the commission/franchising authority may take whatever steps are available under state law to declare the property surplus, and sell it. 
(e)  When such franchised MCS provider removes its multichannel system property from the streets, public ways, and private property located within the city, the franchised MCS provider shall, at its own expense, and in a manner approved by the commission/franchising authority, replace and restore such public or private property in as good a condition as before the work causing the disturbance was done. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  74, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-53. - Construction standards. 
    Methods of construction, installation, maintenance and repair of any multichannel system shall comply with the most current editions of the National Electrical Safety Code, and the National Electrical Code, as affects the construction, installation, and maintenance of electrical supply and communication lines, attachments and supports. To the extent that these are inconsistent with other provisions of a franchise, or state, or local law, then the more stringent shall govern in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  75, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-54. - System construction schedule for franchised MCS providers. 
(a)  This section is applicable to any MCS provider required to maintain a franchise to operate within the city. 
(b)  A franchised MCS provider's construction schedule for the multichannel system shall be detailed in the franchise agreement in a form and format determined by the commission/franchising authority. 
(c)  A franchised MCS provider who does not abide by the system construction schedule shall be subject to the penalties set forth in this chapter, as well as being subjected to any liquidated damages, if permitted and set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  76, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-55. - System expansion for MCS providers, including provision for universal service. 
(a)  At a minimum, an MCS provider shall extend multichannel service to any area within the city that has a density of eight homes or building passings per mile or fractional equivalent thereof. Also, in such case, a newly installed subscriber shall not be assessed or apportioned the cost for installation, except for the usual and normal connection fees paid by subscribers, so long as the system expansion is technically feasible. 
(b)  In conjunction with the minimum density standards, the commission/franchising authority recognizes that one of its primary purposes in the franchising process is to ensure that the widest diversity of programming sources is available to the greatest number of residents. Moreover, it is the desire of the commission/franchising authority that an MCS provider, to the greatest extent possible, shall not charge, assess, or apportion a newly installed subscriber the costs for installation, except for the usual and normal connection fees paid by subscribers. Therefore, notwithstanding any minimum density standards detailed in this chapter, any franchised MCS provider shall submit within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section was derived, or 45 days from the date that a franchised agreement (initial or renewal) becomes effective (whichever is later), a comprehensive plan for extending the provision of multichannel service to all residents and/or potential subscribers that reside within the city. 
(c)  At a minimum, such a comprehensive plan shall include the following: 
(1)  The construction schedule for providing multichannel service to areas within the city that are below the minimum service densities that are detailed in subsection (a) of this section; 
(2)  Any costs, fees, or charges (and their amounts) that are to be borne by a potential subscriber who seeks the provision of multichannel service to a residence and/or building that lies outside the minimum service densities detailed in subsection (a) of this section; and 
(3)  The procedure for extending service to any area of the city that may be annexed in the future, and which might be below the minimum service densities detailed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  After submission of the comprehensive plan, the commission/franchising authority shall have up to 60 days in which to review the comprehensive plan. Within that 60-day time frame, the commission/franchising authority has the power to approve, modify, or deny the comprehensive plan. 
(e)  If the commission/franchising authority chooses to either modify or deny the comprehensive plan for extending service, then this commission/franchising authority must: 
(1)  Detail its reasons in writing for the denial, or extent of the modification; 
(2)  Provide such reasons to the affected franchised MCS provider; and 
(3)  Give the affected franchised MCS provider an opportunity to make a presentation before the commission/franchising authority in order to explain its rationale for such a plan, or justify any of the component parts of its comprehensive plan. 
(f)  Among the reasons that the commission/franchising authority may modify or deny the comprehensive plan for extending service are the following: 
(1)  The construction schedule is excessive or does not meet the objective or extending service to all residents of the city within a reasonable period of time; 
(2)  The cost that is proposed to be borne by a potential subscriber who wishes extension of service is excessive in light of the commission's desire to extend service to all residents; or 
(3)  The proposed comprehensive extension plan extends service in an uneven pattern and in so doing impermissibly discriminates on the basis of race, religion, color, creed, sex, or handicap. 
(g)  For reasons occasioned by unexpected physical or topographic barriers, an affected MCS provider may request, at any time modification, or relief from its comprehensive plan. 
(h)  The commission/franchising authority should inspect its comprehensive plan at least once every 12 months to ensure that the affected MCS provider is complying with each integral provision of this section, and each integral provision of the MCS provider's comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  77, 9-21-92; Ord. No. 93-2,  1, 3-5-93) 
Sec. 50-56. - Permits and licenses. 
    An MCS provider shall obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by law, rule, regulation, or ordinance, and maintain the same, in full force and effect, for as long as required. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  78, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-57. - Commission/franchising authority's policy with respect to safety requirements. 
(a)  The commission/franchising authority requires that the MCS provider's construction, operation, and maintenance of the multichannel system meet certain threshold safety levels which are designed to protect the public and lessen the likelihood of interruption of multichannel service. 
(b)  Consequently, the commission/franchising authority may require a nonexempt MCS provider to adopt the following safety requirements: 
(1)  Emergency alert override activation in the manner set forth in this chapter; 
(2)  Minimum standby power as noted in this chapter; 
(3)  The provision of an indoor signal or safety alert technology in the manner noted in this chapter; 
(4)  Implementing a periodic preventative maintenance program as set forth in this chapter; 
(5)  Follow all FCC rules and regulations concerning maximum cumulative leakage index (CLI) limits; and 
(6)  Comply with, and abide by, any construction, safety or fire codes as noted in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  86, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-58. - Provisions to alert subscribers upon emergency; standby power. 
(a)  In order that subscribers may be alerted of an impending, imminent or actual, natural or manmade emergency, then all MCS providers shall ensure that the multichannel system providing multichannel service to all, or part, of the city is designed so as to permit the chief of police or fire chief or another authorized official of the city to override the audio portion of all channels, by touch-tone phone (or functional equivalent) from any location. 
(b)  In addition to any other requirements listed in this section, an MCS provider shall: 
(1)  Designate a channel which will be used for emergency broadcasts of both audio and video; 
(2)  Inform subscribers of the designated emergency channel at least daily on at least one channel of the multichannel system; 
(3)  Maintain all channel video blanking capability to facilitate the needs of hearing and sight-impaired customers; 
(4)  Test the emergency override system not less than once a month; 
(5)  Cooperate with the city on the use and operation of the emergency alert override system; and 
(6)  Develop a plan (with the city's concurrence) in order to provide continuity of multichannel service, and response to service calls in the event of a natural or manmade emergency. 
(c)  As one method of providing continuity of multichannel services upon a natural or manmade emergency, an MCS provider shall, unless exempted by the commission/franchising authority, have the capacity for four-hour automatically activated standby power on all trunk and feeder cables, and all headends, hubs, and receive sites associated with the distribution of cable service to, and throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  87, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-59. - Provisions concerning safety alert technology. 
(a)  The commission/franchising authority considers the need for an indoor signal or safety alert technology, available to both subscribers and nonsubscribers of an MCS provider's lowest level of programming service, of paramount interest and need, and as such should be an integral part of an MCS provider's system. Though in some ways similar to the concept of emergency alert override, signal alert technology is different and distinct in that it may be used by both subscribers to basic service and nonsubscribers to the basic service of an MCS provider's system. Moreover, such safety alert technology is connected to the National Weather Service 24-hour radio service including its new WRSAME/"Site Select" weather and warning system, which specifically allows for an indoor warning and notification via an audio alert voice path, regardless of whether an individual has a television receiver or monitor, or an FM receiver, and, moreover, can provide effectively instantaneous alert and warning, as well as needed instructions, in addition to allowing key community-oriented entities to communicate with both the general populace and selected (i.e. target) segments of the community. 
(b)  In realization and recognition of the preceding, a nonexempt MCS provider shall offer for use throughout the city a signal or safety alert monitoring technology for purposes of alerting both subscribers and nonsubscribers of a multichannel system to impending or occurring disaster emergencies, and allowing the city to communicate with both subscribers and the public as the need to do so may exist at any time. 
(c)  A nonexempt MCS provider shall cooperate with the city and the provider of such technology in the marketing and distribution of the necessary on-premises alert receiving devices, including the installation, and replacement of such, as may be needed from time to time. 
(d)  A nonexempt MCS provider shall install the necessary electronics, processing, and distribution equipment in the MCS provider's headend, and will ensure the maintenance, operating condition, and replacement of such equipment, as is necessary to protect its continued use. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the preceding, a nonexempt MCS provider has no responsibility for repair of such equipment beyond obtaining (in a timely manner) replacement from the manufacturer for inoperable components. 
(f)  It is explicitly understood that one need not be a subscriber to a multichannel system to use the safety alert device, and receive the safety alert service, so long as a drop is installed into the address to which such device is attached. It is also understood that the user need not have a television receiver. In such case, the nonsubscriber to basic service may be charged a separate amount for the service either on a monthly basis, as a one-time charge or on a monthly installment basis in lieu of a one-time charge. 
(g)  The commission/franchising authority recognizes the positive effect on the safety of the public in general, and the ability to save lives, and property, of those who would otherwise be prevented from receiving the most expeditious warning or alert possible without such a device and technology. Consequently, the commission/franchising authority requires that all nonexempt MCS providers shall participate in a periodic public awareness campaign as deemed appropriate by the commission/franchising authority, in cooperation with the commission/franchising authority and the manufacturer, to inform the citizenry and noncable subscribers of the availability and capability of such safety alert technology. 
(h)  An MCS provider shall assure that all subscribers to multichannel service receive printed material, fully describing the technology and its benefits, at least annually and at the time of installation. 
(i)  An MCS provider shall allow nonsubscribers of basic cable service the choice of purchasing or leasing the necessary equipment, which shall include the cost of installation on a nondiscriminatory basis, and so inform such persons of both options. 
(j)  Given the significant public safety and life and property saving benefits of this technology, it being the primary and paramount responsibility of government to protect such to the extent possible, and the resultant need of as much of the general public as possible to be protected from the otherwise unnecessary greater risk to life, limb and property associated with other alert/warning systems, an MCS provider shall assure that the service is provided as part of the same level of service and is priced commensurate with that for any technology/service (deemed comparable by the United States National Weather Service) in the midwestern United States. 
(k)  Given the importance and critical nature of preventing the loss of life and property, and the need and ability of the commission/franchising authority to communicate directly with the public, and specific, individual segments of the public individually and discreetly, in any number of situations, including but not limited to those potentially involving matters of life and death, and as this technology is clearly not a specific private (i.e. commercial) programming service, the commission/franchising authority deems it appropriate to designate the use of the capability of such technology as a governmental use of the system, and it is the intent of the city that it be made available to all subscribers in the lowest tier of service provided. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  88, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-60. - Implementation of a preventative maintenance program. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of an MCS provider (that has more than 1,000 subscribers) to devise and implement a regular and on-going preventative maintenance program for the multichannel system in order to ensure that there is no material degradation of the multichannel system that would affect the citizens' health, safety, and welfare, or negatively affect the quality of multichannel services being provided. 
(b)  Before the MCS provider implements such a program, it shall be reviewed by the cable advisory committee and approved by the commission/franchising authority. Within 45 days after the completion of the quarterly preventative maintenance program, the MCS provider shall prepare and submit a written report to both the cable advisory committee, and the commission/franchising authority detailing the results of the tests conducted, and all items performed or addressed during the quarterly program. Although not exhaustive, the following areas should be included in a preventative maintenance program, and subsequent report: 
(1)  Inspection and repair, if needed, of the headend; 
(2)  Inspection and repair, if needed, of the antenna tower; 
(3)  Requiring weatherproofing and protection of the antenna lead connectors, and on any other exposed fittings; 
(4)  Requiring the conducting of signal leakage tests that are in accord with FCC requirements; 
(5)  Removing tree roots, limbs, and branches that interfere with, or come in contact with, the MCS provider's cable; 
(6)  Requiring the periodic servicing, testing, and calibration of the MCS provider's equipment including service vehicles, and field test equipment; 
(7)  Employing a status monitoring system to identify problems or situations in which the multichannel system electronics are operating outside preprogrammed parameters; and 
(8)  Testing of the emergency alert system to ensure that it will function properly during an emergency situation. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  89, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-61. - Construction, fire, and safety codes. 
(a)  An MCS provider shall construct, operate, maintain, repair, remove, replace, or restore the multichannel system in strict compliance with all current technical codes adopted by the commission/franchising authority, the state, or the United States. 
(b)  The codes referred to specifically include, but are not limited to, construction, fire and safety, and zoning codes. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  90, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-62. - Alternative user charge. 
(a)  This section is applicable to any licensed, but unfranchised, MCS provider, and to any MCS provider who has had its franchise ruled unconstitutional, unenforceable, or invalid. For all franchised MCS providers then the provisions concerning franchise fees shall be applicable. 
(b)  Where not specifically prohibited by federal or state law, and as an alternative to the imposition of a franchise fee as set forth in this local law, the commission/franchising authority may impose, extract, and collect, a charge from an affected MCS provider for the use by such provider of the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the city. 
(c)  The alternative user charge shall be based on the following mathematical mode: 
(1)  Determine the present value of all public streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the city in which are located multichannel system facilities and equipment of the affected MCS provider; 
(2)  Take the average percentage increase in land appraisals within the city (as determined by the property appraiser for the city) for the five preceding years; 
(3)  Take the average percentage increase for the five preceding years and use it to determine the dollar amount of property value increase for the remaining term of the franchise (if no franchise applicable, then use five years); 
(4)  Add the present value to the dollar amount of property value increase for the remaining term of the franchise (if no franchise applicable then use five years); 
(5)  Divide the adjusted value by the remaining number of years on the term of the franchise (if no franchise applicable then use five years); 
(6)  Multiply that figure by five percent to arrive at the annual user charge that is to be collected from the affected MCS provider. 
For purposes of illustration only, the formula reads as follows: 
Present value, = (plus) dollar amount of property increase for remaining term of the franchise (based on average percentage increase of land appraisals for past years of franchise term, divide the adjusted value by the remaining years on the term of the franchise, multiply that figure by five percent, = (equals) the annual alternative user charge. 
(d)  The commission/franchising authority adopts such an alternative user charge, in order to receive fair compensation for the affected MCS provider's use of the public streets and public ways if such compensation cannot be obtained by imposing a flat percentage fee on such MCS provider's annual gross revenues. However, an affected MCS provider may agree to an alternative charge that is based on a flat percentage of gross revenues, as long as that charge does not exceed five percent of an affected MCS provider's annual gross revenues. 
(e)  It is expressly understood that a franchise fee and an alternative user charge will not be imposed on the same MCS provider at the same time, for the same period. 
(f)  An affected MCS provider shall at no time be charged or obligated to pay an alternative user charge that exceeds five percent of such provider's gross revenues (as defined by this chapter) for any particular reporting period. If the alternative user charge does exceed five percent of gross revenues, then such alternative user charge should be reduced to reflect an amount not greater than the five percent cap. 
(g)  An affected MCS provider shall pay 25 percent of the alternative user charge at the end of every three months. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  96, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-63. - Franchise required; exception. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (b), (c), and (d) of this section, no person, or MCS provider shall be permitted to construct, operate or maintain a multichannel system which requires the laying or positioning of cable (coaxial, fiber or functional equivalent) across the rights-of-way of the city, without having first obtained a franchise, and then entering into a franchise agreement with the city. 
(b)  Pursuant to the CCPA, a local government may own and operate a multichannel system classified as a cable system. Consequently, should the commission/franchising authority directly, or indirectly, through any legal means available to the commission/franchising authority, decide to purchase, acquire, construct, lease, control, or otherwise own a cable system within the territorial limits of the city, then the commission/franchising authority shall not be required to submit a proposal for, or receive, a franchise in order to construct, operate, and maintain a cable system within the geographical limits of the city. 
(c)  In the case of a person or MCS provider lawfully providing multichannel service on July 1, 1984, then such person or MCS provider shall not be required to obtain a franchise, and enter into a franchise agreement unless the commission/franchising authority expressly requires the person or MCS provider to do so. 
(d)  If, as a result of annexation, a previously unfranchised MCS provider comes under the jurisdiction of the city, then such MCS provider shall not be required to obtain a franchise, and enter into a franchise agreement unless the commission/franchising authority expressly requires the operator to do so. 
(e)  Where a person or MCS provider is required by the commission/franchising authority to obtain a franchise, then the commission/franchising authority shall notify the person or MCS provider, in writing, within 15 working days of the commission/franchising authority's formal action. 
(f)  After receipt of notification, the affected person or MCS provider has 90 days to submit an application or proposal in substantially the same form and format as required by the commission/franchising authority. The affected person or MCS provider's application will be handled as set forth by either state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  97, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-64. - Authority to grant nonexclusive franchises. 
(a)  Consistent with section 621(a)(1) of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 541), the commission/franchising authority may award one or more nonexclusive multichannel service franchises within its geographical limits. 
(b)  A franchised MCS provider shall be selected as part of a public proceeding and hearing which affords due process to both the city, and the applicant, and after which, if the applicant is selected as a franchised MCS provider, then such applicant will enter into a franchise agreement with the city, pursuant to the provisions of federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  98, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-65. - Franchise agreement; minimal requirements. 
(a)  If the commission/franchising authority awards an applicant a franchise to construct, operate, or maintain a multichannel system in all, or part, of the city, or approves a proposal for a renewal of a franchise, then within 180 days, an applicant or a renewal franchised MCS provider and the city shall enter into a franchise agreement which details the rights, duties, responsibilities, and liabilities of both parties. 
(b)  A newly franchised MCS provider may not lay any cable (coaxial, fiber, or functional equivalent) until the franchise agreement is executed by both the newly franchised MCS provider and the commission/franchising authority. 
(c)  A franchise agreement shall be in sufficient detail in order to clearly delineate the rights and duties of the franchised MCS provider, and the commission/franchising authority. 
(d)  At a minimum, a franchise agreement shall contain provisions for the following: 
(1)  A detailed definition of "annual gross revenues" or "gross revenues" which specifically includes an explanation of what constitutes the revenue base for determining what revenues are subject to any franchise fee or alternative user charge; 
(2)  The term or duration of the franchise; 
(3)  Indemnity and holds harmless clauses; 
(4)  Insurance; 
(5)  Performance and completion bonds or security deposits; 
(6)  Construction, upgrade or rebuild schedule; 
(7)  Franchise fees; 
(8)  Continuity of multichannel programming service; 
(9)  Repeal of prior inconsistent franchise agreements; and 
(10)  A severability clause. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  99, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-66. - Extent of grant of franchise. 
(a)  Upon an award of a franchise, and the subsequent execution of the franchise agreement, an MCS provider required to obtain and maintain a franchise may construct, erect, install, maintain, operate, repair, replace, remove, or restore a multichannel system within the geographical limits set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(b)  The franchised multichannel system may be located in, upon, along, across, over, and under the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways of the city. 
(c)  If necessary, the responsibility of obtaining easements for private property (including privately owned utility or street light poles) shall be that of a franchised MCS provider. 
(d)  A franchised MCS provider, through a separate pole or utility easement agreement with an affected utility, may locate the multichannel system on, or within, the property of such utility company. This provision specifically includes MCS providers classified as cable operators. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  100, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-67. - Term of franchise. 
(a)  The term of an initial renewal franchise may be for a period not to exceed 15 years from the date that a franchise renewal agreement is approved by the commission/franchising authority. 
(b)  Should the highest court of the nation, or state, invalidate, void as unenforceable or unconstitutional, the concept of a franchise or franchise duration, then the commission/franchising authority may adopt emergency rules and regulations in order to preserve and protect the rights and duties of both the commission/franchising authority and any franchised MCS provider. During the interim, the invalid franchise may be considered (unless prohibited by the state) and interpreted in the same manner and fashion as a business license. Upon the adoption of emergency rules, the commission/franchising authority should enter into a new agreement which describes under which terms and conditions of the franchised MCS provider's system may be reviewed and examined, and under what circumstances may a franchised MCS provider forfeit its right to operate a multichannel system within all, or part of, the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  101, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-68. - Application for franchise; application fee. 
(a)  The commission/franchising authority may develop rules and regulations with respect to the submission and processing of applications for a franchise. Such rules and regulations shall primarily be aimed at determining the legal, financial, technical, and character qualifications of the applicant. 
(b)  Unless prohibited, an applicant shall pay an application fee which shall be equal to the administrative and consulting costs associated with processing an application for a franchise. The total application fee must be paid, unless waived, regardless of whether the applicant receives, or does not receive a franchise. The total application fee must be paid (unless waived) prior to the commission/franchising authority's formal action on the applicant's request for a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  102, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-69. - Franchise fees. 
(a)  Any nonexempt franchised MCS provider (specifically including any MCS provider classified as a cable operator) awarded a franchise or renewal franchise after the date the ordinance from which this chapter was derived becomes effective, shall pay to the city for the privilege and use of the streets, rights-of-way, easements, and public ways, and other facilities of the city in the operation of the multichannel system, and for the city's supervision thereof during the term of the franchise, a sum equal to five percent of the annual gross revenues of such nonexempt franchised MCS provider. 
(b)  If the FCC, congress or other governmental entity with authority over multichannel service ever allows a governmental entity or commission/franchising authority to increase the franchise fee beyond five percent, the commission/franchising authority shall have the authority to increase the franchise fee to the maximum rate allowable. 
(c)  It is intended that the franchise fees will promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city and may provide the necessary funding for city-oriented cable programs, projects and services and to further allow and provide for the necessary regulation of a franchised MCS provider's activities and its use of the streets, public ways, rights-of-way, and easements. Therefore, the five-percent franchise fee shall be deposited into the general revenues of the city, unless specifically authorized elsewhere. 
(d)  A nonexempt franchised MCS provider shall file with the commission/franchising authority, within 45 days after the expiration of each of the franchised MCS provider's fiscal quarters, a detailed financial and revenue statement clearly showing the gross revenues received by such franchised MCS provider during the preceding quarter and certified by a certified public accountant or officer of a franchised MCS provider attesting to the accuracy, completeness, and veracity of the revenue figures. Such statement shall be in the form and format determined by the commission/franchising authority. Such statement shall include revenue from whatever source, directly or indirectly derived from, or allowed, or caused to be derived from, or applicable to the operation of the multichannel system, or the provision of any multichannel service by or to the multichannel system. Revenue will be reported by service category, type, and level showing computations and using incremental billing rates for all sources, levels, tiers, and types of service and other revenue sources of all kinds and types. 
(e)  Payment of the quarterly portion of the franchise fee shall be rendered to the city at the time the financial statement is filed. 
(f)  In the event that payment is not made within 45 days after the date specified in this section, then such franchised MCS provider may be declared in default of the franchise, and the franchise may be revoked, terminated, or canceled in the manner prescribed by this chapter. 
(g)  The commission/franchising authority reserves the right to audit a franchised MCS provider books, if the commission/franchising authority deems it necessary. If such audit discovers an underpayment of franchise fees that exceeds two percent of the total fee paid for any reporting quarter, then the affected franchised MCS provider shall reimburse the city for the cost of such an audit. It is specifically understood, that the right of audit and recomputation of any, and all, amounts paid under a franchise fee, shall always be accorded to the commission/franchising authority. 
(h)  All annual reports due and pertaining to the payment of franchise fees, will be certified by an officer of the franchised MCS provider, and such provider shall maintain records used in the preparation of such report, to be produced in their originality and totality upon request or demand by the commission/franchising authority. 
(i)  No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release of, or an accord, or satisfaction of, any claim that the city might have for further or additional sums payable under the terms of this chapter, or for any other performance or obligation of a franchised MCS provider hereunder. 
(j)  Payments of compensation made by a franchised MCS provider to the city, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be considered in addition to, and exclusive of, any and all authorized taxes, business license fees, other fees, other levies or assessments presently in effect, or subsequently adopted. 
(k)  A franchise fee does not include any items excluded by section 622(g)(2)(D) of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 542(g)(2)(D)). 
(l)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the commission/franchising authority to impose a tax, fee or other assessment of any kind, on any person (other than a franchised MCS provider) with respect to multichannel service or other programming or communications service provided by such person over a multichannel system for which charges are assessed to subscribers, but not received by a franchised MCS provider. For purposes of illustration only, this subsection shall include the situation where a premium service directly bills a subscriber, or the franchised MCS provider merely acts as collection agent for a premium service billing directly to a subscriber, or where a person leases a channel for commercial use and sells advertising or goods on that channel, and receives the money directly or through a third party. 
(m)  Except as permitted by federal law, no federal agency may regulate the amount of franchise fees paid by franchised MCS providers, or regulate the use of funds derived from franchise fees. 
(n)  For any 12-month period, the fees paid by any person subject to subsection (l) of this section with respect to any such multichannel service shall not exceed five percent of such person's gross revenues derived in such period from the provision of such service over the multichannel system. 
(o)  If at any time, the highest court of the nation, or the highest court of the state, invalidates, voids, or rules as unconstitutional the concept of franchise fees, then the commission/franchising authority may impose an alternative user charge on the franchised MCS provider, in the manner set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  103, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-70. - Assignment or transfer of franchise. 
(a)  Where required for operation, an MCS provider's franchise may not be assigned or transferred in whole, or in part, by the affected MCS provider, without the prior express written approval by the commission/franchising authority. 
(b)  Any attempted assignment or transfer without such prior written consent shall constitute a default of such franchise. 
(c)  Upon such a default, the commission/franchising authority shall proceed according to the procedure set forth in this chapter, and any applicable state law. 
(d)  At least 60 days before a proposed assignment or transfer of an MCS provider's franchise is scheduled to become effective, such franchised MCS provider shall petition in writing for the commission/franchising authority's written consent for such a proposed assignment or transfer. 
(e)  The commission/franchising authority will not unreasonably withhold its consent to such an assignment or transfer. However, in making such a determination, the commission/franchising authority may consider the following: 
(1)  Experience of proposed assignee or transferee (including conducting an investigation of proposed assignee or transferee's service record in other communities); 
(2)  Qualifications of proposed assignee or transferee; 
(3)  Legal integrity of proposed assignee or transferee; 
(4)  Financial ability and stability of the proposed assignee or transferee; 
(5)  If requested by the commission/franchising authority, submittal from the proposed assignee or transferee, on what, if any, changes it intends to make in the operation and maintenance of the present multichannel system; 
(6)  The corporate connection, if any, between the franchised MCS provider, and proposed assignee or transferee; 
(7)  The economic viability or nonviability of the multichannel system in the future, based upon certain factors including the impact of the purchase price on the city and/or the proposed assignee or transferee; and 
(8)  Any other aspect of the proposed assignee's or transferee's background which could affect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry of city as it relates to the operation of the multichannel system. 
(f)  A copy of the completed sales agreement, or a functionally equivalent instrument, between the franchised MCS provider and proposed assignee or transferee shall be provided to the commission/franchising authority, so that the commission/franchising authority may discover the assumption of obligations by the franchised MCS provider and proposed assignee or transferee with respect to the multichannel system. In lieu of the sales agreement, the commission/franchising authority may accept an attested summary of obligations assumed by the above referenced parties. 
(g)  Before an assignment or transfer is approved by the commission/franchising authority, the proposed assignee or transferee shall execute an affidavit, acknowledging that it has read, understood, and intends to abide by both this chapter, and the applicable franchise agreement. 
(h)  Upon any approved assignment or transfer, the assignee or transferee shall assume all obligations and liabilities of the former franchised MCS provider, except as noted in subsection (i) of this section. 
(i)  An assignment or transfer shall not relieve the former franchised MCS provider of its liabilities under the franchise agreement until the assignment actually takes place, or unless specifically relieved by federal, or state law, or unless specifically relieved by the commission/franchising authority at the time an assignment or transfer is approved. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  104, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-71. - Default of franchise; revocation, termination or cancellation of franchise. 
(a)  When any event, act or omission (on the part of the franchised MCS provider) occurs which represents a violation of an integral provision of this chapter, or compromises the corporate character, or legal, financial or technical integrity and/or stability of the multichannel system or the franchised MCS provider to such a degree that the interests of the subscribers and users are negatively affected, then such event, act or omission may be considered a major breach of this chapter. Under such circumstances, the commission/franchising authority shall notify the affected MCS provider in writing, of the specific breach, and direct such franchised MCS provider to comply with all such provisions of its proposal, franchise agreement, or this chapter. 
(b)  For illustrative purposes only, the events, acts and omissions include, but are not limited to: bankruptcy, insolvency, failure to pay taxes or franchise fees (including the alternative user charge if applicable), failure to receive written commission/franchising authority approval for an assignment or transfer, or failure to abide by the integral terms and conditions of the franchise agreement, or integral provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Where a franchised MCS provider satisfactorily corrects any of the enumerated conditions, within 60 days, then in no event shall the enumerated condition be weighed against such franchised MCS provider in any subsequent review of franchise performance. 
(d)  A copy of such notice of material breach shall be mailed to the surety on the performance bond. 
(e)  Within 75 days, after such written notice is mailed to a franchised MCS provider, the commission/franchising authority shall conduct a public hearing on the matter. 
(f)  The commission/franchising authority shall provide written notice to a franchised MCS provider, and the surety, of the time and place of such public hearing in a manner consistent with either state law, or approved by the commission/franchising authority. 
(g)  At the time of the hearing, the affected franchised MCS provider may present information on the current status of the alleged breach of the franchise agreement or this chapter. If the situation has been resolved, or steps are being taken to resolve the situation, then the franchised MCS provider should present the information at the hearing. 
(h)  If the affected franchised MCS provider fails to attend the hearing, and has not requested a continuance of the hearing, then such franchised MCS provider shall be deemed to have waived its right to a further continuation of the matter, and may be declared in default of the franchise agreement. 
(i)  The commission/franchising authority may, after the public hearing, direct the affected franchised MCS provider to take corrective action within a specified period of time, or may declare such franchised MCS provider in default of the franchise agreement, and thereafter, revoke, terminate, or cancel the franchise. 
(j)  If the commission/franchising authority directs corrective action to take place within a specified time or declares such franchised MCS provider in default of the franchise agreement, then that declaration shall be reduced to writing, and the notice of corrective action or default shall be mailed to such franchised MCS provider, and surety, within 15 days of the commission/franchising authority's action. 
(k)  If within 45 days, the affected franchised MCS provider, or surety does not take significant action to rectify the breach, or submit a plan detailing how the affected MCS provider will eliminate the breach, then the commission/franchising authority shall revoke such MCS provider's franchise, and shall notify the affected franchised MCS provider, and surety forthwith. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  105, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-72. - Performance evaluations. 
    The commission/franchising authority is authorized to design a performance evaluation procedure which periodically monitors compliance of the franchised MCS provider with the terms and conditions of both the franchise and this chapter. Moreover, the commission/franchising authority may periodically review and examine whether a franchised MCS provider's financial, technical, legal, and character qualifications continue to meet required operational, maintenance, and performance levels in order to ensure the uninterrupted provision of multichannel services. Such performance evaluations may be conducted every three years during the franchise term, and may be done as part of any required survey. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  106, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-73. - Specific additional rules for MCS providers classified as cable operators. 
(a)  In addition to any requirements contained within this chapter, all nonexempt MCS providers that are classified as cable operators shall be expected to abide by, and comply with, all applicable provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984. 
(b)  The specific provisions of the CCPA include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Cable channels for public, educational, or governmental use (section 611 CCPA-codified at 47 USC 531); 
(2)  Cable channels for commercial use (section 612-47 USC 532); 
(3)  General franchise requirements (section 621-47 USC 541); 
(4)  Franchise fees (section 622-47 USC 542); 
(5)  Regulation of rates (section 623-47 USC 543); 
(6)  Regulation of services, facilities, and equipment (section 624-47 USC 544); 
(7)  Modification of franchise obligations (section 625-47 USC 545); 
(8)  Franchise renewal (section 626-47 USC 546); 
(9)  Conditions of sale of a franchise (section 627-47 USC 547); 
(10)  Subscriber privacy (section 631-47 USC 551); and 
(11)  Equal employment opportunity (section 634-47 USC 554). 
(c)  Further, as an additional requirement, before the third anniversary of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived, any nonexempt MCS provider classified as a cable operator and providing cable service within the city shall have designed and activated a multichannel system with a minimum channel capacity of 54 channels. 
(d)  Further, the commission/franchising authority is committed that the goal of the CCPA, as set forth in section 601(4) of the Act (codified at 47 USC 521(4)), is met at all times. As a result, the commission/franchising authority expressly requires that upon the advent, implementation, and transmission of high definition television (HDTV), its functional equivalent, or any subsequently developed technological advancement affecting channel capacity or needed bandwidth for any video programming source or service, the cable operator shall not lessen, dilute, or decrease the mix, level, quality, or quantity of programming services carried on the cable system for reasons of lack of adequate channel capacity. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  116, 9-21-92) 
Sec. 50-74. - Specific additional public, educational, and governmental rules for MCS providers classified as cable operators. 
(a)  The commission/franchising authority recognizes that under section 611 of the CCPA (codified at 47 USC 531), the commission/franchising authority has certain power with respect to certain aspects for public, educational, or governmental (PEG) use that is provided by MCS providers classified as cable operators. 
(b)  To the extent permitted by law, and in order to fulfill the commission/franchising authority's desired goal of a public, educational, and governmental (PEG) access policy that will facilitate the long-range needs of the city, the commission/franchising authority adopts the following: 
(1)  At the time of an initial application for an MCS franchise for a cable system, and contained within any renewal franchise agreement, an MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall pledge to include the following guarantees: 
a.  An MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall provide at its own expense, one 12-hour per day educational channel; and 
b.  An MCS provider classified as a cable operator shall provide, at its own expense, one 12-hour per day governmental channel that is available for providing coverage of commission meetings, and other related programming offered or designed by a duly designated official, including department heads. 
(2)  Both the commission/franchising authority and the affected cable operator shall review after every six months, the percentage of use of every PEG channel. At the end of each six-month period, the commission/franchising authority shall evaluate the response and actual use of such channels. If, after any six-month period, the percentage of use for any required PEG channel drops below 25 percent of the total time allocated, then the required number of hours shall be reduced to a number that most closely approximates the average hours of use per day. If the commission/franchising authority determines the average hours of use per day for any required PEG channel is less than four hours, then the requirement for that channel's availability shall cease, and an affected cable operator may use such channel for any lawful purpose. However, upon reasonable notice of the need for additional channel time, the commission/franchising authority may require additional time for the originally intended use of the channel. 
(3)  If, at any time, 90 percent of the total time allocated for any required PEG channel is consistently used five days a week for a period of three months, then the cable operator shall provide an additional PEG channel. 
(4)  A cable operator shall provide both mobile, portable, and stationary equipment to be used for PEG access, together with the aid of technical and production assistance provided by the cable operator. A cable operator shall provide equipment that can store programs for delayed cable casting. There will be no cost for technical production assistance for PEG access use to any one user provided that such use does not exceed 50 actual production man-hours per year. Moreover, the cost of maintenance of a PEG access studio, and equipment required to run the studio shall be borne by the cable operator. 
(Ord. No. 92-12,  117, 9-21-92) 
Chapter 51 - TELCOMMUNICATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, adopted Nov. 18, 2002, amended former Ch. 51, Arts. I-VI, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 98-10,  1, adopted Dec. 21, 1980. Provisions of Ord. No. 2002-7, designated as 51-22, Repealer, and 51-23, Effective date, have not been set out herein. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; multichannel service providers, ch. 50; streets and sidewalks, ch. 62. 

Sec. 51-1. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this Chapter 51 are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the City of Plymouth qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 11-18-02) 
Sec. 51-2. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the Act or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 51-3. - Terms defined. 
(a)  The meaning of the terms used in this Chapter 51 shall be as follows: 
(1)  Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. 
(2)  City means the City of Plymouth. 
(3)  City commission means the city commission for the City of Plymouth or its designee. This subsection does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city commission. 
(4)  City manager means the city manager or his or her designee. 
(5)  Permit means a non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and to this Chapter 51 to a telecommunications provider to use the pubic rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
(b)  All other terms used in this Chapter 51 shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following: 
(1)  Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the Act. 
(2)  MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in the Act. 
(3)  Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
(4)  Public rights-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public rights-of-ways does not include a federal, state, or private rights-of-way. 
(5)  Telecommunications facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunications facility or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of Title III of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way device. 
(6)  Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services means those terms as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of Title III of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way device. For the purpose of the Act and this Chapter 51 only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
a.  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
b.  Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunications facilities located with a public rights-of-way. 
c.  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 51-4. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this Chapter 51. 
(b)  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section 6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with city clerk, one copy with the city manager, and one copy with the city attorney. Upon receipt, the city clerk shall make copies of the application and distribute a copy to all members of the city commission. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act. 
(c)  Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)  Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application fee shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(e)  Additional information. The city manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the city manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the Act. 
(f)  Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the City to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this Chapter 51. 
(g)  Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public rights-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this chapter 51. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (d) above. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the Authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 51-5. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit rests with the city commission. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, the city commission shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under subsection 51-4(b) of this chapter 51 for access to a public rights-of-way within the city. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the Act, the city commission shall notify the MPSC when the city commission has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which the permit was granted or denied. The city commission shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)  Form of permit. If an application for a permit is approved, the city commission shall issue the permit in the form as provided by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Sections 6(1), 6(2), and 15 of the Act. 
(c)  Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the city commission may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public rights-of-way. 
(d)  Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without limitation on subsection (c) above, the city commission may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public rights-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications providers' access and use. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 51-6. - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under chapter 70 of the City Code, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 51-7. - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this chapter 51 does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 51-8. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city. The route maps should be in paper or electric format unless and until the commission determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 51-9. - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public rights-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public rights-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public rights-of-way and shall promptly restore the public rights-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 51-10. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set forth in subsection 4(d) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the Authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 51-11. - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirement of Section 13(1) of the Act, the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the Authority. In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act, the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunications facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under Section 8 of the Act. The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this Chapter 51, in compliance with the requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 51-12. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under Section 51-11 above shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 51-13. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant to Section 9(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the major street fund and/or the local street fund maintained by the city under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 51-14. - Annual reports. 
    Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the city manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 51-15. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received from cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 51-16. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this Chapter 51 shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 51-17. - Compliance. 
    The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this chapter 51 is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, a provided in subsection 51-44(c) of this chapter 51; 
(2)  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with subsection 51-4(f) of this chapter 51; 
(3)  Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500.00 application fee, in accordance with subsection 51-44(g) of this chapter 51; 
(4)  Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public rights-of-way within the city, in accordance with subsection 51-5(a) of this chapter 51; 
(5)  Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with subsection 51-5(a) of this chapter 51; 
(6)  Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with subsection 51-5(a) of this chapter 51; 
(7)  Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in subsection 51-5(b) of this chapter 51; 
(8)  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public rights-of-way, in accordance with subsection 51-5(c) of this chapter 51; 
(9)  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to insure that the public rights-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use, in accordance with subsection 51-5(d) of this chapter 51; 
(10)  Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 51-6 of this chapter 51; 
(11)  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's rights-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with section 51-11 of this chapter 51; 
(12)  Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 51-14 of this chapter 51; and 
(13)  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 51-15 of this chapter 51. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 51-18. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this chapter 51 shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunications provider's access to and ongoing use of a public rights-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 51-19. - Severability. 
    The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this chapter 51 are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause of this chapter 51 is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of any remaining provisions of this chapter 51. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 51-20. - Authorized city officials. 
    To the extent permitted under the Act or otherwise, the city manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter 51 violations bureau) for violations under this chapter 51 as provided by the city code. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 51-21. - Municipal civil infraction. 
(a)  To the extent permitted under the Act or otherwise, a person who violates any provision of this Chapter 51 or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to payment of not less than $500.00 and not more than $5,000.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate infraction. Repeat offenses under this chapter 51 shall be subject to increased fines as follows: 
First repeat offense: Not less than $1,000.00 and not more than $10,000.00 Second and subsequent: Not less than $2,000.00 and not more than $20,000.00  
(b)  Nothing in section 5-21 shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a person of this chapter 51 or a permit. 
(Ord. No. 2002-7,  1, 10-21-02) 
Chapter 54 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic liquors, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; environment, ch. 34; nuisances,  34-51 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 46; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- Crimes, MSA Title 28. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Peeping. 
    No person shall go upon property owned or leased by another and peep through the window of a building on that property at any person without the express or implied consent of that person. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(37)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-2. - Defecation, urination in public. 
    No person shall urinate or defecate on any public street or sidewalk or on the floor of that part of any building open to the public or any other place in view of the public not specifically designated for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(16)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-3. - Spitting in public. 
    No person shall spit on any street or sidewalk, or in any public carrier upon the floor, seat, or walls thereof, or upon the floor, walls, stairs, or seats of any public building or place of public assemblage. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(17)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-4. - Possession, consumption of liquor in public. 
    No person shall possess alcoholic liquor in an open or uncapped container, nor consume alcoholic liquor in any public place, provided this section shall not apply to any public place wherein by state or local law, consumption or possession is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(20)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-5. - Attempts to commit violations. 
    Any person who shall attempt to commit a violation of any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuant thereof, and in such attempt shall do any act towards the commission of such offense, but shall fail in the perpetration, or shall be intercepted or prevented in the execution of the same, when no express provision is made by law for the punishment of such attempt, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for or a fine of not more than one-half of the greatest punishment which might have been inflicted if the offense so attempted had been committed. 
(Ord. No. 85-10,  1, 7-15-85) 
Sec. 54-6. - Sale or use of fireworks-Definitions. 
    As used in sections 54-6 through 54-8: 
    Act means the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, MCL 28.451 et seq., as that statute may be amended from time to time, which is hereby adopted by reference as part of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
    Agricultural and wildlife fireworks means fireworks devices distributed to farmers, ranchers, and growers through a wildlife management program administered by the United States Department of the Interior or the department of natural resources of this state. 
    Articles pyrotechnic means pyrotechnic devices for professional use that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction but not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer fireworks but are not labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or UN0432 under 49 CFR 172.101. 
    Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks. 
    Display fireworks means large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA standard 87-1, 4.1. 
    Firework or fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, and special effects. 
    Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5. 
    Novelties means that term as defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all of the following: 
(1)  Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls, or individual caps containing not more than one-fourth of a grain of explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cap. 
(2)  Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in subparagraph (1) are used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion. 
(3)  Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding one-eighth-inch in diameter. 
(4)  Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes with not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and if the manufacturer's name and the quantity contained in each box are printed on the box; and toy smoke devices. 
    Special effects means a combination of chemical elements or chemical compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and designed and intended to produce an audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal effect as an integral part of a motion picture, radio, television, theatrical, or opera production or live entertainment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, 6-17-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-02, adopted June 17, 2013, amended the Code by adding provisions numbered as  54-1-54-3. In order to avoid conflicts in section numbering the editor has renumbered these provisions as  54-6-54-9. 
Sec. 54-7. - Use of consumer fireworks prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks, as such term is defined in section 54-6 except for the use of consumer fireworks on the day preceding, the day of, or the day after the following national holidays in accordance with the listed prohibited hours of use: 
Holiday Prohibited Hours of Use New Year's Day, January 1 1:00 a.m.-8:00 a.m. Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, the third Monday in January 12:00 midnight-8:00 a.m. Washington's Birthday, the third Monday in February 12:00 midnight-8:00 a.m. Memorial Day, the last Monday in May 12:00 midnight-8:00 a.m. Independence Day, July 4 12:00 midnight-8:00 a.m. Labor Day, the first Monday in September 12:00 midnight-8:00 a.m. Columbus Day, the second Monday in October 12:00 midnight-8:00 a.m. Veterans Day, November 11 12:00 midnight-8:00 a.m. Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November 12:00 midnight-8:00 a.m. Christmas Day, December 25 12:00 midnight-8:00 a.m.  
(b)  A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks on public property, school property, church property, or the property of another person without that organization's or person's express permission to use those fireworks on those premises. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, a person that violates this subsection is responsible for a civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $500.00. 
(c)  Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged or used by a person under the influence of alcoholic liquor or controlled substance or a combination of both. 
(d)  Low-impact fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged or used by a person under the influence of alcoholic liquor or controller substance or a combination of both. 
(e)  Unmanned free-floating devices: Any unmanned free-floating device (sky lantern) which requires fire underneath to propel it and is not moored to the ground while aloft, have an uncontrolled and unpredictable flight path and descent area so as to pose a potential fire risk and are therefore prohibited. 
(f)  Novelties. This section does not aply to novelties. 
(g)  No person shall recklessly endanger the life, health, safety, or well-being of any person by the ignition, discharge, or use of consumer fireworks. 
(h)  If a police officer determines that a violation of this section has occurred, the officer may seize the consumer fireworks as evidence of the violation. 
(i)  Unless otherwise provided in this section, if a person knowingly, intentionally, or recklessly violates this section, the person is guilty of a crime as follows: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both. 
(2)  If the violation causes damage to the property of another person, a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 54-8. - Display and articles pyrotechnic fireworks. 
(a)  Pursuant to MCL 28.451 et seq., (the "Act") the city may grant a permit, upon application in writing on forms provided by the department of licensing and regulatory affairs, for the use of the following: 
(1)  Agricultural or wildlife fireworks (as defined in the Act); 
(2)  Articles pyrotechnic; 
(3)  Display fireworks; or 
(4)  Special effects manufactured for outdoor pest control. 
(b)  Such a permit granted by the city shall be subject to payment of a fee to the city, and shall be for either public or private displays within the city by the city, fair associations, amusement parks, or other organizations or individuals approved by the city, as long as the applicable conditions and requirements of the Act are complied with. 
(c)  Before a permit for display fireworks or articles pyrotechnic firework ignition is granted, the person, firm, or corporation applying for the permit shall furnish proof of financial responsibility by a bond or insurance in an amount, character, and form deemed necessary by the city to satisfy claims for damages to property or personal injuries out of an act or omission on the part of the person, firm, or corporation or an agent or employee of the person, firm, or corporation, and to protect the public. 
(d)  The city shall not approve or otherwise grant a permit for display fireworks or pyrotechnic fireworks ignition to a nonresident person, firm, or corporation until the person, firm, or corporation has appointed in writing a resident member of the bar of this state or a resident agent to be the legal representative upon whom all process in an action or proceeding against the person, firm, or corporation may be served. 
(e)  Pursuant to the Act, the city shall rule on the competency and qualification of articles phrotechnic and display fireworks operators as required under NFPA 1123, as the operator has furnished in his or her application form, and on the time, place, and safety aspects of the display of articles pyrotechnic or display fireworks before granting permits. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, 6-17-13) 
Secs. 54-9-54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AFFECTING GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-31. - False alarms, threats. 
    No person shall summon, as a joke or prank or otherwise without any good reason therefor, by telephone or otherwise, the police or the fire department or any public or private ambulance to go to any address where the service called for is not needed. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(32)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-32. - Self-identification to officers. 
    No person shall fail to accurately identify himself when requested to do so by a police officer after the officer observes that person commit a civil infraction or when the officer has probable cause to believe the person has committed a misdemeanor outside the officer's presence. Provided that under circumstances where a police officer has good reason to believe, but does not have probable cause, that any individual has committed or is about to commit any unlawful act, such officer may ask the individual to identify himself and explain his presence on the scene, but failure to respond to such questioning shall not constitute an offense under this section. This section shall not be construed to affect any obligation to respond which is otherwise imposed by law. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(31)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-33. - Resisting, obstructing officers. 
    No person shall knowingly obstruct or resist any member of the police force or fire department in the discharge of his lawful duties or fail to obey the lawful order of such officer, knowing him to be a member of the police force or fire department. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(30)), 2-18-92) 
Secs. 54-34-54-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ALARM SYSTEMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2000-14, adopted Nov. 20, 2000, repealed former Div. 2,  54-46-54-49, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 97-1,  1, adopted June 17, 1991. The provisions of Ord. No. 2000-14 have been renumbered by the editor to replace the former sections of this division. 

Sec. 54-46. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Alarm system is defined as a device or an assembly of equipment or devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police officers and/or firefighters are expected to respond. 
    Alarm user is defined as any person on whose premises an alarm system is maintained within the City of Plymouth, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles. If, however, an alarm system on a motor vehicle is connected with an alarm system at a premises, the person using such alarm system is an alarm user. Also, excluded from this definition and from coverage of this division are persons who use alarm systems to alert or signal persons within unauthorized intrusion or hold-up attempt. If such a system, however, employs an audible signal emitting sounds of flashing lights or beacon, designed to signal persons outside the premises, such system shall be within the definition of an alarm system and shall be subject to this division. 
    False alarm shall be defined as any alarm condition which is registered at the police department, fire department or elsewhere not resulting from the activity for which the alarm was intended. 
(Ord. No. 2000-14, 11-20-00; Ord. No. 2013-01, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 54-47. - False alarm fines. 
(a)  The alarm user shall be required to pay a fine, as set forth in subsection 54-47(c), for each false alarm in excess of three false alarms occurring within the calendar year. The calendar year shall be defined as January 1st to December 31st of any given year. Upon the occasion of the second false alarm occurring within any one-year period, the alarm user shall be advised in writing by the city police department of the city recording of the occurrence of the two false alarms and shall be advised of the existence of this division. 
(b)  Alarm conditions caused by the following extenuating circumstances shall not constitute a false alarm and no false alarm fine shall be charged by the city. 
(1)  Alarm conditions being activated by persons working on alarm system with prior notification to the police department of the city, or the community fire department. 
(2)  Alarm conditions being activated by severe weather. 
(3)  Alarm conditions being activated by disruption or disturbance of telephone or other communication systems. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any penalties provided for in the event of a conviction for violation of this division, and notwithstanding whether or not a prosecution has been commenced, any person, corporation, partnership or other legal entity who uses, leases, installs or directs the installation of an alarm system described in this division shall be subject to the following fines: 
False Alarms Within 
Calendar Year Response By Police 
Department Response By Fire 
Department 1st and 2nd No fine No fine Third $50.00 $300.00 Fourth 100.00  500.00 Fifth 200.00  500.00 Sixth 300.00  500.00 In excess of six 500.00  500.00  
(Ord. No. 2000-14, 11-20-00; Ord. No. 2013-01, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 54-48. - Interference with telephone communications systems. 
    No person shall sell, operate, adjust, arrange for or contract to provide a device or combination of devices that will upon activation, either mechanically, electronically, or by other means, initiate the automatic intrastate calling, dialing or connection to any telephone number assigned to any subscriber thereof by a public telephone company for the purpose of delivering a recorded message without the proper written consent of such subscriber. 
(Ord. No. 2000-14, 11-20-00; Ord. No. 2013-01, 6-17-13) 
Sec. 54-49. - Audible or visual signals. 
    No person shall use, install or direct to be installed any alarm system which emits a sound and/or visual signal for a period of longer than fifteen minutes, from the time of the initial signaling of the device(s). 
(Ord. No. 2000-14, 11-20-00) 
Sec. 54-50. - Violation and penalty. 
    Any person, corporation, partnership or other legal entity who violates the provisions of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined not more $500.00 dollars or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the court. Each day that the violation continues after due notice has been served in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2000-14, 11-20-00) 
Sec. 54-51. - Failure to pay. 
    When the city has responded to a false alarm, the charges set forth herein of the premises and forwarded to such owners by the city, and said charge shall be due and payable upon receipt. 
    Where the false alarm charge is not paid by an owner(s) within 60 days after the billing for such false alarm as set forth herein, then the city manager shall cause to be recorded in the treasurer's office, the date and premises responded to. The recording of such statement shall constitute a lien on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest until final payment has been made and shall be collected in the manner provided by law for collection of taxes. Said provisions hereof shall be notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the premises described in the statement that the same is due. 
(Ord. No. 2000-14, 11-20-00) 
Secs. 54-52-54-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 54-71. - Crowding others in public. 
    No person shall jostle or roughly crowd persons in any street, alley, park or public building. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(2)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-72. - Fighting. 
    No person shall engage in any physical fight in any public place. This section shall not apply to a physical fight between two participants in a sanctioned sporting event during the actual sanctioned sporting event. However, this section shall apply to any physical fight between spectators and/or any other non-participants at a sanctioned sporting event, as well as any physical fight between a participant in the sanctioned sporting event and a spectator and/or any other nonparticipant at a sanctioned sporting event. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(8)), 2-18-92; Ord. No. 2005-01,  1, 3-7-05) 
Sec. 54-73. - Disturbing the peace. 
    No person shall willfully make or assist in making any noise or diversion which disturbs or tends to disturb, the peace, quiet or good order of any meeting, gathering or congregation lawfully assembled, whether religious, political or otherwise, or to persist in disturbing the peace and orderly conduct of any meeting of a public body or any meeting open to the general public by any conduct or communication which, by its very existence, inflicts injury or tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace or which prevents the peaceful and orderly conduct of such meeting after having been clearly informed that he is, in fact, unreasonably causing such a disturbance. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(9)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-74. - Loud, aggressive conduct. 
    No person shall persist in disturbing the public peace and quiet by loud or aggressive conduct, having once been clearly informed by persons affected that he is, in fact, unreasonably causing such a disturbance. Notice need not be given when such persons affected reasonably believe that to do so would constitute a risk to their personal safety. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(10)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-75. - Violent, riotous conduct. 
    No person shall with four or more persons, act in concert, to wrongfully engage in violent conduct and thereby intentionally or recklessly cause or create a serious risk or causing public terror or alarm. Nor shall a person intending to cause or to aid or abet the institution or maintenance of a riot, do an act or engage in conduct that urges other persons to commit acts of unlawful force or violence, or the unlawful burning or destroying of property, or the unlawful interference with a police officer, peace officer, or a member of the state national guard or any unit of the armed services officially assigned to riot duty in the lawful performance of his duty. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(11)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-76. - Public intoxication. 
    No person shall be intoxicated in a public place and either endanger directly the safety of another person or of property; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be construed to apply to a person whose faculties have been impaired by medication prescribed by a physician and taken as directed. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(19)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-77. - Disorderly house. 
    No person shall permit or suffer any place occupied or controlled by him to be a resort of noisy, boisterous, or disorderly persons. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(22)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-78. - Trespass at night. 
    No person shall knowingly prowl about premises owned or leased by another in the nighttime, without the express or implied consent of that person. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(38)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-79. - Obstruction of public ways. 
    No person shall stand, sit or recline in one place or move slowly about or conduct himself in any public place, or join with one or more other persons in a public place, if the accused knows or should know that, singly or together with others, he is unreasonably obstructing the free and uninterrupted passage of the public along any street or sidewalk, provided that this section is not to be interpreted to conflict with the regulations of the National Labor Relations Board regarding picketing in labor disputes. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(34)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-80. - Crowding for illegal purposes. 
    No person shall collect or stand in crowds or arrange, encourage, or abet the collection of persons in crowds for illegal purposes in any public place. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(33)), 2-18-92) 
Secs. 54-81-54-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-101. - School disturbances. 
(a)  No person shall mark with any substance, or in any other manner deface or do damage to any building owned, occupied or otherwise used as a school within the city. 
(b)  No person shall mark with any substance, or in any other manner deface or do damage to any fence, tree, lawn or other fixture situated on lands owned, occupied, or otherwise used by a school within the city. 
(c)  No person, while on public or private grounds adjacent to any building in which a school or any class thereof is in session, shall willfully make or assist in the making of any noise or diversion which disturbs or tends to disturb, the peace, quiet or good order of such school session or class thereof. 
(d)  No person while on public or private lands adjacent to any building or lands owned, occupied or otherwise used by a school within the city, in or on which any gathering or function is in progress, whether in the day or nighttime, shall willfully make or assist in the making of any noise or diversion which disturbs or tends to disturb the peace, quiet or good order of such gathering or function. 
(e)  No person, while in any building or on any lands owned, occupied or otherwise used by a school within the city, shall utter any profane, indecent or immoral language towards any person or while within the hearing of any other person. 
(f)  No person not a student or employee of any school located in the city, or parent or guardian of any student enrolled therein, shall remain within any school during normal school hours without securing the written permission of the principal or person in charge of such school. 
(g)  No person shall, by violence, threat of violence, or other, force any public, private or parochial school student or other person to lend any money or other things of value to any person at any time. 
(h)  The term "student" as used in this section is hereby defined as any person of school age and enrolled in the school at which he then is present. 
(Code 1982,  9.138) 
Sec. 54-102. - Unlawful entry, remaining on another's property. 
    No person shall willfully enter upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden to do so by the owner or occupant, agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or, when upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, the agent or servant of either, without lawful authority neglect or refuse to depart therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(35)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-103. - Trespass generally; posting property. 
    No person shall enter upon any private property or private parking area, either in a vehicle or on foot, without the express or implied permission of the owner, lessee, occupant, or agent. This section shall apply only to property that is fenced or enclosed, and maintained in a manner to exclude intruders, or posted in a conspicuous manner against entry. It shall be prima facie evidence that a property is posted in a conspicuous manner, if a minimum letter height on the posting sign is two inches and the sign is located to enable a reasonably observant person to observe not less than one sign at any point of entry upon the lands. A complaint for violation of this section may be made by the owner, lessee or occupant of the property. If the owner, lessee or occupant delegates, in writing, the enforcement to the police department, the city may enforce this section. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(36)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-104. - Possession, concealment of stolen property. 
    No person shall buy, or be in the possession of, receive or aid in the concealment of any stolen, embezzled or converted money, goods, or property, knowing the same to have been stolen, embezzled or converted. Any person being a dealer or collector, who fails to make reasonable inquiry, that the person selling or delivering any stolen, embezzled or converted property has a legal right to do so, or who buys or receives any such property which has a registration, serial or other identifying number, altered or obliterated on any external surface thereof, shall be presumed to have bought or received such property knowing it to have been stolen, embezzled or converted; provided, however, that this resumption may be rebutted by proof. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(51)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-105. - Shoplifting. 
    No person shall do any of the following in a store or in its vicinity: 
(1)  While a store is open to the public, alter, transfer, remove and replace, conceal or otherwise misrepresent the price at which property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property, or to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale. 
(2)  While a store is open to the public, steal property of the store that is offered for sale. 
(3)  With intent to defraud, obtain, or attempt to obtain, money or property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid for and belongs to the store. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(50)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-106. - Embezzlement. 
    No person shall, while occupying or acting in a fiduciary relationship, (specifically, but not limited to, agent, servant or employee of another, or as the trustee, bailee or custodian of the property of another) wrongfully convert or appropriate property or money in his possession, by virtue of that relationship, to his own use, with the intent to defraud and without the consent of the principal. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(49)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-107. - Fraudulent conversion. 
    No person shall fraudulently covert for his own use, or wrongfully apply to a purpose other than that for which it was delivered, the property of another delivered to him. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(48)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-108. - False pretenses-Obtaining property. 
    No person shall, with the intent to defraud and to permanently deprive the owner of property, use false pretenses, or false representations, to induce another person to voluntarily relinquish possession of property. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(47)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-109. - Same-Obtaining property and title. 
    No person shall, with the intent to defraud and to permanently deprive the owner of property, use false pretenses, or false representations, to induce another person to voluntarily relinquish both possession and title to property. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(46)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-110. - Larceny. 
    No person shall commit the offense of larceny by taking any property of another without lawful authority, claim or right, with the intent to permanently deprive the owner of lawful possession. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(45)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-111. - Malicious mischief generally. 
    No person shall willfully destroy or damage, or in any manner deface, destroy, or injure any property of another, or any public school building, or any public building, bridge, fire hydrant, alarm box, street light, street sign, or shade tree, belonging to the city, or make or post handbills on, or in any manner mar the walls of any public building, or any fence, tree, or pole within the city, or take, or meddle with any property belonging to the city or remove the same from the building or place where it may be kept, placed, standing, or stored, without authority from the city manager or other official custodian of such property. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(42)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-112. - Malicious destruction of property. 
    No person shall willfully and maliciously destroy or injure the property of another. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(43)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-113. - Damage by throwing. 
    No person shall in any public place within the city, throw or hurl at or towards any building, window, public or private streetlamp, moving vehicle, or at or towards any person, animal or thing, any ball of snow, mass of snow packed together, piece of ice, stone, piece or block of wood or any solid substance whatever or throw any object from any moving vehicle, if the accused knows or should know that damage to person or property, or alarm, which may foreseeably produce damage to person or property, is likely to result. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(44)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-114. - Unlawful possession of vehicles. 
    No person shall knowingly take possession of and ride or take away any bicycle, moped, snowmobile, or motor vehicle without the express or implied permission of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(41)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-115. - Tampering with vehicles. 
    No person shall open or wrongfully tamper or meddle with any motor vehicle. This section does not apply to lawful acts of individuals in an emergency situation. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(40)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-116. - Protection of gardens, orchards. 
    No person shall enter any enclosed or unenclosed vegetable garden or orchard located within the city without the consent of the owner, tenant or agent, and there cut down, injure, damage, destroy, eat, or carry away any portion of such garden, including any growing thing, crop, tree, timber, grass, seed, soil, fertilizer, water supply, tool, implement, fence, or any other protective device or any other thing used for the development, cultivation, maintenance and use of such gardens or orchards. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(39)), 2-18-92) 
Secs. 54-117-54-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CHECK FRAUD 

Sec. 54-126. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Credit means an arrangement or understanding with the bank or depository, for the payment of such check, draft or order, in full, upon the presentation thereof for payment. 
(Code 1982,  9.155) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 54-127. - Checks without sufficient funds. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person with intent to defraud or make or draw or utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, knowing at the time of such making, drawing, uttering or delivering, that the maker, or drawer, has not sufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository, for the payment of such check, draft, or order, in full, upon its presentation. 
(Code 1982,  9.151) 
Sec. 54-128. - Drawing check upon bank without any bank account. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, with the intent to defraud to make or draw or utter any check, draft or order for the payment of money to apply on an account or otherwise upon any bank or other depository who at the time of making, drawing, uttering or delivering such check, draft or order has no account in or credit with such bank or other depository for the payment of such check, draft or order upon presentation. 
(Code 1982,  9.152) 
Sec. 54-129. - Evidence of intent to defraud. 
    As against the maker or drawer thereof, the making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, when presented in the usual course of business, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository, provided such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee thereof the amount due thereon, together with all costs and protest thereon, together with all costs and protest fees, within five days after receiving notice that such check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee. 
(Code 1982,  9.153) 
Sec. 54-130. - Notice of protest as evidence of intent to defraud. 
    Where a check, draft or order is protested on the grounds of insufficiency of funds or credit, the notice of protest thereof shall be admissible as proof of presentation, nonpayment and protest, and shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud, and of knowledge of insufficient funds or credit with such bank or other depository. 
(Code 1982,  9.154) 
Secs. 54-131-54-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS, PARKING AREAS 

Sec. 54-141. - Injury to property. 
    No person shall injure, mar or damage in any manner, any monument, ornament, fence, bridge, seat, tree, fountain, shrub, flower, playground equipment, fireplaces, or other public property within or pertaining to the parks, playgrounds, parking lots or parking structures in the city. 
(Ord. No. 85-6,  1(3.1), 4-1-85) 
Sec. 54-142. - Intoxicating liquors. 
    No person shall possess any alcoholic beverage in any park or playground. 
(Ord. No. 85-6,  1(3.2), 4-1-85) 
Sec. 54-143. - Waste containers. 
    No person shall place or deposit any garbage, glass, tin cans, paper or miscellaneous waste in any park, playground, parking lot or parking structure, except in containers provided for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 85-6,  1(3.3), 4-1-85) 
Sec. 54-144. - Improper uses. 
(a)  No baseball, football, softball throwing or other violent or rough exercise or frisbee, hacky-sack or other games shall be engaged in any, parking lot or parking structure, except in areas designated therefor by the city manager. 
(b)  No person shall obstruct any walk, drive, street, or designated parking area in any park, playground, parking lot or parking structure or conduct themselves in any manner so as to obstruct or tend to obstruct the free and uninterrupted use by, or passage of, the public. 
(c)  The playing of any radio, tape player, or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume that the sound shall be audible beyond the property lines of the park, playground, parking lot or parking structure where the music is being played or so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of others using the park, playground, parking lot or parking structure is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 85-6,  1(3.4), 4-1-85; Ord. No. 2000-05, 9-5-00) 
Sec. 54-145. - Additional rules. 
    The city manager is hereby empowered to make such rules and regulations subject to the approval of the city commission, pertaining to the conduct and use of parks, playgrounds, parking lots, or parking structures, as are necessary to administer the same and to protect public property and the safety, health, morals and welfare of the public, and no person shall fail to comply with such rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 85-6,  1(3.5), 4-1-85) 
Sec. 54-146. - Closing. 
    All park property under the jurisdiction and control of the city commission shall be closed to the general public from 10:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. unless otherwise provided by the city commission. Under circumstances considered by the police to be hazardous to the health, welfare and/or safety of the community, they are authorized to temporarily close the parks and public grounds at any hour. No person shall loiter or remain within parks or public grounds after an order to vacate has been given by the police department. Each such closing will be documented in reports to be filed with the city manager and city commission. 
(Ord. No. 85-6,  1(3.6), 4-1-85) 
Secs. 54-147-54-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SPECIAL EVENTS 

Sec. 54-156. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Special event means and includes any parade, gathering, assemblage or demonstration. 
(Code 1982,  3.7; Ord. No. 84-3,  1(3.7(1)), 2-6-84) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 54-157. - Approval required. 
    In order to properly provide for traffic and crowd control, street and property maintenance and the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, it shall be unlawful to participate in any special event upon any street, park or public area of the city unless such activity is granted approval by resolution by the city commission. 
(Code 1982,  3.7; Ord. No. 84-3,  1(3.7(2)), 2-6-84) 
Sec. 54-158. - Application. 
    Application to conduct a special event shall be made to the city manager, in writing, by the person or persons in charge or responsible therefor. Such application shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the permit. 
(2)  The name and address of the organization or group he is representing. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will act as chairman of the special event and be responsible for the conduct thereof. 
(4)  The purpose of the event and the estimated number of persons to attend. 
(5)  The date the event is to be conducted and the hours it will commence and terminate. 
(6)  The specific assembly and dispersal locations, and specific route plans, if any. 
(7)  Such other information as the city may deem necessary. 
(Code 1982,  3.7; Ord. No. 84-3,  1(3.7(3)), 2-6-84) 
Sec. 54-159. - Time lapse for application. 
    No approval shall be issued for a special event unless application is made not less than 20 days in advance of the date on which such special event is sought to be held. 
(Code 1982,  3.7; Ord. No. 84-3,  1(3.7(4)), 2-6-84) 
Sec. 54-160. - Considerations for issuance; denial. 
    If the city finds that the special event is not to be held for any unlawful purpose and will not in any manner act so as to breach the public peace or unnecessarily interfere with the public use of the streets, sidewalks, parks and public areas, it shall grant the approval. Denials of approval shall be in writing, setting forth the reasons for such denial. Notice of acceptance or denial shall be given within ten days of receipt of the application. 
(Code 1982,  3.7; Ord. No. 84-3,  1(3.7(5)), 2-6-84) 
Sec. 54-161. - Restrictions. 
    The permit evidencing approval under this division may include certain reasonable time, place and manner restrictions as a condition to granting such permit if such restrictions are reasonable and necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 1982,  3.7; Ord. No. 84-3,  1(3.7(6)), 2-6-84) 
Sec. 54-162. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating any provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this division is committed, contained or permitted. 
(Code 1982,  3.7; Ord. No. 84-3,  1(3.7(7)), 2-6-84) 
Secs. 54-163-54-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-186. - Abandoned refrigerators. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or container having airtight doors which when closed cannot be opened from the inside. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded ice box, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight snaplock or other device thereon without first removing the snaplock or doors from such ice box, refrigerator or container. 
(Code 1982,  9.51, 9.52) 
Sec. 54-187. - Shooting, propelling dangerous items. 
    No person shall, in any public place, shoot., propel, or expel towards any person, animal or thing, any substance whatsoever, if that person knows or should have known that damage to a person or property, or alarm which may foreseeably produce damage to person or property, is likely to result. This section shall not apply to law enforcement training or sanctioned sporting events. However, this exception shall only apply to actual participants in the law enforcement training or sanctioned sporting events and shall not apply to spectators, observers, or any other person other than a participant in the law enforcement training or sanctioned sporting event. 
(Ord. No. 92-14,  3(9.122(7)), 9-21-92; Ord. No. 2005-02,  1, 4-4-05) 
Secs. 54-188-54-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS 

Sec. 54-201. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ammunition means any projectile or other device designed to be expelled by any firearm, excluding nonexplosive projectiles or other devices over six inches in length. 
    Dangerous weapon means any firearm, dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto or knife having a blade over three inches in length, or any sharp edged or pointed instrument or club or bludgeon or other dangerous or deadly weapon or instrument carried with intent to use same unlawfully against the person of another. 
    Firearm means any device or part of a device by whatever name known, which is designed to or may be readily converted to expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of any explosive expansion of gas or air, or escape of gas or air, excluding however: 
(1)  Any device used exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges, explosive rivets, or similar industrial ammunition. 
(2)  Any device which expels a projectile by the action of a spring. 
(3)  Any device used exclusively for signaling or safety and required or recommended by the United States Coast Guard, the Interstate Commerce Commission, the Federal Aviation Agency or (the appropriate state agencies governing marine, air or highway safety). 
    Longarm means any rifle, shotgun or firearm, over 30 inches in overall length. 
(Code 1982,  9.131) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 54-202. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to: 
(1)  Members of the Armed Forces or the National Guard and other employees of the federal government, the states and their political subdivisions who are required to carry firearms and longarms as part of their official duties and who are engaged in the performance of their official duties. 
(2)  Hunters during the hunting season designated by the laws of the state, with valid resident hunting licenses and while in the area where hunting is permitted, however, at all times and in all other places such persons must have their firearms and longarms unloaded and enclosed in a case. 
(3)  Persons while at a firearms or longarms showing or display recognized by the city; however, at all other times and in all other places such person must have his firearms or longarms unloaded and enclosed in a case. 
(4)  Persons whose firearms or longarms are unloaded and enclosed in a case. 
(5)  Firearms dealers licensed in accordance with the provisions of the Federal Firearms Act of 1938 who keep such firearms solely for purposes of display and sales and not for personal use. 
(Code 1982,  9.132) 
Sec. 54-203. - Carrying firearms or dangerous weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to carry a firearm or dangerous weapon on his person or within or upon any vehicle, except as specifically provided for within this division, concealed or otherwise, in or upon the public streets, alleys, public shopping centers or places of business frequented by the public, or public parks or on the property of any school, college, whether public, private or parochial, locations of religious worship open to the public, or any other public place in the city, unless the bearer possesses a duly authorized unexpired state license to carry a concealed weapon. It shall also be unlawful for any person to carry a machine gun, sawed-off shotgun, or to have a silencer, or any instrument, attachment or appliance for causing the firing of any firearm to be silent or intended to lessen or muffle the noise of the firing of any firearm, except as is otherwise permitted by law, or to have a switchblade knife, bombs, blackjacks, metallic knuckles, sand gloves, sand bag, sand club, sling shot, billy club or metallic bar designed for use as a club in his possession. 
(Code 1982,  9.133(1)) 
Sec. 54-204. - Carrying longarms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to carry a longarm on the public streets, alleys, public shopping centers or places of business frequented by the public, parks or on property of any school or college, whether public, private or parochial, locations of religious worship open to the public, or any other public place in the city, whether cased or uncased, except under the provisions of this division. 
(1)  Unloaded longarms may be transported from a place of purchase to the residence of the purchaser if enclosed in a carton, container, closed gun case, or wrapped completely in commercial wrapping paper securely closed by tape or string, while being so transported. 
(2)  Unloaded longarms may be transported by motor vehicle to and from hunting and firearms practice or target shooting, but must be fully enclosed in a closed carton, container or gun case or carried in the trunk of the vehicle. 
(3)  Unloaded longarms may be carried by persons, 17 years or older, on foot, to and from a regulated gun range, when the firearm is fully enclosed in a closed carton, container, or gun case. Persons so involved shall proceed to and from the gun range without delay by avoiding loitering on the public streets and all other public places within the city. 
(Code 1982,  9.133(2)) 
Sec. 54-205. - Aiming firearm or longarm. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, without just cause, to intentionally, without malice, point or aim any firearm or longarm at or toward another person. 
(Code 1982,  9.133(3)) 
Sec. 54-206. - Discharge of firearms. 
    No person shall discharge any firearm in the city, except when lawfully acting in the defense of persons or property or the enforcement of law or at a duly established range, the operation of which has been approved by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(6)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-207. - Injury by discharging of firearm or longarm. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to maim or injure any other person by the discharge of any firearm or longarm unintentionally, without malice, at any such person. 
(Code 1982,  9.133(5)) 
Sec. 54-208. - Possession or control of firearm while intoxicated. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, while under the influence of an intoxicating liquor, or controlled substance, to carry, have in his possession or control, use in any manner, or discharge any firearm or longarm. 
(Code 1982,  9.133(6)) 
Secs. 54-209-54-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

Sec. 54-231. - Assault and battery. 
    No person shall commit an assault, or an assault and battery upon any person. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(1)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-232. - Threatening persons by mail. 
    No person shall knowingly send or deliver or make, and for the purpose of being delivered or sent, to part with possession of any letter, postal card or writing containing any language with or without a name subscribed thereto, or signed with a fictitious name, or with any letter, mark or other designation, with the intent thereby to cause annoyance, shock, or threaten such person or with a view or intent to extort or gain any money or property of any description belonging to another. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(5)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-233. - Threatening by telephone. 
    No person shall telephone any other person or cause any person to be telephoned for the purpose of harassing or molesting or threatening any person or his family, or their property, whether or not conversation ensues, except for telephone calls made for legitimate business purposes. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(4)), 2-18-92; Ord. No. 2006-06,  1, 12-18-06) 
Sec. 54-234. - Harassing others. 
    No person shall knowingly harass any other person, visit or otherwise communicate with any person repeatedly, or cause the same to be done for the primary purpose of harassing such other person or his family. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(3)), 2-18-92) 
Secs. 54-235-54-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 
DIVISION 1. - PUBLIC INDECENCY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2000-02,  1, adopted June 5, 2000, repealed former Div. 1,  54-256-54-264, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former Div. 1 derived from Ord. No. 92-4,  3, adopted Feb. 18, 1992 and consisted of the following sections:  Sec. 54-256. Touching in public.  Sec. 54-257. Indecent exposure.  Sec. 54-258. Indecent language.  Sec. 54-259. nude swimming.  Sec. 54-260. Gambling generally.  Sec. 54-261. Houses of ill repute-Frequenting.  Sec. 54-262. Same-Transporting to.  Sec. 54-263. Prostitution generally.  Sec. 54-264. Contributing to delinquency of minors. 

Sec. 54-256. - Public indecency prohibited. 
(a)  A person who knowingly or intentionally, in a public place: 
(1)  Engages in sexual intercourse; 
(2)  Engages in deviate sexual intercourse as defined by the Michigan Crimes Code; 
(3)  Appears in a state of nudity; or 
(4)  Fondles the genitals of himself, herself or another person commits public indecency, a summary offense. 
(b)  "Nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genital, pubic area or buttocks with less that a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; the exposure of any device, costume, or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates the genitals, public hair, natal cleft, perineum anal region or public hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and gives the realistic appearance of nipples and/or areola. 
(c)  "Public Place" includes all outdoor places owned by or open to the general public, and all buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the general public, including such places of entertainment, taverns, restaurants, clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls limited to specific members, restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, whether or not admission charge is levied. 
(d)  The prohibition set forth in subsection 54-256(a)(3) shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any child under ten (10) years of age; or 
(2)  Any individual exposing a breast in the process of breastfeeding an infant. 
(e)  In addition to the specific penalties provided in this ordinance, it is hereby declared that any building, portion of a building, or enclosed place regularly used for the prohibited display of public nudity is a public nuisance, subjecting the owner, proprietor or other operator thereof to any and all actions authorized by the State of Michigan for the abatement of public nuisances, including, but not limited to the procedures set forth in Article 7, Division 1 [section 34-51 et seq.] of the Code of Ordinances. 
(f)  Penalty. Whoever violates this section, either by commission of a public indecency, or by the promotion or maintenance of public indecency as property owner, proprietor or manager of a business, shall be guilty of a summary offense, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500.00, or be imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. Each day such violation continues is a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2000-02,  1, 6-5-00) 
Secs. 54-257-54-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES 

Sec. 54-276. - General prohibition. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use, or knowingly or intentionally to possess, lysergic acid diethylamide, peyote, mescaline, dimethyltryptamine, psicolyn or marijuana (Cannabis Sativa L.) or such other substances as defined in Schedules 1-5 of Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.1101 et seq., MSA 14.15(1101) et seq.), as amended, of the state, unless the substance was obtained directly from, or pursuant to, a valid prescription or order of a practitioner, (`practitioner' being defined as in MCL 333.7109, MSA 14.15(7109), while acting in the course of his professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by this section. 
(Code 1982,  9.361) 
Sec. 54-277. - First offenders. 
    When any person who has not previously been convicted under this division, or under any statute of the United States, or state law, or municipal ordinance relating to possession or use of the substances coming under this division, pleads guilty to or is found guilty of violating this division, the court, without entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of the accused person, may defer further proceedings and place the accused person on probation upon certain terms and conditions, including therein such requirement that the accused person attend courses of instruction on rehabilitation on the medical, psychological and social effects of the misuse of drugs and/or the substances coming under this division. Upon violation of terms or conditions, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt and proceed as the court determines. Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions, the court shall discharge the person and dismiss the proceeding against him. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt and is not a conviction for the purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon the conviction of a crime. There may be only one discharge and dismissal under this section with respect to any person. The police department shall retain a nonpublic record of an arrest and discharge or dismissal under this section. This record shall be furnished to any court or police agency upon request for the purpose of showing that a defendant in a criminal action involving possession or use of such substances has already once availed himself of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1982,  9.362) 
Sec. 54-278. - Paraphernalia. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have, possess, sell, offer to sell, dispense or give away any pipe, device or contrivance adapted for the use of smoking or inhaling marijuana (Cannabis Sativa L.), hashish or opium; provided, however, that such pipe, device or contrivance has been used for the purpose of smoking or inhaling marijuana, hashish or opium. 
(Code 1982,  9.363) 
Sec. 54-279. - Hypodermic syringes, needles, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have, possess, sell, offer to sell, dispense or give away any hypodermic syringe, needle or any other instrument or implement for the illegal use of narcotic or dangerous or hallucinatory drugs as defined by Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.1101 et seq., MSA 14.15(1101) et seq.), by subcutaneous injection or intracutaneous injection or any other manner or method of introduction and which is possessed, sold, offered, dispensed or given away for that purpose. 
(Code 1982,  9.364) 
Sec. 54-280. - Loitering about places where drugs, etc., are illegally stored, kept or used. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, knowing that the substances, devices and/or other instruments enumerated and prescribed within this division are being illegally sold, dispensed, furnished, given away, stored, kept or used, to loiter about, frequent or be present in such building, apartment, automobile, beat or place of any description wherein such illegal activity is being carried on, conducted or operated, or wherein such illegal substances, devices and/or instruments prescribed herein are being illegally kept or stored. 
(Code 1982,  9.365) 
Secs. 54-281-54-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OBSCENE MATERIAL 

Sec. 54-291. - Obscene literature and portrayals. 
(a)  Recordings or pictures; dealing in or possessing; penalties; evidence. Any person who knowingly sells, lends, gives away, distributes, shows or transmutes or offers to sell, lend, give away, distribute, show or transmute or has in his possession with intent to sell, lend, give away, distribute, show or transmute, or advertise in any manner, or who otherwise offers for loan, gift, sale or distribution, any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent, sadistic or masochistic book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing, paper, phonograph record, picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture film, figure, image, wire or tape recording or any written, printed or recorded matter of an indecent character which may or may not require mechanical or other means to be transmuted into auditory, visual or sensory representations of such character, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(b)  Evidence of violation. For the purpose of this section, possession of six or more identical copies, or six or more articles of any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing, paper, phonograph record, picture drawing, photograph, slide, motion picture film, figure, image, wire or tape recording, or any written, printed or recorded matter of an indecent character, shall be prima facie evidence of possession with intent to sell, lend, give away, distribute, show or transmute the thing. 
(c)  Test. The test to be applied in cases under this section shall not be whether sexual desires or sexually improper thoughts would be aroused in those comprising a particular segment of the community, the young, the immature, or the highly prudish, or would leave another segment, the scientific or highly educated or the so-called worldly wise and sophisticated, indifferent and unmoved. But the test shall be the effect of the book, picture or other subject of complaint considered as a whole, not upon any particular class, but upon all those whom it is likely to reach, that is, its impact upon the average person in the community. The book, picture or other subject of complaint must be judged as a whole in its entire context, not by considering detached or separate portions only, and by the standards of common conscience of the community of the contemporary period of the violation charged. 
(Code 1982,  9.126, 9.127) 
Secs. 54-292-54-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 54-311. - Abetting violations. 
    No person shall by any act, or by any work, assist, aid, abet, encourage, contribute toward, cause or tend to cause any minor child under the age of 17 years, to violate any provision of this article or to become neglected or delinquent so as to come, or tend to come, under the jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court, as defined in section 2 of Chapter 12a of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1939 (MCL 701.1 et seq., MSA 27.3178(1) et seq.), and any amendments thereto, whether or not such child shall in fact be adjudicated a ward of the probate court. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(24)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-312. - Furnishing liquor. 
    No person shall knowingly give or furnish any alcoholic liquor to a person under 21 years of age, except upon authority of, and pursuant to, a prescription of a duly licensed prescriber. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a person related to a minor as a parent or guardian, or to a person placed in the position of a parent by a parent or guardian of the minor, or to legally protected religious observances, educational activities, or medical treatments. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(21)), 2-18-92) 
Sec. 54-313. - Responsibility of adults. 
    No adult having control of any residence or premises shall allow any alcoholic liquor or controlled substance to be possessed or consumed at the residence or premises by any minor where the adult knew or reasonably should have known that any alcoholic liquor or controlled substance was in the possession of or being consumed by a minor at the residence or premises, and where the adult failed to take reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of the alcoholic liquor or controlled substance at the residence or premises. Provided the provisions of this section shall not apply to a person related to a minor as a parent or guardian, or to a person placed in the position of a parent by a parent or guardian of the minor, or to legally protected religious observances, educational activities, or medical treatments. 
(Ord. No. 92-4,  3(9.122(23)), 2-18-92) 
Secs. 54-314-54-325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW 

Sec. 54-326. - Minors under 14 years of age. 
    No person under 14 years of age shall loiter, idle, or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley, or park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless such person is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some adult delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the child. 
(Code 1982,  9.341) 
Sec. 54-327. - Minors under 17 years of age. 
    No person under the age of 17 years shall loiter, idle or congregate in or on any public street, highway, alley or park between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., except where the minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some adult over the age of 18 years delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the minor child, or where the minor is upon an errand or other legitimate business directed by his parent or guardian. 
(Code 1982,  9.342) 
Sec. 54-328. - Aiding, abetting prohibited. 
    No person of the age of 17 years or over shall assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage any person under the age of 17 years to violate the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1982,  9.343) 
Secs. 54-329-54-340. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OBSCENE MATERIAL 

Sec. 54-341. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Harmful to minors means that quality of any description or representation, in whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sadomasochistic abuse when it: 
(1)  Predominantly appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of minors; 
(2)  Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors; and 
(3)  Is utterly without redeeming social importance for minors. 
    Knowingly means having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry or both: 
(1)  The character and content of any material described herein which is reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant; and 
(2)  The age of the minor, provided however, that an honest mistake shall constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor. 
    Minor means any person under the age of 15 years. 
    Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
    Sadomasochistic abuse means flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed. 
    Sexual conduct means acts of masturbation, homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area or buttocks. 
    Sexual excitement means the condition of human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
(Code 1982,  9.141) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 54-342. - Unlawful sales of materials to minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to sell or loan for monetary consideration; or to provide without monetary consideration: 
(1)  Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion picture film or similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors; or 
(2)  Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or sound recording which contains explicit and detailed verbal description or narrative accounts of sexual excitement; sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which, taken as a whole, is harmful to minors. 
(Code 1982,  9.142) 
Sec. 54-343. - Unlawful admission of minors to showing, exhibition or motion picture. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit to a minor or knowingly to sell to a minor an admission ticket or pass or knowingly to admit a minor to premises whereon there is exhibited a motion picture, show, or other presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors. 
(Code 1982,  9.143) 
Sec. 54-344. - Lawful if accompanied by parent or guardian. 
    Notwithstanding any provisions in this division to the contrary, it shall not be unlawful for any person to sell, loan, provide or exhibit to a minor any of the items or materials which may, or may not be deemed harmful to minors, if at the time such minor shall be accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
(Code 1982,  9.144) 
Sec. 54-345. - Warrant required. 
    No arrest for alleged violation of this division shall be made without first obtaining a duly issued warrant from a court of jurisdiction. 
(Code 1982,  9.145) 
Sec. 54-346. - Penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this division, upon conviction thereof, shall be subjected to a fine not exceeding the sum of $100.00, or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. 
(Code 1982,  9.146) 
Secs. 54-347-54-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TOBACCO 

Sec. 54-361. - Use or possession of tobacco products by minors. 
(a)  No person under the age of 18 shall purchase, offer or attempt to purchase, have in possession or use any product which is used for the formation of a smoking device, tobacco, tobacco snuff, chewing tobacco or tobacco in any other form. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 98-4, 9-3-98) 
Sec. 54-362. - Sale of tobacco products to minors; penalty; affirmative defense. 
(a)  No person shall sell, furnish, give or deliver any product which is used for the formation of a smoking device, tobacco, tobacco snuff, chewing tobacco or tobacco in any other form, to any person under the age of 18. 
(b)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00 for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 98-4, 9-3-98) 
Sec. 54-363. - Tobacco products on school property. 
(a)  A person, except those who qualify under (c), shall not use a tobacco product on school property. 
(b)  A person who violates subsection (a) is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00. 
(c)  School staff and/or personnel are exempt from this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-4, 9-3-98) 
Secs. 54-364-54-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS AND VIOLATIONS BUREAU 

Sec. 54-401. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to sections 54-402 through 54-450 of the City Code: 
    Act means Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended. 
    Authorized city official means a police officer, ordinance officer, building official or other personnel of the city authorized by this Code or designated by the city manager or an employee of the Plymouth community fire department designated by the city manager to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices. 
    Bureau means the City of Plymouth municipal ordinance violations bureau as established by this article. 
    Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
    Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of one or more municipal civil infractions by the person cited. 
    Municipal civil infraction violation notice means a written notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the City of Plymouth municipal ordinance violations bureau regarding the occurrence or existence of one or more municipal civil infractions by that person and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the city, as authorized under Sections 8396 and 8707 (6) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 96-02,  1, 2-20-96) 
Sec. 54-402. - Municipal civil infraction action; commencement. 
    A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized city official of (1) a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court; or (2) a municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the City of Plymouth municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(Ord. No. 96-02,  1, 2-20-96) 
Sec. 54-403. - Municipal civil infraction citations; issuance and service. 
    Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized city officials as follows: 
(1)  The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued. 
(2)  The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the 35th Judicial District Court. 
(3)  Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be filed with the 35th Judicial District Court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by Section 8705 of the Act. 
(4)  A citation for a municipal civil infraction citation signed by an authorized city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge, and belief." 
(5)  An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation. 
(6)  An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if, based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
Further, an authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if, upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person violate an ordinance a violation of which is a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and if the city attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(7)  An authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator; however, in a municipal civil infraction action involving the use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first-class mail to the owner of the land, building, or structure at the owners's last known address. 
(Ord. No. 96-02,  1, 2-20-96) 
Sec. 54-404. - Municipal civil infraction citations; contents. 
(a)  A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made. 
(b)  Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or she may do one of the following: 
(1)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance. 
(2)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance or, in person, or by representation. 
(3)  Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following: 
a.  Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the City of Plymouth; 
b.  Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(c)  The citation shall inform the alleged violator of all of the following: 
(1)  That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a schedule date and time for an appearance. 
(2)  That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation. 
(3)  That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the City of Plymouth. 
(4)  That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(5)  That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(d)  The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgement against the alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction. 
Sec. 54-405. - Municipal civil infraction violation notices; issuance, service and contents. 
(a)  An authorized city official may issue a municipal civil infraction notice to a person if, based upon investigation the authorized city official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, or if, based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person violate an ordinance a violation of which is a municipal civil infraction, the authorized city official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and if the city attorney approves in writing the issuance of the violation notice. 
(b)  An authorized city official may issue and serve a municipal ordinance violation notice, instead of a citation, under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided in this chapter for the service of a municipal civil infraction citation. 
(c)  A municipal civil infraction violation notice shall consist of a complaint signed by an authorized city official containing the allegations which shall fairly inform the alleged violator of the ordinance violation claimed and of the other information set forth in this chapter at section 54-406(e). 
(d)  Each violation notice shall be numbered consecutively, be in a form approved by the city attorney and consist of the following parts: 
(1)  The original which shall be filed with the bureau; 
(2)  The first copy which shall be retained by the ordinance enforcement agency supervising the authorized city official; and 
(3)  The second copy which shall be issued to the alleged violator. 
(e)  Once issued by an authorized city official, no municipal civil infraction notice shall be dismissed without written authorization by the city attorney. Upon dismissal of a violation notice, the bureau shall maintain a record of the written authorization received from the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 96-02,  1, 2-20-96) 
Sec. 54-406. - Municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(a)  Bureau established. The city hereby establishes a Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau ("bureau") as authorized under Section 8396 of the Act to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infraction in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized city officials, and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by this Code or any ordinance. 
(b)  Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The bureau shall be located at the City of Plymouth City Hall and shall be under the supervision and control of the city treasurer. The Treasurer, subject to the approval of the city manager, shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the bureau and appoint any necessary qualified city employees to administer the bureau. 
(c)  Disposition of violations. The bureau may dispose only of municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil infraction violation notice (as compared with a citation) has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the bureau. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the bureau and may have the violation processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(d)  Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The scope of the bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infraction violation notices and collecting and retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event shall the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation. 
(e)  Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized city officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided for citations as provided in section 54-403(6) and (7) of this chapter. In addition to any other information required by this Code, the notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made, the address and telephone number of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation and the consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time. 
(f)  Appearance; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by representation. 
(g)  Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid. If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal ordinance violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the violation are not paid at the bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the 35th judicial district court and a copy of the citation may be served by first-class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by Section 8705 and 8709 of the Act, but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. 
(Ord. No. 96-02,  1, 2-20-96) 
Sec. 54-407. - Schedule of civil fines established. 
(a)  A schedule of civil fines payable to the bureau for admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance violation notices shall be as established by resolution of the City Commission from time to time. 
(b)  A copy of the schedule of civil fines payable to the bureau shall be prominently posted at the bureau and readily available for public inspection. 
(c)  All collected civil fines shall go to the general fund of the city or to such other account of the city that the commission of the City of Plymouth may from time to time designate by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 96-02,  1, 2-20-96) 
Secs. 54-408-54-450. - Reserved. 
Chapter 55 - PERSONAL PROPERTY SALES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 55-1-55-5. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERSONAL PROPERTY SALES 

Sec. 55-6. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Garage Sale Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2014-06,  2, 7-21-14) 
Sec. 55-7. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the intent of this chapter to regulate the term and frequency of personal property sales within residential areas so that the residential environment of such areas is not disturbed or disrupted. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06,  2, 7-21-14) 
Sec. 55-8. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the term garage sale shall include the terms "basement sale," "attic sale" "estate sale," "yard sale," "rummage sale," "barn sale," or other types of so-called residential sales of tangible personal property such as repurposed furniture, clothing, household effects, tools, garden implements, toys, recreation equipment or other secondhand items customarily found in and about the home and advertised in a manner whereby the public at large is, or can be, aware of such sale. Such sales include sales that are open to the public and conducted from or on residential premises for the purpose of disposing of personal property. 
    A calendar year is defined as January 1 through December 31. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06,  2, 7-21-14) 
Sec. 55-9. - Limitations. 
(1)  No one but the homeowner or occupant of the residential property on which the sale is conducted may conduct a garage sale on the premises. 
(2)  No merchandise of any nature shall be brought in from any other source in connection with such sale. Only personal property, as defined in this chapter, may be offered for sale. 
(3)  No sale can be conducted for longer than three consecutive days. 
(4)  Not more than three sales can be conducted on or at the same premises during any calendar year. 
(5)  No sale shall begin prior to 7:00 a.m. nor continue later than 8:00 p.m. 
(6)  Confines of the sale must remain on private property. 
(7)  Excessive noise emanating from the area of any sale is expressly prohibited as prescribed by the City of Plymouth Noise Ordinance [section 34-86 et seq. of this Code]. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06,  2, 7-21-14) 
Sec. 55-10. - Exceptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to the homeowner or occupant who, during the normal course of housekeeping, advertises or otherwise offers for sale individual pieces of furniture, an automobile or an appliance being replaced or no longer needed. In addition, the limitations of this section shall not be applicable when a garage sale is registered and conducted by a church, school or other civic or charitable non-profit organization. Further, if the property has been transferred, the new property owner is entitled to one additional garage sale unless no sales have occurred as of the date of the transfer of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06,  2, 7-21-14) 
Sec. 55-11. - Registration. 
    Online registration of each sale must be completed prior to the commencement of the sale at the city's website address (www.ci.plymouth.mi.us). There is no fee to register. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06,  2, 7-21-14) 
Sec. 55-12. - Signs. 
    Signs advertising the garage sale may be posted, subject to the following: 
(1)  Any allowable signs must comply with the City of Plymouth Sign Ordinance [section 78-220 et seq. of this Code]. 
(2)  One garage sale sign not to exceed four square feet in area may be located on the property where the garage sale is being held and shall be used to advertise the garage sale. Such sign shall be placed at least ten feet inside the property line of the premises on which said sale is conducted, and shall be removed immediately after the completion of the garage sale in accordance with the terms of registration and this chapter. 
(3)  No more than three (3) signs advertising the garage sale shall be posted within the city limits and may only be posted on private property with the owner's permission. 
(4)  No signs shall be posted more than one day prior to the sale and must be removed within one day of the end of the sale.;ol1; 
(5)  Signage shall not be illuminated in any manner whatsoever except incidentally by streetlights or house lights. 
(6)  Under no circumstances shall any signs be attached to or located on any tree, utility pole, traffic-control device or on any public land or right-of-way, either by nail, screw, wire, cord, tape or by any other manner whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06,  2, 7-21-14) 
Sec. 55-13. - Penalty for violation of this article. 
    Any homeowner or occupant who violates any provisions of this article, more than one time, during any given calendar year that person, and any other homeowner or occupants living in the home at the time of violation shall be prohibited from registering and holding a garage sale for the following calendar year. Further, any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction punishable by a civil fine of not more than $250.00 for the first offense, $500.00 for the second offense and $750.00 for the third and all other offenses and the costs of prosecution. Any person found responsible for a municipal civil infraction for holding an "unregistered" sale the preceding year shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction equal to a third offense for any "unregistered" sales held the following calendar year. The city commission may, by resolution, at any time, change the amount of the civil fine for the municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06,  2, 7-21-14) 
Chapter 58 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 22; environment, ch. 34. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate disposal of garbage and rubbish, MCL 123.241 et seq., 123.361 et seq., MSA 5.2661 et seq., 5.2726(1) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the intent of the city commission that this chapter be liberally construed for the purpose of providing a sanitary and satisfactory method of preparation, collection and disposal of solid waste, and recyclable materials, as well as the maintenance of public and private property in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition, for the health, safety and welfare of the community, and to provide for a reasonable system of user fees to defray the cost incurred by the city in collecting and administering waste removal. The city commission recognizes that in order to conserve our natural resources, as well as to control the ever increasing cost of solid waste disposal, that the separation, collection and sale of recyclable materials will reduce the amount of solid waste to be disposed of, reduce the cost of landfilling solid waste, extend the life of the existing and future landfills and protect and conserve our limited natural resources. All citizens are encouraged to voluntarily recycle and to make use of the facilities therefor provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.2), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aluminum means all products made of aluminum including aluminum cans, foil, wrappers, containers for prepared dinners or other foods, screen frames and lawn chairs excluding redeemable aluminum cans. 
    Brush means small trees and shrubs. 
    Building means a structure used in whole or in part for human habitation, manufacturing, sales, or other purposes. 
    City designated waste or recyclable collection and transfer facility means a facility which the city has identified from time to time as an approved location for the collection and transfer of solid waste, leaves, yard waste, and/or recyclable materials. 
    City solid waste bag means a bag sold by the city as a suitable container for the purposes of solid waste collection. Solid waste bags shall be of a distinctive color or material and printed with the city seal or other appropriate words which indicate the bags contain solid waste. 
    City solid waste cart means a city specified cart provided by one of the city's designated solid waste collector's as a container for commercial solid waste. 
    City solid waste tag means a tag sold by the city which may be attached to an acceptable solid waste container for the purpose of solid waste collection. Solid waste tags shall be of a distinctive color or material and printed with the city seal or other appropriate words which indicate the acceptable containers contain solid waste. 
    City yard waste bag means a bag sold by the city as a suitable container for the purpose of yard waste collection. Yard waste bags shall be of a distinctive color or material and printed with the city seal or other appropriate words which indicate the bags contain yard waste. 
    City yard waste tag means a tag sold by the city which may be attached to an acceptable refuse container for the purpose of yard waste. Yard waste tags shall be of a distinctive color or material and printed with the city seal or other appropriate words which indicate the acceptable containers contain yard waste. 
    Commercial solid waste means the miscellaneous waste material resulting from the operation of mercantile enterprises, and includes garbage and rubbish and excludes all hazardous waste. 
    Commercial solid waste collection means solid waste pickup from all commercial, business, institutional, condominium development, and multiunit residential establishments (those consisting of three or more dwelling units). 
    Construction materials means waste from building, street or other construction, alteration or repair, including dirt from excavation. 
    Demolition debris means refuse which is incidental to the demolition of buildings, other structures or appurtenances on a premises. 
    Department means the department of public works of the city. 
    Designated collector means a licensed collector who has been issued a contract from the city to collect solid waste, leaves, yard waste and/or recyclable materials within the city. 
    Director of the department of public works means the director of public works of the city or his duly authorized representative. 
    Domestic solid waste means the waste materials resulting from the usual routine of housekeeping, and includes garbage and rubbish and excludes all hazardous waste. 
    Dwelling unit has the same meaning as residential unit. 
    Garbage means all waste animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable matter incident to the use, preparation and storage of food for human consumption. This term does not include food processing wastes from canneries, slaughterhouses, packinghouses or similar industries, which shall be classified as industrial refuse or hazardous waste. 
    Hazardous waste means any material that has been identified by state or federal regulation to be unsuitable for disposal in a Type II sanitary landfill. 
    Industrial solid waste means all waste materials resulting from industrial or manufacturing operations or processes of every nature whatsoever, including organic wastes from canneries, slaughterhouses, packinghouses and other industrial food processing operations. The term includes refuse material resulting from cleaning up in connection with such industrial or manufacturing operations, and refuse material resulting from offices, stores, lunch rooms, warehouses or other operations established in conjunction with such industrial or manufacturing operations as well as garbage and rubbish and excludes hazardous waste. 
    Inspector means a person designated or appointed by the city manager to have charge or control of a waste or recyclable collection and transfer site and/or the authority to enforce this chapter. 
    Leaves means foliage from plants, shrubs and trees. 
    Leaf collection season means a period during the fall of each year as scheduled by the city manager during which a leaf collection service is provided in specified areas of the city. 
    Licensed collector means a collection agent who has received a material collection license from the city. 
    Material collection license means a license issued by the city to a collection agent, which would allow the collection agent the privilege to provide a specific type of solid waste, yard waste and/or recyclable material collection service. 
    Medical waste means any material that has been identified by state or federal regulation to be medical, biohazardous or pathological waste and subject to special handling and disposal regulations. 
    Multiple residential means residential establishments consisting of three or more dwelling units. 
    Municipal solid waste means rubbish and garbage consisting of certain discarded products incidental to housekeeping and mercantile enterprises that are not recyclable. It shall be classified as either domestic, commercial or industrial solid waste and excludes hazardous waste. 
    Person in charge means the owner, proprietor, occupant, or agent in charge of any premises, whether an individual, partnership or corporation. 
    Premises means a parcel of land, including any buildings, structures or appurtenances within the city, which includes the adjoining street, right-of-way or legal easement, separated from adjacent parcels of land by legal description. 
    Recyclable material means materials specifically designated, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter to be separated from solid waste for the express purpose of preparation for and delivery to a secondary market or other use. 
    Refuse has the same meaning as solid waste. 
    Residential solid waste has the same meaning as domestic solid waste. 
    Residential solid waste collection means weekly solid waste pickup from residential buildings with no more than two dwelling units and from small commercial establishments which regularly generate less than one cubic yard of solid waste per week. 
    Residential unit means a building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy exclusively by one family for residential purposes and having cooking facilities and separate sanitary facilities. 
    Rubbish means the miscellaneous waste materials resulting from housekeeping and ordinary mercantile enterprises, and includes material such as packing boxes, cartons, excelsior paper, ashes, cinders, glass, metal, plastic and rubber, and excludes hazardous waste. 
    Small commercial establishments means commercial establishments which regularly generate less than one cubic yard of solid waste per week. 
    Solid waste means garbage, rubbish and ashes. Solid waste does not include human body waste, liquid waste, materials that have been separated either at the source or a processing site for the purpose of reuse, recycling or composting, or any material that has been identified by state or federal regulation to be unsuitable for disposal in a Type II sanitary landfill. 
    Special refuse means furniture, washers, dryers, refrigerators and other household appliances, brush, large tree limbs and other bulky refuse items, and excluding construction and demolition debris, that are unsuitable for regular solid waste collection services. 
    Special refuse tag means a tag sold by the city which shall be attached to special refuse. Special refuse tags shall be of a distinctive color or material and printed with the city seal or other appropriate words which indicate the use of the tag. 
    Type II sanitary landfill shall have the same meaning as defined in Act No. 641 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 299.401 et seq., MSA 13.29(1) et seq.), as amended. 
    Yard waste means grass clippings, leaves, weeds, hedge clippings, garden waste, and twigs. 
    Yard waste collection season means a period each year as scheduled by the city manager during which a yard waste collection service is provided in specified areas of the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.3), 8-20-90) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 58-3. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The director of the department of public works, inspectors and the police department are hereby authorized and directed to enforce this chapter. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby authorized to employ inspectors to have the care and control of established collection and transfer sites and to enforce this chapter. Such inspector may be empowered with police power and duly authorized to issue tickets and shall enforce the rules that are or may hereafter be promulgated for the government and control of solid waste and recyclables. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.17), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-4. - Rules and regulations. 
    The city manager is authorized and directed to establish and promulgate reasonable rules and regulations as to the manner, days and times for the collection of waste or recyclables in accordance with the terms hereof. Such regulations shall be effective upon promulgation in the case of waste or recyclables specifically enumerated herein, and upon promulgation but subsequent to the date of the passage of resolution by the city commission for subsequently added waste or recyclables. The city commission may, by majority vote, change, modify, repeal or amend any portion of such rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.2), (2.17), (2.19), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-5. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person who violates or neglects to comply with any provisions of this chapter, or any regulation promulgated pursuant thereto, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and the cost of prosecution, except that the maximum fine for failure to comply with this chapter, and rules and regulations issued pursuant thereto, shall not exceed $100.00 for an initial violation, and the cost of prosecution or in default of the payment thereof, by imprisonment at the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements herein. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.18), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-6. - General obligations. 
    It shall be mandatory for all persons to dispose of their solid waste and to segregate such items provided herein, or as specified by the subsequent resolution of the city commission, from all other solid waste produced and to separately bundle or contain such items for proper disposal, collection and/or recycling, in accordance with the provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.4), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-7. - Accumulation of solid waste. 
(a)  No person in charge of a residential dwelling unit, commercial establishment, or industrial facility shall permit the accumulation of refuse, rubbish or garbage upon their premises for a period that would pose a health hazard, subject adjacent property occupants to an unreasonably offensive odor, or become a public nuisance. The accumulation of refuse, rubbish or garbage in excess of seven days shall be prima facie evidence of posing a health hazard and creating a public nuisance. 
(b)  Leaves, yard waste and vegetable waste may be stored for composting purposes in a manner which will not harbor rodents, subject adjacent property owners to an unreasonably offensive odor, or become a public nuisance. 
(c)  In the case of any alley or lawn extension (the area between the sidewalk and the street) where any refuse, rubbish, garbage or yard waste shall exist or be, or has been deposited, it shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of any lot or premises to remove from the one-half of such alley adjoining such lot or premises or the entire lawn extension adjoining such lot, all such substances. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.5), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-8. - Unauthorized dumping and littering. 
    It shall be unlawful to throw or deposit any refuse upon or into any street, right-of-way, alley, portable container, nonportable container, or any other property or premises, public or private, without the permission of the owner, proprietor, occupant, or agent in charge of that premises. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.6), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-9. - Precollection requirements; separation; containers. 
(a)  All persons within the city who shall place for disposal, removal, or collection, the following items shall do so in strict conformity with the following regulations: 
(1)  Solid waste shall be separated and contained in a city solid waste bag, or in any other acceptable solid waste container (as provided in section 58-41 et seq.), clearly marked with a city solid waste tag. 
(2)  Yard waste shall be separated and contained in a city yard waste bag, or in any other acceptable yard waste container (as provided in section 58-41 et seq.), clearly marked with a city yard waste tag, provided that during the leaf collection season, leaves may also be placed at the curb for the city leaf collection services. 
(3)  Special refuse. All special refuse shall be separated and must be removed using an approved method. Approved methods shall be limited to: 
a.  Arrangements with a licensed collector; 
b.  Transport to a city-designated collector and transfer site; or 
c.  By tagging the debris with a city special refuse tag. 
(4)  Bulk rubbish. All bulk rubbish, such as cardboard containers, wooden crates and similar rubbish shall be separated and shall be flattened and tied in bundles or packed in suitable containers of a size that may be readily handled by one collector, and in no case shall such bundle or container be larger than three feet by three feet by four feet, nor weigh more than 50 pounds and clearly marked with a city special refuse tag. 
(5)  Brush. All brush shall be separated and placed at the curb without being bound. 
(6)  Industrial solid waste. All industrial solid waste shall be collected by licensed collectors privately contracted for by the industrial user, and shall otherwise comply with this chapter. 
(7)  Construction and demolition debris. All construction and demolition debris shall be separated and collected by licensed contractors privately contracted for by the person who produced the waste, and shall otherwise comply with this chapter. 
(8)  Hazardous waste. All hazardous waste shall be separated and collected by licensed collectors privately contracted for by the person who produced the waste, and shall otherwise comply with this chapter. 
(9)  Medical waste. All medical waste shall be separated and disposed of in accordance with any and all applicable state and federal regulations, and shall be collected by licensed contractors privately contracted for by the person who produced the waste, and shall otherwise comply with this chapter. 
(b)  Items not put in a prepaid city bag or tagged with a prepaid city tag will not be picked up unless otherwise provided herein. The collection of municipal solid waste or recyclables is conditioned upon the observance of all provisions of this chapter. Collection is subject to weather and other conditions beyond the city's control. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.7), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-10. - City bag and tag specifications. 
(a)  Specifications for city bags and/or tags and their use shall be promulgated by the city manager. 
(b)  The prices for the various bags and tags shall be determined by resolution of the city commission. 
(c)  The city or its authorized representative may sell city solid waste or yard waste bags and/or tags to individuals and/or to participating retail sales establishments. Participating sales establishments shall sell the bags or tags for not more than the price specified by the city commission. However, the appropriate sales tax may be charged by the retail establishment if so required by state or federal law. 
(d)  The gross weight of the solid waste or yard waste bags, when filled with waste, shall not exceed 50 pounds. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.8), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-11. - Ownership of wastes. 
    From the time of placement at the curb for collection any leaves, yard waste or recyclable material required to be separated from the residents solid waste in accordance with this chapter for the purposes of collection shall be the property of the city or its authorized agent. No person shall take, collect, or transport any leaves, yard waste or recyclable material from any street, right-of-way, alley or dumpster of this city, without a material collection license authorizing such activity. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.10), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-12. - Sale of recyclable materials permitted. 
    Anything in this chapter to the contrary not withstanding, any person may donate or sell recyclables to any other person, whether that person operates for profit or not for profit. Under no circumstances, however, may the transferred recyclables be picked up from curbside regardless whether or not such recyclables are placed at curbside on or immediately preceding the regular curbside collection. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.11), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-13. - Transportation. 
(a)  Manner. The transportation of all garbage, offal, rubbish or other waste materials through the streets, alleys or thoroughfares of the city shall be conducted in such a manner as to create no nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport, cart, carry or convey through or over any of the streets, alleys or public places of the city any garbage, unwashed refuse or unwashed food containers without the written consent of the city manager. Whenever such permission is granted, the vehicle used for such purposes shall be watertight and provided with a suitable covering. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport or otherwise convey through or over any of the streets or public places of the city, any rubbish or other waste material except under written regulations or with the written consent of the city manager except rubbish or waste material accumulating on property owned or controlled by him and then only by approved methods of conveyance. 
(b)  Vehicles. Vehicles conveying waste must be of such construction and so operated that contents shall not spill upon the public streets, alleys, or into the air or otherwise create a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.13), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-14. - Removal of accumulated wastes. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to notify, in writing, the owner, proprietor, occupant, agent and/or tenant of any premises, to remove solid waste, yard waste, special refuse and/or recyclables accumulated and not disposed of in compliance with this chapter on such premises (unless the same is on the abutting public property, or public rights-of-way in which no notice is required). Such notice shall be by hand delivery or first class mail, addressed to such owner and/or tenant at his last known address. 
(b)  If solid wastes are not removed from the premises within six days after the date of mailing such notice, or if the waste or recyclables are on abutting public property or public rights-of-way, the owner, proprietor, occupant, agent and/or tenant of the premises shall be subject to penalties set for the violation of this chapter. The city manager is also hereby authorized and empowered to contract and pay for the removal of the waste or recyclable or to order the removal by the city. 
(c)  When the city has effected the removal of such waste or recyclables or has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date of removal, shall be charged to the fee owner of the premises and forwarded to such owner by the city. Such charge shall be due and payable upon receipt. 
(d)  Where cost of removal is not paid by an owner within 60 days after the removal of such waste or recyclable as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the city manager shall cause to be recorded in the treasurer's office the date and premises on which removal was done. The recording of such statement shall constitute a lien on the property and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest until final payment has been made and shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of taxes; further, the total amount shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of one percent per month if the same is not paid in full on or before the date of the tax bill upon which such charge appears becomes delinquent. Such sworn statements, recorded in accordance with the provisions hereof, shall be notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the premises described in the statement that the same is due. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.14), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-15. - Prohibited waste. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place in any container or receptacle any material that might endanger the collection personnel, nor deposit or deliver any hazardous waste or any such waste or recyclable to a disposal site which would be detrimental to the normal operation of collection, incineration, recycling or disposal, for example: gaseous, solid or liquid poison, dead animals, ammunition, explosives, inflammable liquid undrained garbage of a liquid or semiliquid nature, whether in containers or not, concrete, dirt, auto, or equipment parts, or any material that possesses heat sufficient to ignite any other collected materials. No motor vehicle shall be dumped or abandoned at any disposal site. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to place leaves, yard waste or recyclables specifically required herein, or by city commission resolution, to be separated from solid waste, in a refuse container for the purposes of refuse collection, removal or disposal, nor otherwise dispose of the item except in conformance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.15), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-16. - Waste or recyclable collection and transfer sites. 
(a)  Selection of sites. The city manager, with the approval of the city commission, is hereby authorized to select and locate such waste or recyclable collection and transfer sites as he may deem necessary, upon any land owned or leased by the city or upon land privately owned, subject to consent having first been secured by the city from the owner. 
(b)  Scavengers. It shall be unlawful to take, remove or carry away anything deposited on such disposal site nor in any other way interfere therewith, except by permission of the city manager. 
(c)  Unauthorized dumping. It shall be unlawful to dump or deposit any waste or recyclable in any place in the city except in a collection and transfer site duly designated as such by the city manager, as provided by subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Licenses. The city manager, with the approval of the city commission, is authorized to license the use of private property within the city as a private collection and transfer site subject to such reasonable terms and regulations as he may deem necessary for the protection of the public, which rules and regulations shall at all times be subject to revision, cancellation, alteration or amendment by the city commission; provided, however, that any such permit shall be revocable at any time without cause and without previous notice by the city manager or by the city commission. 
(e)  Use permits. It shall be unlawful to dump or deposit waste or recyclables in any collection and transfer site without permission of the city manager or his agents, which permission shall state the time the disposal site is open for use, and shall be issued upon the payment of such charges as the city commission by resolution prescribes. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.16), 8-20-90) 
Secs. 58-17-58-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RECEPTACLES 

Sec. 58-41. - Required. 
    The person in charge of any building, house or structure where refuse accumulates, shall provide and maintain proper refuse receptacles, and shall place or cause to be placed in such receptacles, all refuse accumulating on such premises; provided, that bulk rubbish may be stored in a condition properly prepared for collection as specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.9(A)), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-42. - Residential and small commercial. 
    The person in charge of every single- or two-family building or small commercial establishment where refuse accumulates, shall provide, keep clean and in place, proper receptacles of a portable type to house their bagged solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.9(B)), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-43. - Commercial, industrial and multiple residential. 
    The person in charge of every building consisting of three or more dwelling units, and every building used for a commercial or industrial business, shall provide, keep clean and in place proper receptacles of a portable type; provided that where the city manager determines that portable receptacles are not practical for multiple dwellings, commercial or industrial businesses, he may authorize the use of nonportable receptacles of the type that can be mechanically hoisted by a refuse collection vehicle, and with specifications established and approved by him. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.9(C)), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-44. - Portable receptacles. 
    Portable receptacles for municipal refuse shall be of metal, fiberglass, plastic or other substantial construction approved by the city manager, shall have handles or bails and tightfitting covers; they shall not exceed 30 gallons each in capacity, provided that receptacles used exclusively for yard waste, need not have covers; and provided further, that the city manager may approve the use of plastic bags of a capacity and quality specified by him for the storage and disposal of solid and/or yard waste. In no event shall the gross weight of receptacle, and the waste it contains, exceed 50 pounds. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.9(D)), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-45. - Nonportable receptacles. 
    Nonportable receptacles for solid waste shall be of substantial metal construction, shall have a capacity of not more than eight cubic yards, and shall meet all specifications established by the city manager on the basis of the requirements of the solid waste collection equipment being used by the city or a licensed collector, and the necessities of health and safety. All garbage shall be properly wrapped or within a closed plastic bag before placing it in the nonportable receptacle. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.9(E)), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-46. - Nonconforming receptacles. 
    Receptacles that are badly broken or otherwise fail to meet the requirements of this chapter may be classified as rubbish and, after due notice to the owner, may be collected as rubbish by the department. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.9(F)), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-47. - Location of receptacles. 
(a)  All nonportable receptacles shall be placed and collected in the location designated by the city manager. Furthermore, they shall be so located that the licensed collectors will not have to trespass on private property in order to pick up such receptacles. In no event shall nonportable receptacles be placed in or upon public property, or public rights-of-way, without first obtaining the city manager approval in writing. 
(b)  All portable receptacles shall be stored within the side or rear yards of the premises and not be set out for collection prior to 12:00 noon preceding the day of collection, and after the receptacles are emptied they shall be returned to their place of storage on the same day collections are made. Points of collection shall be determined by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.9(G)), 8-20-90) 
Secs. 58-48-58-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION LICENSE 

Sec. 58-71. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful to engage in the business or practice of collecting or disposing of solid waste, leaves, yard waste, or recyclable material without first obtaining a material collection license in the manner outlined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.12(A)), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-72. - Application. 
    No material collection license shall be issued except upon application to the city clerk. At a minimum, the application must include the following information: 
(1)  A description of the methods and equipment which the applicant proposes to use for collecting solid waste, leaves, yard waste and/or recyclable material in the city; 
(2)  A description of the type of collection to be provided and the part of the city which it will affect; 
(3)  A plan for meeting the precollection requirements outlined in section 58-9; 
(4)  Proof of liability insurance as required by city policy; 
(5)  A plan for meeting all collection and disposal requirements outlined in other relevant city, county, state and federal regulations, as appropriate; 
(6)  The name and address of the site or sites to be used to dispose of each material collected; 
(7)  Proof of access to and use of an adequate and approvable materials recovery facility, composting facility or a licensed disposal area; 
(8)  Such other pertinent facts as the city manager may from time to time require for the purposes of determining whether the applicant complies with any and all laws, rules or regulations established by the city, county, state or federal government in regards to waste handling or disposal. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.12(B)), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-73. - Action by manager. 
    The city clerk shall submit all such applications to the city manager who may approve the applications of such persons or organizations as deemed to be in the best interests of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.12(C)), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-74. - Fee. 
    The city commission may establish by resolution a license fee to be paid by the applicant upon receipt of the material collection license. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.12(D)), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-75. - Issuance. 
    Whenever an application made under this article has been approved by the city manager, the city clerk shall, upon payment of any established fee by the applicant, issue a material collection license. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.12(E)), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-76. - Expiration. 
    Unless revoked under circumstances hereinafter provided, every material collection license shall expire on the next succeeding January 1 following its issuance. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.12(F)), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-77. - Limitations. 
    The city may restrict the number of material collection licenses issued and the scope of service of such licenses based on: 
(1)  The geographic area to be served; 
(2)  The population sector to be served such as single-family residential, multiple-family residential or commercial; 
(3)  The type of material to be collected; 
(4)  The points of collection (such as the curb, alley, or other location); and/or 
(5)  The schedule of such collections. 
A license may only be used for the scope of services expressly stated in the material collection license. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.12(G)), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-78. - Revocation. 
    A material collection license issued under this article may be revoked if: 
(1)  Any part of this chapter or other relevant city, county, state or federal regulation is violated, or 
(2)  If the terms of the license are violated. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.12(H)), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-79. - Disposal restricted. 
    No collector licensed under this article shall dispose of solid waste, leaves, yard waste and/or recyclable material at sites other than those specified in the terms of the collector's material collection license. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.12(I)), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-80. - Bond. 
    Collectors licensed under this article shall provide a $5,000.00 bond for damage to public or private property while collecting, transporting or disposing of the solid waste or recyclable waste. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.12(J)), 8-20-90) 
Sec. 58-81. - Inspections. 
    Each unit of transportation, and each licensed collector provided receptacle may be inspected in accordance with a procedure established by the city manager to determine that the licensed contractor has in operation only units and receptacles which are proper, hygienic, and not contributory to litter. 
(Ord. No. 90-3,  1(2.12(K)), 8-20-90) 
Chapter 62 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; community development, ch. 30; multichannel service providers, ch. 50; subdivisions, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 74; zoning, ch. 78. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Additional regulations. 
    The city manager may make additional regulations pertaining to openings and excavations in the streets, curb cuts, street obstructions, and house moving, which regulations shall be subject to the approval of the city commission. No person shall fail to comply with any such regulations. 
(Code 1982,  4.36) 
Sec. 62-2. - Protection of openings, obstructions. 
    All openings, excavations and obstructions shall be properly and substantially barricaded and railed off, and at night shall be provided with prescribed warning lights. Warning lights perpendicular to the flow of traffic shall not be more than three feet apart, and parallel to the flow of traffic not over 15 feet apart. 
(Code 1982,  4.31) 
Sec. 62-3. - Shoring excavations. 
    All openings and excavations shall, where necessary, be properly and substantially sheeted and braced as a safeguard to workmen and to prevent caveins or washouts which would tend to injure the thoroughfare or subsurface structure of the street. 
(Code 1982,  4.32) 
Secs. 62-4-62-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department refers to the department of engineering of the city. 
    Engineer means the city engineer or his duly authorized assistant or deputy. 
    Street means all of the land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, alleys and boulevards in the city, and includes lawn extensions and sidewalks and the area reserved therefor where the same are not yet constructed. 
(Code 1982,  4.1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 62-27. - Damage and obstruction prohibited. 
    No person shall make any excavation in, or cause any damage to any street in the city, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this article. No person shall place any article, thing or obstruction in any street, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this article, but this provision shall not be deemed to prohibit the following: 
(1)  Such temporary obstructions as may be incidental to the expeditious movement of articles and things to and from abutting premises, 
(2)  The lawful parking of vehicles within the part of the street reserved for vehicular traffic, 
(3)  The parking of any disabled vehicles, outside the traveled portion of any street for a period of not to exceed 48 hours, or 
(4)  The planting of trees and shrubs as permitted in section 18-711 et seq. 
(Code 1982,  4.2) 
Sec. 62-28. - Permits; insurance. 
(a)  Where permits are authorized in this article, they shall be obtained upon application to the engineer, upon such forms as he shall prescribe, and there shall be a charge of $10.00 for each such permit, except as otherwise provided by resolution of the city commission. Such permit shall be revocable by the engineer for failure to comply with this article, rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, and the lawful orders of the engineer or his duly authorized representative, and shall be valid only for the period of time endorsed thereon. 
(b)  Application for a permit under the provisions of this article shall be deemed an agreement by the applicant to promptly complete the work permitted, observe all pertinent laws and regulations of the city in connection therewith, repair all damage done to the street surface and installations on, over or within such street, including trees, and protect and save harmless the city from all damages or actions at law that may arise or may be brought on account of injury to persons or property resulting from the work done under the permit or in connection therewith. 
(c)  Where liability insurance policies are required to be filed in making application for a permit, they shall be in not less than the following amounts, except as otherwise specified in this article: 
(1)  On account of injury to, or death of, any person in any one accident ..... $100,000.00 
(2)  On account of any one accident resulting in injury to, or death of, more than one person ..... 300,000.00 
(3)  On account of damage to property in any one accident ..... 100,000.00 
A duplicate executed copy or photostatic copy of the original of such insurance policy, approved as to form by the city attorney, shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(d)  Where cash deposits are required with the application for any permit hereunder, such deposit shall be in the amount of $50.00, except as otherwise specified in this article, and such deposit shall be used to defray all expenses to the city arising out of the granting of the permit and work done under the permit or in connection therewith. Six months after the completion of the work done under the permit, any balance of such cash deposit unexpended shall be refunded. In any case where the deposit does not cover all costs and expenses of the city, the deficit shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Code 1982,  4.3) 
Sec. 62-29. - Street openings. 
    No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street without first obtaining a written permit from the engineer. No permit shall be granted until the applicant shall post a cash deposit and file a liability insurance policy as required by section 62-28. 
(Code 1982,  4.4) 
Sec. 62-30. - Emergency openings. 
    The engineer may, if the public safety requires immediate action, grant permission to make a necessary street opening in an emergency, provided that a permit shall be obtained on the following business day and the provisions of this article shall be complied with. 
(Code 1982,  4.5) 
Sec. 62-31. - Backfilling. 
    All trenches in a public street or other public place, except by special permission, shall be backfilled in accordance with regulations adopted pursuant to this article. Any settlement shall be corrected within eight hours after notification to do so. 
(Code 1982,  4.6) 
Sec. 62-32. - Sidewalk vaults. 
    Openings through the sidewalk for the delivery of fuel when lawfully in existence, shall not be greater than 30 inches in diameter, shall be circular in form, and shall be effectually closed when not in actual use by an iron cover set flush within the surface of the sidewalk, level with the sidewalk and securely locked in place. All openings in the sidewalk for the admission of light and air shall be closed and protected either by substantial iron gratings or illuminating pavement of a design and so placed as to be satisfactory to the engineer. 
(Code 1982,  4.7) 
Sec. 62-33. - Utility poles. 
    Utility poles may be placed in the city streets as the engineer shall prescribe and shall be located thereon in accordance with the directions of the engineer. Such poles shall be removed or relocated as the engineer shall from time to time direct. 
(Code 1982,  4.8) 
Sec. 62-34. - Maintenance of installations in street. 
    Every owner of, and every person in control of, any estate hereafter maintaining a sidewalk vault, coal hole, manhole, or any other excavation, or any post, pole, sign, awning, wire, conduit or other structure in, under, over or upon, any street which is adjacent to or a part of his estate, shall do so only on the condition that such maintenance shall be considered as an agreement on his part with the city to keep the same and the covers thereof, and any gas and electric boxes and tubes thereon, in good repair and condition at all times during his ownership or control thereof, and to indemnify and save harmless the city against all damages or actions at law that may arise or be brought by reason of such excavation or structure being under, over, in or upon the street, or being unfastened, out of repair or defective during such ownership or control. 
(Code 1982,  4.9) 
Sec. 62-35. - New paving. 
    Whenever the city commission shall determine to pave or resurface any street, the engineer shall, not less than 30 days prior to commencement of construction, serve notice upon all public utilities requiring them to install all necessary underground work in advance of the paving or resurfacing. 
(Code 1982,  4.10) 
Sec. 62-36. - Sewer and water connections-Procedure. 
    When such paving or resurfacing shall have been ordered or declared necessary by the city commission, such sewer and water connections as are necessary, shall be installed in advance of such paving or resurfacing, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the premises adjacent thereto, or to be served thereby, and against the owner of such premises. Where such paving or resurfacing is financed in whole or in part by special assessment, the cost of such sewer and water connections may be made chargeable against the premises served or adjacent thereto, as part of the special assessment for such paving or resurfacing. Where such paving or resurfacing is financed otherwise than by special assessment, the cost of the sewer and water connections so installed shall be a lien on such premises adjacent thereto, or to be served thereby, and shall be collected as provided for assessments on single lots pursuant to the provisions of the city Charter. 
(Code 1982,  4.11) 
Sec. 62-37. - Same-Determination of necessity. 
    The necessity for sewer and water connections shall be determined by the engineer, which determination shall be based upon the size, shape and area of each abutting lot or parcel of land, the lawful use of such land under the zoning regulations of the city, the character of the locality and the probable future development of each abutting lot or parcel of land. The engineer shall give written notice of the intention to install such sewer and water connections and to charge the cost of the same to the premises, to each owner of land abutting the street, to be furnished with such connections, as shown by the records of the city assessor in accordance with section 1-14 of this Code. Any owner objecting to the installation of any such sewer or water connection, shall file his objection in writing within seven days after service of such notice, with the engineer who shall, after considering each such objection made in writing, make a final determination of the sewer and water connections to be installed. 
(Code 1982,  4.12) 
Sec. 62-38. - Time period limitation. 
    No permit to make any opening or excavation in or under a paved street shall be granted to any person within a period of two years after the completion of any paving or resurfacing thereof. If a street opening is necessary as a public safety measure, the engineer may suspend the operation of this section as to such street opening. 
(Code 1982,  4.13) 
Sec. 62-39. - Removal of encroachment. 
    Encroachments and obstructions in the street may be removed and excavations refilled and the expense of such removal or refilling charged to the abutting landowner when made or permitted by him or suffered to remain by him, otherwise than in accordance with the terms and conditions of this article. The procedure for collection of such expenses shall be as prescribed in the city Charter. 
(Code 1982,  4.37) 
Sec. 62-40. - Dumping snow. 
    The pushing, dumping, or depositing of snow or ice from any privately owned premises into or upon any street in the city shall constitute a violation of this Code and shall be deemed an encroachment subject to the provisions of section 62-39. 
(Code 1982,  4.38) 
Sec. 62-41. - Temporary street closings. 
    The chief of police shall have authority to temporarily close any street, or portion thereof, when he shall deem such street to be unsafe or temporarily unsuitable for use for any reason. He shall cause suitable barriers and signs to be erected on such street, indicating that the same is closed to public travel. When any street or portion thereof is closed to public travel, no person shall drive any vehicle upon or over such street except as the same may be necessary incidentally to any street repair or construction work being done in the area closed to public travel. No person shall move or interfere with any sign or barrier pursuant to this section without authority from the chief of police. 
(Code 1982,  4.39) 
Secs. 62-42-62-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURB CUTS 

Sec. 62-51. - Permit required. 
    No opening in or through any curb or any street shall be made without first obtaining a written permit from the department. 
(Code 1982,  4.18) 
Sec. 62-52. - Basic specifications. 
    Curb cuts and sidewalk driveway crossings to provide access to private property shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The minimum width of a driveway approach at the sidewalk line shall be ten feet, and the maximum width of a single driveway approach at the sidewalk line shall be 30 feet. 
(2)  The minimum distance between any curb cut and a public crosswalk shall be five feet. 
(3)  The minimum distance between curb cuts, except those serving residential property, shall be 25 feet. 
(4)  The maximum number of linear feet of sidewalk driveway crossings permitted for any lot, parcel of land, business or enterprise, shall be 45 percent of the total abutting street frontage up to and including 200 linear feet of street frontage plus 20 percent of the linear feet of street frontage in excess of 200 feet. 
(5)  The necessary adjustments to utility poles, light standards, fire hydrants, catchbasins, street or railway signs, signals, or other public improvements or installations shall be accomplished without cost to the city. 
(6)  All construction shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the engineer. 
(Code 1982,  4.18) 
Secs. 62-53-62-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 62-76. - Obstructions. 
    No person shall occupy any street with any materials or machinery incidental to the construction, demolition or repair of any building adjacent to such street, or for any other purpose, without first obtaining a permit from the engineer and posting a cash deposit and filing an insurance policy as required by section 62-28. 
(Code 1982,  4.26) 
Sec. 62-77. - Pedestrian passage. 
    At least four feet of sidewalk space shall be kept clean and clear for the free passage of pedestrians and if the building operations are such that such free passageway is impracticable, a temporary plank sidewalk with substantial railings or sidewalk shelter built in accordance with chapter 18, shall be provided around such obstruction. 
(Code 1982,  4.27) 
Sec. 62-78. - Construction. 
    The sidewalks of all streets, alleys, and public highways within the city hereafter constructed or repaired shall, unless otherwise ordered by the city commission, be constructed of the material and in the manner provided in this article. 
(Code 1982,  4.41) 
Sec. 62-79. - Line and grade. 
    The width of all sidewalks constructed under this article shall be determined by the city commission, before the same are constructed, or ordered constructed, and shall conform to the established grade of the street, unless otherwise ordered by the city commission and shall be laid with an inclination downward from the inner side to the outer side of one-fourth of an inch to the foot. Line and grade for all walks constructed or repaired under this article shall be given by the city manager or his engineer representative, and all of the construction work shall be under the manager's supervision and to his satisfaction. 
(Code 1982,  4.42) 
Sec. 62-80. - Specifications. 
    Sidewalks shall not be less than four inches in thickness and expansion paper shall be placed in the joints. All concrete used in sidewalk construction shall, 28 days after placement, be capable of resisting a pressure of 3,000 pounds per square inch without failure. The city engineer may establish additional detailed specifications in addition hereto and not inconsistent herewith, which shall be on file in the department of engineering. 
(Code 1982,  4.43) 
Sec. 62-81. - Order to construct. 
    Whenever the city commission shall, by resolution, declare the necessity for the construction of any sidewalk in any street in front of or adjacent to private property it shall be the duty of the clerk to cause notice, in substantially the following form, to be served upon the owner or owners of such property, and if the owner or owners of such property cannot be located, then to cause such notice to be posted in a conspicuous place on such property, as follows: 
Plymouth, Michigan ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ 
SIDEWALK NOTICE 
    Take notice that by order of the Commission of the City of Plymouth, you are required to construct a cement sidewalk on the ____________ side of ____________ street (or avenue) in front of or adjoining such lots or parts of lots described as follows: ____________ , as are now owned by you within thirty (30) days from the date hereof, and in default thereof, the same will be constructed by the City of Plymouth and the expense thereof will be assessed against said lot. 
City Clerk 
(Code 1982,  4.44) 
Sec. 62-82. - Construction by city. 
    If any person notified under this article shall not have constructed the sidewalk within the time mentioned, it shall be the duty of the city manager to have such walk constructed in front of or adjoining the property of the persons so in default and upon its completion to prepare a report in duplicate and attach thereto the affidavits of the service or posting of the notice above specified, which report shall contain the cost of the construction of such sidewalks together with any other expenses incident thereto, and a description of the parcels of land in front of or adjoining which such sidewalk has been constructed, one copy of which shall be transmitted to the city commission and one copy to the city treasurer. Within ten days after receipt of such report, the city treasurer shall notify each of the persons who have had sidewalks constructed in front of or adjacent to their premises as shown by said report, of the fact that he, the treasurer, will receive payments of assessments so made for a period of 30 days from the date of such notice without further or additional costs. Such treasurer shall further notify such persons that unless such assessments are paid within 30 days additional costs will necessarily be incurred in perfecting and completing the assessments and assessment roll. Such treasurer shall, within 40 days after the receipt of such report from the manager, transmit the same to the city commission together with his report thereon covering the matter of payments that may have been made to him. 
(Code 1982,  4.45) 
Sec. 62-83. - Order to repair. 
    Whenever any sidewalks shall become out of repair within the city, the city manager shall give the owner or occupant of the premises in front of or adjacent to which such sidewalk is located, notice to repair the same within 30 days thereof, and in default thereof such manager shall have the power to repair such sidewalk and charge the cost and expense thereof to such owner of such property. 
(Code 1982,  4.47) 
Sec. 62-84. - Repair by city. 
    In case of nonpayment by such owner of the cost and expense of such repair, suit can be brought in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover the same, or the cost and expense of such repair may be certified to the treasurer, the city commission and the assessor, and the same assessed upon the lot or parcel of land in front of or adjacent to which such sidewalk has been repaired in the same manner as provided for assessments for building and constructing sidewalks in the city. 
(Code 1982,  4.48) 
Sec. 62-85. - Notice. 
    The notice required by this article, in addition to specifying the time in which such sidewalk shall be repaired, shall also state the kind of material to be used in repairing such sidewalk and may be served as prescribed in section 1-14. 
(Code 1982,  4.49) 
Sec. 62-86. - Bond and permit required. 
    In order to ensure the quality and guarantee the maintenance of sidewalks hereafter laid in the city, every person engaged in the business of laying and constructing sidewalks in the city shall for each job first obtain from the building department a permit to proceed with proposed work, such permit to be issued upon receipt of $5.00 as a permit fee, and the execution of a good and sufficient bond to the city in the penal sum of $1,000.00, such bond to be a surety company bond or a personal bond with two sureties owning real property in the county. Only one such bond shall be required for each party in such business. Every person laying or constructing his own sidewalk shall for each job first obtain such a permit and pay such fee, but shall not be required to file such bond. Every permittee shall comply with all requirements as to grade, width, specifications and all other terms and conditions contained in this article relative to laying and constructing and repairing sidewalks, and failure so to do shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1982,  4.50) 
Sec. 62-87. - Conditions of bond. 
    The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful observance of the terms and conditions of this article, and further conditioned that the person executing such bond shall keep and maintain the sidewalk or sidewalks which he constructs or repairs in a good condition of repair and fit for public travel for a period of three years from and after the date of completion of the construction or repair of such sidewalk. Such bonds shall be approved by the city commission. 
(Code 1982,  4.51) 
Sec. 62-88. - Action on bond. 
    The bond may be prosecuted and recovery had by any person who shall have suffered any injury or damage by reason of inferior quality of the material having been used in the construction or repair of such sidewalk or sidewalks, or because of defective workmanship or for any injury or damage suffered by such person on account of such sidewalk or sidewalks having become out of repair within three years from the date of the completion of the construction or repair of such sidewalk in the name of the city for the use or benefit of such person. The city shall in no case brought under this article be liable for costs. 
(Code 1982,  4.52) 
Sec. 62-89. - Sidewalks to be cleared. 
    Every owner or occupant of any lot or parcel of land adjoining any Right-of-Way or public place in the city along or across which there is a sidewalk shall, within 24 hours after the same has fallen or formed, remove any snow or ice which may have fallen or accumulated or dirt or debris on such sidewalks, and in case of neglect or refusal to do so the city manager or his agent may cause the removal of same and the expense thereof shall be a lien upon such premises. 
(Code 1982,  4.53; Ord. No. 16-03, 8-7-16 ) 
Sec. 62-90. - Expense of clearing. 
    The city manager or his agent shall cause to be kept an accurate account of expense incurred for each lot or parcel of land and such expense shall be charged against such lot or premises and collected by giving notice thereof to the owner of the premises. If such expense or charge shall not be paid the same shall be assessed against the premises and collected as provided by section 12.22 of the City Charter. 
(Code 1982,  4.54; Ord. No. 91-3,  1(4.54), 3-18-91; Ord. No. 16-03, 8-7-16 ) 
Secs. 62-91-62-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NEWS RACKS 

Sec. 62-100. - Purpose and intent. 
    The city hereby finds and declares: 
(1)  The city has a substantial interest in promoting the public health, safety, and welfare of its citizens and visitors by ensuring that public streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way are not unreasonably obstructed by news racks, that news racks are properly maintained, and that news racks do not create visual blight. 
(2)  In recent years, the proliferation of news racks on city streets, and particularly poorly maintained or abandoned freestanding news racks, have contributed to the congestion of city sidewalks, impeded the flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, interfered with the use of streets, sidewalks and public rights-of-way, presented hazards to persons and property, resulted in visual blight, and hindered the ability of public services such as sidewalk and street cleaning. Certain news racks have been placed in inappropriate locations, been abandoned, and are poorly maintained. 
(3)  The city has a substantial interest in preserving and protecting its unique visual and aesthetic qualities. To that end it is in the best interest of the city to take steps to solve and reduce the negative effects of this problem. 
(4)  An effective way to remedy this problem is to require that all newspapers and other publications desiring to be sold or provided in newspaper racks on city sidewalks or other public property or rights-of-way be placed in and sold from modular units which are provided by the city at locations commensurate with the locations at which newspapers and other publications are currently being sold or provided. 
(5)  The purpose of this article is to accomplish the following: 
a.  Provide for increased pedestrian and vehicular safety and convenience; 
b.  Ensure that there is no unreasonable interference with the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including ingress into, or egress from, any place of business or public facility, or any legally parked or stopped vehicles; 
c.  Ensure compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act and improve passage for persons with disabilities by reducing impediments to passage caused by poorly located news racks; 
d.  Provide reasonable access for the safe and efficient use and maintenance of sidewalks, poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, benches, planters, delivery areas, loading zones, and curb ramps; 
e.  Reduce visual blight, clutter and litter problems associated with poorly maintained, improperly located or abandoned news racks; 
f.  Advance the economic interests of the city's businesses and residents, including the interests of those involved in the publication or distribution of newspapers and news periodicals through news racks; and 
g.  Prevent news racks from unduly interfering with city sidewalk and street cleaners as well as other public services. 
(6)  In adopting this article, the city is mindful that regulation of news racks implicates rights protected by the Constitution of both the United States and the state. To that end, this article was drafted and shall be applied and enforced in a manner consistent with these constitutional rights. The content or viewpoint of the material to be distributed through modular news racks shall not be considered in administering or enforcing this article. 
(7)  Given the limited space available and the increasing congestion on certain public sidewalks, streets and rights-of-way, the city has a substantial interest in devising a systematic approach to news rack placement in those locales to ensure a fair and equitable distribution of newspapers. This objective may be achieved by providing modular news rack units in specified locations in the city. Utilizing news rack units and prohibiting freestanding news racks will promote the city's interest in promoting public safety, reducing visual blight and clutter, protecting the unique aesthetic and historical attributes of the city, and advancing the economic interests of the city's businesses and residents by improving the appearance of the city and resulting in better use of space and reduced congestion. 
(8)  A reasonable accommodation of these competing interests can be achieved by adoption of this article, which reasonably regulates the placement of news racks in specified areas. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 62-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned news rack, means any news rack, which either remains empty for more than 30 business days or contains only outdated issues based on frequency of publication as set forth in the registration application. In case of a labor strike or a temporary and extraordinary interruption of distribution of publications of the newspaper or other periodical sold or dispensed from that news rack, the publication shall notify the city manager in writing in order to avoid having the news rack deemed abandoned. 
    City manager means the city manager or his or her designee. 
    Cluster of modular news rack units means two or more modular news rack units located such that each unit is within a 25-foot radius of another unit. 
    Freestanding news rack, means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used for, or maintained for the display and sale or the distribution without charge of newspapers, news periodicals or other publications, and which is not a modular news rack unit authorized under this article. 
    Modular news rack unit, means a news rack that is provided by the city for the placement of publications to be sold or distributed in the city on public streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way. 
    News rack means a news rack box, a freestanding news rack, or modular news rack unit. 
    News rack box shall mean the individual space within a modular news rack unit that dispenses one newspaper or other periodical, including the door, coin return mechanism and associated hardware. "News rack box" does not include any freestanding news rack. 
    Public property means parks, squares, plazas, and any other real property owned by the city, except for public rights-of-way as defined by this section. 
    Public right-of-way means land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage or process of law is reserved and dedicated to the general public for street, highway, alley, public utility, or pedestrian walkway purposes, whether or not said land has been improved or accepted for maintenance by the city. 
    Publication means any morning, evening, special or other editions of a publication, as well as any editions published jointly with another publisher. 
    Registered publication means a publication which has registered with the city to locate its publications in one or more modular news rack units. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 62-102. - Scope and application. 
    The requirements of this article shall apply to all news racks located on public property or public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way within the city. The city manager is authorized to establish guidelines for implementation of this article in specified areas or locations and to establish dates by which modular news rack units will be in place and all freestanding news racks must be removed and in compliance with this article, in each area or location. The deadlines for compliance with this article and the city manager's guidelines shall be mailed by first class mail to each affected publication at least 30 days prior to the implementation date in each location. These deadlines shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 30 days prior to the implementation date in each location. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 62-103. - City manager. 
(a)  The city manager shall be responsible for carrying out the provisions of this article and for performing the duties described herein. 
(b)  It is the intent of the city commission that the duties imposed upon the city manager by this article be directory in nature, and that as a result, the city manager's failure to comply with a particular procedural step shall not invalidate any subsequent action by the city manager to which the procedural requirement relates. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 62-104. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, no news racks other than modular news rack units provided by the city may be placed, operated or maintained on any public street, sidewalk or public right-of-way or portion thereof. 
(b)  No news rack box or modular news rack unit shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes. However, each publication may attach a decal no larger than three inches high and 16 inches wide, in white script letters only, to a specified area on the front of its news rack boxes for the purpose of displaying the name of the publication contained in the news rack box. The publication shall be responsible for ensuring that any such decals are maintained in a clean and good condition. 
(c)  No person or entity shall violate any other section, subsection, guideline or provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 62-105. - Registration. 
(a)  Requirement. Registration with the city is necessary to facilitate the regulation and inspection of news rack boxes and to allocate space for the purposes set forth in this article. No person may place any publication in any modular news rack unit on a public sidewalk, street, public right-of-way or portion thereof for the purpose of sale or distribution without having first registered with the city. 
(b)  Duty to register. Each publication seeking access to a modular news rack unit shall register with the city for each location and for each unit at which the publication seeks access. The registered publication shall be responsible for the payment of all fees or penalties due or imposed under this article with respect to that registered publication's modular news rack unit(s) or news rack box. 
(c)  Registration. Registration for placement in a modular news rack unit shall be made in writing and filed with the city manager's office. The application package shall inform the applicant to the requirements of this article and the guidelines provided herein. 
(d)  Approval. Upon receipt of a properly completed application from a publication, or from the agent for a publication, accompanied by written authorization from the publication along with the required fee, the city manager shall register the publication for placement in a modular news rack unit within 15 working days of receipt of the application, unless based on the requirements of this article or the guidelines provided herein there are grounds requiring denial of the application. If an application is disapproved in whole or in part, the city manager shall notify the applicant promptly in writing within 15 working days of receipt of application, explaining the reasons for the denial. 
(e)  Effect of registration. The city commission specifically determines that the approval of an application and registration of a publication by the city pursuant to this section confers a non-transferable, revocable privilege on the registered publication. In addition, the city commission may at any time in its exclusive legislative discretion elect to repeal or amend this article and thereby render null and void any approval/registration issued pursuant this section. 
(f)  Fees. There shall be an annual registration fee to be paid by all publications to the city manager's office for each news rack box utilized by the publication for the sale or distribution of its publications. The amount of this registration fee shall be set forth in a schedule established by city commission. The fee is not for the purpose of generating revenues or to reimburse the city for its costs in purchasing the modular news rack units. The purpose of the fee is to cover the cost incurred in maintaining the exterior of the modular news rack units and repairing or replacing damaged units. The fee shall be reviewed annually by the city manager, who shall propose to the city commission, if necessary, any recommended adjustments, along with written justification for the adjustment and any necessary amendment to Appendix A. If a publication fails to pay the required fee within 30 days after it becomes due, the city manager shall provide written notice that registration will be revoked and the news rack box removed if the fee is not paid within ten days of this notice. If the fee is not paid within ten days, registration shall be revoked and the news rack box removed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 62-106. - Locations. 
(a)  The precise locations of modular news rack units in the city shall be recommended by the city manager and presented on a detailed map for approval by the city commission. The following factors shall be taken into account: 
(1)  The locations being utilized prior to the adoption of this article, including the publications' desire to maintain these locations and the number of publications present at each location; 
(2)  Pedestrian and vehicular congestion, traffic and safety considerations at certain locations, including impediments to access by individuals with disabilities, and interference with public services; 
(3)  Demand for and access to publications at the locations, including the availability of alternative channels of distribution other than through news racks; 
(4)  Urban blight, litter, aesthetic and historical concerns; 
(5)  Access to, and use of street furniture, including such access and use by individuals with disabilities; and 
(6)  Sight lines and access to buildings with first floor retail spaces. 
(b)  Any interested person may petition the city manager to request the addition of one or more additional modular news rack unit locations. Such petition shall be in writing, and shall include written statements from publications that are willing to register for each proposed location. Upon receiving such a petition, the city manager will present the request to the city commission within 45 days of receipt thereof to determine whether the placement of one or more additional modular news rack units in the proposed new location would be authorized under the requirements of this article and its guidelines. The city commission shall consider a request for the creation of a new location(s) for the installation of one or more modular news rack units if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  All other requirements of this article have been met with regard to the location; 
(2)  There are no other modular news rack units within 50 feet of the proposed location; 
(3)  The location will not unreasonably impede pedestrian traffic, prevent the performance of essential public services such as sidewalk sweeping, and will not create a traffic hazard; 
(4)  The location is one at which an unsatisfied demand for publications is not met by existing modular news rack units; 
(5)  A minimum of four publications, all published at least once per week, are seeking to sell or distribute their publications at this location; and 
(6)  News racks will be oriented for pedestrian use. 
(c)  The city commission shall also have the option of requiring the city manager to place a modular news rack unit at the proposed location on a trial basis for up to 60 days in order to determine the viability of the location. If the location is determined not to be in contravention of this article and the city commission feels its addition would be proper, it shall recommend to the city manager that this new location be created. Otherwise, the petition shall be denied. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 62-107. - Allocation of space in modular news rack units. 
(a)  With respect to publications' access to specific modular news rack units, space shall be allocated based upon frequency of publication as follows: 
(1)  First priority shall be given to publications which are distributed at least five days per a week, inclusive of their Saturday, Sunday or weekend editions whether or not published jointly with another newspaper; 
(2)  Second priority shall be given to publications between one and four times per week; 
(3)  Third priority shall be given to publications published between two and four times per month; and 
(4)  Fourth priority shall be given to publications published one time per month or less. 
(b)  No publication that has selected a space in a modular news rack unit or cluster of modular news rack units may receive a second space in the same unit or cluster of units. 
(c)  In implementing this allocation scheme as to each modular news rack unit or cluster of modular news rack units, the city manager shall conduct a meeting at which time each category beginning with category (1) daily and weekly publications will be allowed to select a position in a given location. When each publication in that category that so desire have chosen a position in that location, each publication in category (2) shall select a position and so forth through category (4). The publications in each category may agree among themselves as to the order they will follow in selecting positions. If they are unable to agree, the city manager shall determine the order within each category by drawing lots. 
(d)  If all available modular news rack units are filled and a publication decides to vacate a space in a modular news rack unit, the city manager shall maintain a list of publications that are interested in additional spaces as they become available, and shall provide notice to these publications when spaces become available. The city manager shall assign a publication to the available space in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section. 
(e)  Where a publication not previously distributed seeks access to a modular news rack unit in a location, such publication shall first endeavor to locate in any vacant spaces of an existing modular news rack unit before requesting that the city manager provide an additional modular news rack unit. 
(f)  In any circumstances where a publication decides to vacate a location or a news rack box, the publication shall promptly notify the city manager of the intention to vacate the location. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 62-108. - Maintenance. 
(a)  The city shall be responsible for maintenance of the exterior of all modular news rack units excluding any decal or sign indicating the name of the publication. A replacement unit shall be provided by the city while it repairs or refurbishes a modular news rack unit. The cost of the maintenance and replacement shall be the responsibility of the city or the downtown development authority (DDA), depending on the location of the unit. The city shall provide a replacement unit within 48 hours after being notified that a unit is damaged and the city determines that the unit needs immediate repair. If the city fails to provide a replacement unit, the publication(s) contained in the unit may temporarily place a freestanding news rack in the same location until a replacement unit is provided by the city. 
(b)  The publications shall be responsible for maintenance of the doors and door mechanisms as well as the interior of the modular news rack units or news rack box including all mechanical equipment. All coin-operated news rack boxes shall be equipped with a coin-return device that is maintained in good repair and working order to enable persons to secure full refunds if they are unable to receive the publication paid for. In the case of coin-operated news rack boxes, the publication shall be responsible for maintenance of the coin-operated mechanism, including the coin return. Any damage to the modular news rack unit resulting from maintenance, theft or vandalism to the coin mechanism shall be repaired by the publication. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 62-109. - Appeals. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided herein, any person who is aggrieved by a determination made by the city manager or an applicant whose registration is denied may file a request for review of the decision by the city commission. Such a request must be filed at the city clerk's office not more than ten business days following the city manager's decision or the denial. The city commission shall consider the request at its next regularly-scheduled meeting, consistent with public meeting law requirements, and shall vote either to affirm or reverse the city manager's decision or the denial. The city commission's decision shall be provided to the city manager within two business days, and the city manager shall immediately notify the person of the decision. The city manager shall act in accordance with the decision of the city commission. 
(b)  In the event that a person remains aggrieved after an appeal to the city commission, the person may provide to the city manager within ten days of the decision of the city commission a notice of intent to institute legal proceedings against the city. Once the city manager has received this notice, the city manager shall reasonably accommodate the person's request until the earlier of the time that a lawsuit is filed against the city or 60 days from the receipt of the notice of intent. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 62-110. - Enforcement; violations. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to remove without prior notice any news rack that poses an immediate danger to persons, vehicles or property or remove any news rack interfering with construction activity or public works. Such removal shall be in accordance with the notice and hearing procedures set forth below. 
(b)  The city manager shall provide advance notice of removal and the reasons therefore to the publications if possible. Within 48 hours after removal, the city manager shall notify the owner in writing of the removal and the reasons for removal if no advance notice was provided. The city manager shall attempt to relocate the units to a location as close as possible to the vacated location considering the guidelines established by this article. 
(c)  The city manager is authorized to remove and impound any unauthorized news racks in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  Notice of violation and impoundment. The city manager shall post a notice of violation on the unauthorized news rack, and shall use all reasonable efforts to immediately contact the owner of the news rack or other responsible party by facsimile and telephone where this information is contained on the news rack or available from the city manager's records. The notice attached to the news rack, and any written notice transmitted to the owner shall also inform the owner of the right to request by facsimile, telephone or in person by the close of business on the first business day following the date of the notice of violation, a meeting with the city manager to determine whether the news rack is in violation of this article. If the news rack has not been removed, and the owner has not requested a meeting with the city manager by the close of the next business day following the day that the notice of violation has been affixed, the city manager may remove and impound the offending news rack. Within 48 hours after the removal, the city manager shall notify the owner in writing of the removal and the reasons for removal. If the owner did not request a meeting with the city manager prior to removal of the news rack, the notice shall also inform the owner of the right to request, either in writing or in person, within five business days of the date of the postmark of such written notice, a meeting with the city manager to determine whether such removal was proper. 
(2)  Meeting and decision. Upon timely request, the city manager shall provide such a meeting by the close of the next business day following receipt of the request, unless the owner agrees to a later date. The proceeding shall be informal, but oral and written evidence may be offered. The city manager shall give his or her decision in writing to the owner within three business days after such meeting. If no meeting has been requested, and/or the city manager finds that the impoundment was proper, the city manager shall notify the owner that the impounded news rack may be recovered following payment of a fine as set forth in Appendix A. If the city manager finds that the impoundment was improper and/or that placement of the news rack was lawful, the city manager shall order the immediate release to the owner and reinstallation by the city at its expense of the news rack without charge. 
(3)  Disposal of impounded news racks. News racks that are not claimed within 30 calendar days of impoundment shall be disposed of in a manner determined by the city manager in accordance with state law. The owner of an unauthorized news rack shall be responsible for restoring the sidewalk to its original condition if damaged by the unauthorized news rack. 
(d)  A violation of any section or provision of this article is a civil infraction punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 62-111. - Severability. 
    If any provision, subdivision, paragraph, phrase or clause of this article or the application of this article is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this article. The city commission declares that it would have passed each section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this section irrespective of the fact that any portion of this section could be declared unconstitutional invalid or ineffective. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 62-112. - Limitation of liability. 
    By adopting Ordinance No. 2007-02, the city is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general welfare. It is not assuming, nor is it imposing on its officers and employees, an obligation for breach of which it is liable in money damages to any person who claims that such breach proximately caused an injury. 
(Ord. No. 2007-02,  1, 6-4-07) 
Sec. 62-113-62-180. - Reserved. 
Chapter 66 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 74; zoning, ch. 78. 
State Law reference- Subdivision control act, MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 66-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parking space means an area of not less than 160 square feet, exclusive of drives or aisles, giving access thereto, accessible from streets or alleys, and to be usable for the storage or parking of self-propelled passenger automobiles. 
    Subdivide has the same meaning as defined in Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1982,  5.1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 66-2. - Submission, approval of plats. 
    No plat shall be transmitted to any county or state approving authority for official action as required by the state platting procedure until each plat shall have, in the first instance, been approved by the city commission, in accordance with the regulations of this chapter and Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1982,  5.55) 
Sec. 66-3. - Recording of plat. 
    No person shall sell or convey any lot in any plat by reference thereto until such plat has been duly recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. Every plat approved by the planning commission shall, by virtue of such approval, be deemed to be an amendment of, or an addition to, or a detail of the city plan and a part thereof. 
(Code 1982,  5.56) 
Sec. 66-4. - Metes and bounds platting. 
    The description of any lot or parcel in a plat of a subdivision, filed hereafter, by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer, is a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1982,  5.57) 
Sec. 66-5. - Sales contrary to requirements. 
    Any sale of or option or contract to sell land subdivided contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be voidable as provided in Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1982,  5.58) 
Sec. 66-6. - Public water and sewer service. 
    Public sewer or water service shall not be provided for any dwelling or other structure located on a lot or plot subdivided or sold in violation of this chapter, excepting that such service may be installed in any structure when deemed necessary by the health department for the protection of the public health. 
(Code 1982,  5.59) 
Sec. 66-7. - Filing fees. 
    The subdivider shall pay a filing fee to the city treasurer at the time a preliminary plat is filed with the city planning commission. Such fee shall be established by resolution of the city commission and shall cover the cost of advertising and notices, cost of checking statements, and cost of recording the approved plat. 
(Code 1982,  5.60) 
Secs. 66-8-66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATTING PROCEDURE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 66-31-66-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY PLATS 

Sec. 66-41. - Application. 
    An application in writing shall be submitted to the city planning commission by the owner or his authorized representative for approval of a preliminary plat of any proposed subdivision lying in the limits of the city. 
(Code 1982,  5.5) 
Sec. 66-42. - Plat requirements. 
    Four copies of the preliminary plat at a scale of not more than 200 feet to the inch showing the following shall be submitted with the application: 
(1)  Title under which proposed subdivision is to be recorded, description of land to be platted, name and address of owner and technical author of the plan. 
(2)  Location of existing property lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, utilities and other physical features. 
(3)  The location of the adjoining streets, utilities, buildings and other physical features which relate to the development of the subdivision. 
(4)  The location, name and width of proposed streets, alleys, easements and public utilities, parks, plantings, lots and building lines on the property to be subdivided. 
(5)  Any engineering data deemed necessary relative to the topography, street cross section, sewer elevations, water elevations, etc. 
(6)  Proposed use of property. 
(7)  Areas proposed to be dedicated for public purposes. 
(8)  Proposed grade elevations at street intersections or breaks of grades. 
(9)  Date, north point and graphic scale. 
(Code 1982,  5.6) 
Sec. 66-43. - Tentative approval. 
(a)  Preliminary plats shall be subject to the tentative approval of the city planning commission who shall take into consideration the city's requirements and the most appropriate use of the land. Particular attention will be given to the standards of design, the justification for the development of public improvements and the subdivisions conformity to the existing street plan. The width, location and arrangements of streets, the dimensions of lots, the location of utilities and other features will be studied. 
(b)  If the preliminary plat is not approved, a list of the changes necessary to render the plan acceptable will be made known to the subdivider. 
(c)  If the preliminary plat meets the approval of the city planning commission, then the subdivider may proceed to make an accurate survey of the property and prepare the final plat. Plans thus tentatively approved by the city planning commission shall bear the signature of the chairman of the commission and one copy shall be filed in the office of the city engineer, one copy in the file of the city planning commission and the third signed copy returned to subdivider. 
(d)  The approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute an acceptance of the subdivision. The final or record subdivision plat shall be submitted to the city planning commission in triplicate, within one year after approval of the preliminary plat; otherwise the approval of the preliminary plat shall become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and the application is granted by the commission. 
(Code 1982,  5.7) 
Secs. 66-44-66-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FINAL PLATS 

Sec. 66-56. - Contents. 
    The final plat shall be prepared and presented in accordance with the provisions of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.), as amended, and in addition shall show: 
(1)  Any private restrictions shall be shown on plat or reference to them made thereon; and plats shall contain proper acknowledgements of owner and mortgagees accepting such platting restrictions. 
(2)  In addition to the above the city planning commission will require a statement from each subdivider indicating: 
a.  Ownership of the property proposed to be subdivided as evidenced by an abstract of title certified to date, or, at the option of the proprietor, a policy of title insurance. 
b.  The improvements and utilities to be installed by the subdivider. 
c.  The restrictions to be imposed upon the property after subdivision. 
d.  The streets, alleys, parks and easements as agreed upon with the planning commission, with a recital that same are dedicated to the use of the public. 
e.  The total area in acres of the tract to be subdivided. 
f.  The net area in lots. 
g.  The total lot frontage in feet, classified as to: 
1.  Residential frontage. 
2.  Business frontage. 
3.  Industrial frontage. 
h.  The area in streets. 
i.  The area in parks. 
(Code 1982,  5.8) 
Sec. 66-57. - Plat development plan. 
(a)  In addition to the provisions of this division, the city planning commission will require from each subdivider a plat development plan drawn to a scale of one inch to 30 feet, or one inch to 40 feet. Such plan shall show the following: 
(1)  Streets and names thereof. 
(2)  Lots, numbers and dimensions thereof. 
(3)  The storm sewer system. 
(4)  Sanitary sewers. 
(5)  Proposed elevations at each corner of each lot. 
(6)  The finished grade of each proposed home. 
(7)  House numbers. 
(8)  Approximate setback and approximate side yard clearance. 
(9)  Sidewalk grades. 
(10)  Arrows on each lot indicating the ultimate direction of flow of the surface water as controlled by the planned grading and layout. 
(b)  Such plat development shall be approved by the city planning commission, the city engineer and the city commission. 
(Code 1982,  5.9) 
Sec. 66-58. - Certificate of compliance. 
    A certificate showing compliance with the plat development plan, issued by the building inspector, shall be required before a certificate of occupancy and compliance shall be issued under the provisions of chapter 78 of the city Code. The city building inspector shall make inspections and enforce compliance with said plat development plan. 
(Code 1982,  5.10) 
Sec. 66-59. - Completion bond. 
    As a protection to the city's catchbasins and drainage system and to ensure compliance with the plat development plan, a surety bond may be required to be given by the owner or developer of the subdivision upon the recommendation of the planning commission, the city engineer or the building inspector, conditioned that such plat development plan will be followed, and that, if the subdivision shall be vacated, in whole or in part, or development thereof postponed the developer will adopt temporary or permanent measures to protect the surrounding area against water damage and to prevent the flow of dirt, earth or debris into catchbasins and the drainage system. The city engineer or building inspector may specify measures to be taken to prevent such damage or injury. The amount of such bond shall be fixed by the city commission and the filing of same, when required, shall be a condition precedent to the approval of the plat and the plat development plan by the commission. 
(Code 1982,  5.11) 
Sec. 66-60. - Failure to comply with plan. 
(a)  Failure or refusal to comply with the plat development plan or deviation therefrom shall be a violation of this Code, punishable as provided in section 1-13. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not bar any aggrieved party from any remedy existing under the common law and statutes of this state against any subdivider, developer, builder or other person for injury to his person or property, or from any other right of action. 
(Code 1982,  5.12) 
Sec. 66-61. - Hearing. 
    Any plat submitted to the city planning commission shall contain the name and address of a person to whom notice of a hearing shall be sent and no plat shall be acted on by the planning commission without affording a hearing thereon. Notice shall be sent to such person at the address by registered mail of the time and place of such hearing not less than five days before the date fixed therefor. Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the platted land, as their names and addresses appear upon the latest city tax record. 
(Code 1982,  5.13) 
Sec. 66-62. - Approval. 
(a)  The planning commission shall examine the map for compliance with the preliminary plat and required changes thereof and shall approve, modify or disapprove the plat within 60 days after submission thereof to it, provided that the applicant for the planning commission's approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension to such period. 
(b)  Approval of the city planning commission shall be certified on the plat by the secretary pursuant to authorization by the city planning commission and no plat shall be approved by the city commission without the prior approval of the city planning commission. 
(Code 1982,  5.14) 
Secs. 66-63-66-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 66-86. - Conformity. 
    Subdivisions shall be in harmony with the master thoroughfare plan of the city. 
(Code 1982,  5.21) 
Sec. 66-87. - Relation to adjoining street system. 
(a)  The arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make provision for the continuation of principal existing streets in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions, insofar as they may be necessary for public requirements. In general, such streets shall be of a width as great as that of the street so continued or projected. The centerline of such streets shall continue with the centerline of existing streets. 
(b)  In general, the streets shall extend to the boundary of the subdivision to provide the proper access to adjoining property, and provide for proper connection with the highway system for contiguous land. 
(c)  Where the planning commission has adopted a plan or plat of a neighborhood or area of which the subdivision is a part and proposed plat provided coordinations with the street systems of the city different from that of such continuations or projections of existing streets and the subdivider's plat conforms to such neighborhood or area plat or plan of the commission, the commission may approve the subdivider's plat. 
(d)  Where the plat submitted covers only a part of the subdivider's tract, a sketch of a proposed future street system of the unsubmitted part shall be considered in the light of adjustments and connections with the street system of the part not submitted. 
(Code 1982,  5.22) 
Sec. 66-88. - Access to property. 
    Each residential lot within a subdivision shall be provided with a satisfactory means of access. Building permits shall not be issued for the construction of buildings which do not have access on a public street. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to a street, except where the control of such strips is definitely placed with the city commission. 
(Code 1982,  5.23) 
Sec. 66-89. - Large allotments. 
    Where the parcel is subdivided into larger tracts than for building lots, the platting shall not be such as to stop the opening of major streets and the extension of adjacent minor streets, which in the judgment of the commission should ultimately be opened and extended. 
(Code 1982,  5.24) 
Sec. 66-90. - Street intersections. 
    Streets shall be required to intersect each other at as nearly right angles as practicable. Streets converging at one point shall be reduced to the least practicable number. 
(Code 1982,  5.25) 
Sec. 66-91. - Streets in relation to railroads. 
(a)  Whenever a subdivision is to be laid out adjacent to a railroad right-of-way, a street shall be placed parallel to the railroad. 
(b)  The intersection of the centerline of the parallel street with that of any street which crosses the railroad shall not be less than 300 feet from the line of the railroad right-of-way. 
(Code 1982,  5.26) 
Sec. 66-92. - Dedication of half-streets. 
    The dedication of half-streets will be permitted where a subdivision adjoins undeveloped property and wherever there already exists a dedicated and recorded half-street or alley on an adjoining plat, the other half must be dedicated on the proposed plat to make the street or alley complete. 
(Code 1982,  5.27) 
Sec. 66-93. - Dead-end streets. 
    Dead-end streets will not be approved if they exceed 400 feet in length. Every permanently dead-end street shall be of such width at the closed end as will permit a turning radius of not less than 45 feet. 
(Code 1982,  5.28) 
Sec. 66-94. - Building lines and setback lines. 
    Building lines shall conform to the requirements of chapter 78 and the master thoroughfare plan. The minimum width for minor streets shall be 60 feet except in cases where the topography or special conditions make a street of less width more suitable, the city planning commission may waive the above requirement. 
(Code 1982,  5.29) 
Sec. 66-95. - Street grades. 
    Profiles may be required of all streets at the discretion of the city planning commission. The minimum grade allowed shall be 0.5 percent. 
(Code 1982,  5.31) 
Sec. 66-96. - Corner radii. 
    Curb corners shall be rounded with a radius of not less than 25 feet. Intersections where the interior angle is less than 60 degrees shall have the curb corners rounded with at least a 30-foot radius and when the interior angle is less than 135 degrees it is recommended that the corner be rounded with a minimum radius of ten feet. Property lines at such corners shall be rounded or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such construction. 
(Code 1982,  5.32) 
Sec. 66-97. - Access to streets across ditches. 
    Subdivider shall provide access to all proposed streets across watercourses or ditches in a standard manner approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1982,  5.33) 
Sec. 66-98. - Street and subdivision names. 
    All proposed streets obviously in alignment with another already existing and named, must bear the same name. New street names shall not duplicate existing street names and all names must be approved by the city planning commission. Duplication of proposed subdivision names, with the names of those already existing, will not be permitted. 
(Code 1982,  5.34) 
Sec. 66-99. - Alleys. 
    Alleys, having a minimum width of 20 feet, will be required in the rear of all local business and commercial lots. A diagonal cut-off shall be made at all acute and right-angle intersections of alleys sufficient to provide an inside turning radius of 30 feet. At the intersection of alley lines with street lines, a corner cut-off line shall be provided between points established by measuring a distance of five feet in both directions along the alley line and the street line from the point of their intersection. 
(Code 1982,  5.35) 
Sec. 66-100. - Easements. 
    Where alleys are not provided, easements of not less than six feet in width shall be provided on each side of rear lot lines and of side lot lines where necessary for utilities and shall be noted on the record plat. These easements should be direct and continuous from block to block. Easements of greater width may be required along natural watercourses and channels, such easements to conform substantially with the lines of such natural waterways. 
(Code 1982,  5.36) 
Sec. 66-101. - Monuments. 
    Monuments shall conform to and shall be placed as required by Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq., MSA 26.430(101) et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1982,  5.37) 
Sec. 66-102. - Blocks. 
(a)  Residential blocks shall not be less than 200 feet wide, they shall not be less than 660 feet long nor more than 1,200 feet. Where blocks are more than 800 feet long, a ten-foot crosswalk shall be provided near the center of the block. 
(b)  Business, commercial and industrial blocks shall not be less than 280 feet wide, they shall not be less than 280 feet long. Where blocks are more than 280 feet long a ten-foot crosswalk shall be provided near the center of the block. 
(Code 1982,  5.38) 
Sec. 66-103. - Lots. 
(a)  Size of lots. 
(1)  No lot classified as residential shall be platted that is less than 60 feet in width and less than 6,000 square feet in area. 
(2)  No lot classified as business, commercial or industrial shall be platted that is less than 40 feet in width and less than 5,000 square feet in area. 
(3)  The subdivider and the planning commission shall consider the off-street parking provisions as provided in chapter 78 and make adequate allowance for the same. 
(b)  Lot lines. All side lot lines should be at right angles to straight street lines, or radial to curved street lines, unless a variation from this rule will give a better street and lot plan. 
(c)  Lots with double frontage. Lots with double frontage shall be avoided, but if provided, the corner lots must have sufficient depth so that a reasonable front yard may be provided on both street frontages to protect similar frontages on adjacent lots in each direction. 
(d)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient to permit the maintenance of building lines on both front and side. In normal cases, the width required will not be less than the amount of the established building line on the side street, plus the irreducible buildable width and such side yard requirements as are provided for by chapter 78. 
(Code 1982,  5.39) 
Sec. 66-104. - Open spaces, parks, schools, playground sites, etc. 
    Due consideration shall be given by the subdivider and the planning commission to the dedication or reservation of suitable sites for future schools, parks, and playgrounds, the location of these features to conform as nearly as possible to the master plan of the city. No property shall be subdivided for residential use if such is considered unsuitable for building purposes by the planning commission. 
(Code 1982,  5.40) 
Sec. 66-105. - Use. 
(a)  Wherever property is subdivided with the intention that it shall have a use more restricted than that designated in chapter 78, such use shall be stated either in an application for amendment to chapter 78 or in a separate statement filed with the commission. 
(b)  Property use and area restrictions must be in accordance with chapter 78. 
(c)  Business lots when platted shall bear a reasonable relation in number to the probable future number of families constituting the purchasing power of the neighborhood. The commission will reserve the right to allocate business lots in accordance with its master plan and chapter 78. 
(Code 1982,  5.41) 
Sec. 66-106. - Variances. 
    Whenever it shall appear to the city planning commission that a variance from or relaxation of the requirements of sections 66-86 to 66-100, inclusive, section 66-102 or 66-103 is reasonably desirable to permit proper or efficient use of property, or promote the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity or general welfare, such variance from or relaxation of such requirements may be granted; provided, such variance or relaxation shall be finally approved by the city commission before same shall be effective. The approval of a plat by the city planning commission and transmittal of same to the city commission shall be sufficient evidence of the granting of any variance or relaxation appearing upon the plat and the city commission may thereupon approve such plat, which approval shall be deemed to include approval of any variance or relaxation of requirements herein contained. 
(Code 1982,  5.42) 
Secs. 66-107-66-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UTILITIES AND IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 66-126. - Street surfacing, sidewalks, sewer and water. 
    A plat will not be approved or dedication of a street accepted unless the following improvements are made or a bond furnished to guarantee the improvements. 
(1)  The installation of stormsewers and sanitary sewers, stormwater inlets, house connections from sewers to beyond the curb location, water mains with house connections to beyond the curb location, off-street parking facilities in conjunction with business lots, sidewalks and the construction of roadways to the approved grade, together with street curbs, gutters and street pavements of concrete or bituminous concrete. 
(2)  House connections from sewers to beyond the curb location for stormsewers shall be required where soil of poor absorptive capacity exists. Where soil of good absorptive capacity exists, and on recommendation of the city engineer, the planning commission may waive the requirement for house connections from sewers to beyond the curb location for storm sewers. 
(3)  Plans and specifications must be approved by the city engineer. 
(4)  The fee for reviewing plans and specifications will be in the amount of 11/2 percent of the estimated cost of construction. Such fees shall be paid by the proprietor to the city treasurer on or before the date of submission of the improvement plans and may be used for the purpose of engaging the aid of engineering consultants. The cost of improvements shall be determined by the city manager. Fee adjustment will be allowed at determination of final actual cost of construction as determined by the city manager. 
(5)  The construction must be carried out under the direction of the office of the city engineer in strict accordance with standard city specifications for the various kinds of improvements, as established by this Code or resolution adopted by the city commission. The city engineer will assign a city inspector to the work for such time as may be necessary to ensure full compliance with specifications, and the fees for those inspection services shall be as established by resolution of the city commission. Such fees shall be paid by the proprietor prior to construction and may be used to defray the costs of day to day inspection and the expense of engaging consulting engineers in connection with the inspection of such improvements. Fees will be adjusted upon determination of final actual cost of construction or number of inspection days as determined by the city manager. 
(Code 1982,  5.46) 
Sec. 66-127. - Grades. 
    All manholes, water gates, hydrants and shut off boxes are to be adjusted to proper grade in relation to curb, sidewalk or easement grade. 
(Code 1982,  5.47) 
Sec. 66-128. - Monuments. 
    All subdivision monuments are to be checked after all improvements are installed and to be corrected or replaced as necessary and set to within two inches of finish grade. 
(Code 1982,  5.48) 
Sec. 66-129. - Street signs. 
    When in the opinion of the planning commission the identity of any street appears desirable, the establishment of street signs of the same type and design in general use within the community may be required. 
(Code 1982,  5.49) 
Sec. 66-130. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-06 , adopted October 16, 2017, repealed  66-130 and enacted similar provisions in chapter 34. Former  66-130 pertained to street trees and derived from the Code of 1982. 
Chapter 70 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
State Law reference- Michigan vehicle code, MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq.; regulation by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610, MSA 9.2305, 9.2306, 9.2310. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-03, adopted June 3, 2013, amended former Art. I,  70-1-70-4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. I pertained to the operation of commercial motor vehicles and group vehicles licenses and derived from Ord. No. 95-2,  1-3, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 95-3,  1-6, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 95-4,  1-7, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 95-7,  1-10, 6-19-95. 

Secs. 70-1, 70-2. - Reserved. 
Sec. 70-3. - Motor Carrier Fuel Tax Act. 
(a)  The Motor Carrier Fuel Tax Act of 1980 (PA 119 of 1980), and as subsequently amended, is hereby adopted by reference. 
(1)  Reference to the state police shall mean Plymouth Police Department and its officers. 
(b)  Penalties. Violations of this section shall be punished as proscribed by the Motor Carrier Fuel Tax Act of 1980 (PA 119 of 1980), and as subsequently amended. However, the city may not enforce any penalty greater than a $500.00 fine and/or 90 days imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, 6-3-13) 
Secs. 70-4-70-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE AND MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE 

Sec. 70-26. - Codes adopted. 
(a)  Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages. The Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages promulgated by the Director of State Police and published in the 1979 edition of the Michigan Administrative Code and amendments as published in the Quarterly Supplement No. 5 in the 1979 edition of the Michigan Administrative Code, in accordance with Act No. 62 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1956 (MCL 257.951 et seq., MSA 9.2651 et seq.), is hereby adopted by reference as in this chapter modified. 
(b)  Michigan Vehicle Code. The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PAA 300, MCL 257.1 to 257.923 and as subsequently amended, is adopted by reference. 
(1)  References to code. References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall mean the City of Plymouth. 
(2)  Penalties. The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by reference, provided, however, that the city may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code For which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days, with the exception of subsection 2(a) below as Permitted by Public Act 7 of 2012. 
a.  A violation of Section 625(1)(c) of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code (being MCL 257.625) shall be a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable by one or more of the following: 
1.  Community Service for not more than 360 hours. 
2.  Imprisonment of not more than 180 days. 
3.  A fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $700.00. 
(Code 1982,  10.1; Ord. No. 2002-6,  1, 2, 4, 11-18-02; Ord. No. 2012-05,  1, 12-17-12) 
Sec. 70-27. - References in code. 
    References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Michigan Cities, Townships and Villages to governmental unit shall mean the City of Plymouth. 
(Code 1982,  10.2) 
Sec. 70-28. - Copies to be available. 
    The city clerk shall publish a supplementary notice setting forth the purpose of the Uniform Traffic Code and of the fact that complete copies of the Code are available at the office of the clerk for inspection by and distribution to the public at all times and shall maintain copies in accordance with such supplementary notice. 
(Code 1982,  10.3) 
Sec. 70-29. - Changes in code. 
    The following sections and subsections of the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships and Villages are hereby amended or deleted as set forth and additional sections and subsections are added as indicated. Subsequent section numbers used in this chapter shall refer to the like numbered sections of the Uniform Traffic Code. 
Sec. 1.007b. Conviction. 
    "Conviction" means a final conviction, the payment of a fine, a plea of guilty or nolo contendere if accepted by the court, or a finding of guilt or probate court order of disposition for a child found to be within the provisions of chapter XII of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1939 (MCL 712A.1 et seq., MSA 27.3178(598.1) et seq.), as amended, or a traffic law violation charge, regardless of whether the penalty is rebated or suspended. 
Sec. 1.010d. Former section 625(1), (2). 
    1.010d. "Former section 625(1) or (2)" means section 625(1) or (2) as amended by Act No. 391 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 257.625(1), MSA 9.2325), Act No. 515 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1980 (MCL 257.625(1), MSA 9.2325), Act No. 309 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1982 (MCL 257.625, MSA 9.2325(2)), or Act No. 109 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1987 (MCL 257.625, MSA 9.2325). 
Sec. 1.010e. Former section 625b. 
    1.010e. "Former section 625b" means section 625b as amended by Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 257.625b, MSA 9.2325(2)), Act No. 515 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1980 (MCL 257.625b, MSA 9.2325(2)), Act No. 309 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1982 (MCL 257.625b, MSA 9.2325(2)), or Act No. 109 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1987 (MCL 257.625b, MSA 9.2325(2)). 
Sec. 1.010f. Former section 5.15(1), (2), (5). 
    1.010f. "Former section 5.15(1), (2) or (5)" means section 5.15(1), (2), or (5) of Chapter 126 of the Plymouth City Code of 1982, as amended through December 31, 1991. 
Sec. 1.010g. Former section 5.15a(1), (3), (4). 
    1.010g. "Former section 5.15a(1), (3), or (4)" means section 5.15a(1), (3), or (4) of Chapter 126 of the Plymouth City Code of 1982, as amended through December 31, 1991. 
Sec. 1.014a. Law of another state. 
    1.014a. "Law of another state" means a law ordinance enacted by another state or by a local unit of government in another state. 
Sec. 1.018a. Operator. 
    1.018a. "Operator" means every person, other than a chauffeur, who is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle on a highway. 
Sec. 1.025b. Prosecuting attorney. 
    1.025b. "Prosecuting attorney" except as the context otherwise requires, means the attorney general, the prosecuting attorney of a county, or the attorney representing a local unit of government. 
(Ord. No. 92-3,  3, 1-21-92) 
Sec. 2.5. Reports of stolen and recovered vehicles. 
    A police agency, upon receiving reliable information that any vehicle registered under this act has been stolen, shall immediately report the theft through the law enforcement information network. Upon receiving information that a vehicle previously reported as stolen has been recovered, the police agency shall immediately report the fact of the recovery through the law enforcement information network. 
Sec. 2.5a. Abandoned vehicle procedures. 
(1)  As used in this section, "abandoned vehicle" means a vehicle which has remained on public property or private property for a period of 48 hours after a police agency or other governmental agency designated by the police agency has affixed a written notice to the vehicle. 
(2)  If a vehicle has remained on public or private property for a period of time so that it appears to the police agency to be abandoned, the police agency shall do all of the following: 
(a)  Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen. 
(b)  Affix a written notice to the vehicle. The written notice shall contain the following information: 
(i)  The date and time the notice was affixed. 
(ii)  The name and address of the police agency taking the action. 
(iii)  The name and badge number of the police officer affixing the notice. 
(iv)  The date and time the vehicle may be taken into custody and stored at the owner's expense or scrapped if the vehicle is not removed. 
(v)  The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle, if available. 
(3)  If the vehicle is not removed within 48 hours after the date the notice was affixed, the vehicle is deemed abandoned and the police agency may have the vehicle taken into custody. 
(4)  A police agency which has a vehicle taken into custody shall do all of the following: 
(a)  Recheck to determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen. 
(b)  Within 24 hours after taking the vehicle into custody, enter the vehicle as abandoned into the law enforcement information network. 
(c)  Within seven days after taking the vehicle into custody, send to the registered owner and secured party, as shown by the records of the secretary of state, by first-class mail or personal service, notice that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned. The form for the notice shall be furnished by the secretary of state. Each notice form shall contain the following information: 
(i)  The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle if available. 
(ii)  The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
(iii)  The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
(iv)  The name and address of the police agency which had the vehicle taken into custody. 
(v)  The business address of the custodian of the vehicle. 
(vi)  The procedure to redeem the vehicle. 
(vii)  The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees. 
(viii)  A form petition which the owner may file in person or by mail with the specified court which requests a hearing on the police agency's action. 
(ix)  A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to request a hearing within 20 days after the date of the notice may result in the sale of the vehicle and the termination of all rights of the owner and the secured party to the vehicle or the proceeds of the sale. 
(5)  The registered owner may contest the fact that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees by requesting a hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by filing a petition with the court specified in the notice within 20 days after the date of the notice. If the owner requests a hearing, the matter shall be resolved after a hearing conducted pursuant to sections 2.5e and 2.5f. An owner who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by posting a towing and storage bond in an amount equal to the accrued towing and storage fees with the court. The owner of a vehicle who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by paying the towing and storage fees instead of posting the towing and storage bond. If the court finds that the vehicle was not properly deemed abandoned, the police agency shall reimburse the owner of the vehicle for the accrued towing and storage fees. 
(6)  If the owner does not request a hearing, he may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle. 
(7)  If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing within 20 days after the date of the notice, the secured party may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle and the police agency for its accrued costs. 
(8)  Not less than 20 days after the disposition of the hearing described in subsection (5) or, if a hearing is not requested, not less than 20 days after the date of the notice, the police agency shall offer the vehicle for sale at a public sale pursuant to section 2.5g. 
(9)  If the ownership of a vehicle which has been deemed abandoned under this section cannot be determined either because of the condition of the vehicle identification numbers or because a check with the records of the secretary of state does not reveal ownership, the police agency may sell the vehicle at public sale pursuant to section 2.5g, not less than 30 days after public notice of the sale has been published. 
Sec. 2.5b. Abandoned scrap vehicle procedures. 
(1)  As used in this section: 
(a)  "Registered abandoned scrap vehicle" means a vehicle which meets all of the following requirements: 
(i)  Is on public or private property. 
(ii)  Is seven or more years old. 
(iii)  Is apparently inoperable or is extensively damaged, to the extent that the cost of repairing the vehicle so that it is operational and safe as required by section 683 would exceed the fair market value of that vehicle. 
(iv)  Is currently registered in this state or displays current year registration plates from another state. 
(v)  Is not removed within 48 hours after a written notice as described in section 2.5a(2)(b) is affixed to the vehicle. 
(b)  "Unregistered abandoned scrap vehicle" means a vehicle which meets all of the following requirements: 
(i)  Is on public or private property. 
(ii)  Is seven or more years old. 
(iii)  Is apparently inoperable or is extensively damaged, to the extent that the cost of repairing the vehicle so that it is operational and safe as required by section 683, would exceed the fair market value of that vehicle. 
(iv)  Is not currently registered in this state and does not display current year registration plates from another state. 
(v)  Is not removed within 48 hours after a written notice as described in section 2.5a(2)(b) is affixed to the vehicle. 
(2)  A police agency may have an unregistered abandoned scrap vehicle taken into custody, in which case the police agency shall do all of the following: 
(a)  Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen. 
(b)  Take two photographs of the vehicle. 
(c)  Make a report to substantiate the vehicle as an unregistered abandoned scrap vehicle. The report shall contain the following information: 
(i)  The year, make, and vehicle identification number if available. 
(ii)  The date of abandonment. 
(iii)  The location of abandonment. 
(iv)  A detailed listing of the damage or the missing equipment. 
(v)  The reporting officer's name and title. 
(vi)  The location where the vehicle is being held. 
(d)  Within 24 hours after taking the vehicle into custody, enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network. 
(3)  Within 24 hours, excluding Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays, after taking the vehicle into custody, the police agency shall complete a release form and release the vehicle to the towing service or a used vehicle parts dealer or vehicle scrap metal processor, who shall then transmit that release form to the secretary of state and apply for a certificate of the title or a certificate of scrapping. Upon receipt of the release form and application, the secretary of state shall issue a certificate of title or a certificate of scrapping. 
(4)  The release form described in subsection (3) shall be furnished by the secretary of state and shall include a certification executed by the applicable police agency when the abandoned scrap vehicle is released. The certification shall state that the police agency has complied with all the requirements of subsection (2)(b) and (c). 
(5)  The secretary of state shall retain the records relating to an abandoned scrap vehicle for not less than two years. The two photographs taken pursuant to subsection (2)(b) shall be retained by the police agency for not less than two years. After the certificate of scrapping has been issued, a certificate of title for the vehicle shall not be issued again. 
(6)  A police agency may have a registered abandoned scrap vehicle taken into custody, in which case the police agency shall do all of the following: 
(a)  Determine if the vehicle has been stolen. 
(b)  Take two photographs of the vehicle. 
(c)  Make a report to substantiate the vehicle as a registered abandoned scrap vehicle. The report shall contain the following information: 
(i)  The year, make, and vehicle identification number if available. 
(ii)  The date of abandonment. 
(iii)  The location of abandonment. 
(iv)  A detailed listing of the damage or the missing equipment. 
(v)  The reporting officer's name and title. 
(vi)  The location where the vehicle is being held. 
(d)  Within 24 hours after taking the vehicle into custody, enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network. 
(e)  Within seven days after taking the vehicle into custody, send to the registered owner and secured party, as shown by the records of the secretary of state, by first-class mail or personal service, notice that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned. The form for the notice shall be furnished by the secretary of state. Each notice form shall contain the following information: 
(i)  The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle if available. 
(ii)  The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
(iii)  The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
(iv)  The name and address of the police agency which had the vehicle taken into custody. 
(v)  The business address of the custodian of the vehicle. 
(vi)  The procedure to redeem the vehicle. 
(vii)  The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees. 
(viii)  A form petition which the owner may file in person or by mail with the specified court which requests a hearing on the police agency's action. 
(ix)  A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to request a hearing within 20 days after the date of the notice may result in the termination of all rights of the owner and the secured party to the vehicle. 
(7)  The registered owner of a registered abandoned scrap vehicle may contest the fact that the vehicle has been deemed abandoned or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees by requesting a hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by filing a petition with the court specified in the notice within 20 days after the date of the notice. If the owner requests a hearing, the matter shall be resolved after a hearing conducted pursuant to sections 2.5e and 2.5f. An owner who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by posting a towing and storage bond with the court in an amount as determined by the court. The owner of a vehicle who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by paying the towing and storage fees instead of posting the towing and storage bond. If the court finds that the vehicle was not properly deemed abandoned, the police agency shall reimburse the owner of the vehicle for the accrued towing and storage fees. 
(8)  If the owner does not request a hearing, he may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle. 
(9)  If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing within 20 days after the date of the notice, the secured party may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle. 
(10)  Not less than 20 days after the disposition of the hearing described in subsection (7), or if a hearing is not requested, not less than 20 days after the date of the notice described in subsection (6)(e), the police agency shall follow the procedures established in subsections (3) to (5). 
Sec. 2.5c. Vehicle removed from private property. 
(1)  When a vehicle is removed from private property at the direction of a person other than the registered owner of the vehicle or a police agency, the custodian of the vehicle immediately shall notify the police agency from whose jurisdiction the vehicle was towed. The custodian shall supply that information which is necessary for the police agency to enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the notification described in subsection (1), the police agency immediately shall do all of the following: 
(a)  Determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen. 
(b)  Enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network. 
(3)  The owner of the vehicle removed as described in subsection (1) may obtain release of the vehicle by paying the accrued towing and storage fees to the custodian of the vehicle. Upon release of the vehicle, the custodian shall notify the police agency of the disposition of the vehicle. 
(4)  If the vehicle described in subsection (1) is not claimed by the owner within seven days after the police agency has been notified by the custodian that it has been taken into custody, the vehicle is deemed abandoned and the procedures prescribed in section 2.5a(4)(c) to (9) shall apply. 
Sec. 2.5d. Vehicle removed by police. 
(1)  A police agency or a governmental agency designated by the police agency may provide for the immediate removal of a vehicle from public or private property to a place of safekeeping at the expense of the registered owner of the vehicle in any of the following circumstances: 
(a)  If the vehicle is in such a condition that the continued operation of the vehicle upon the highway would constitute an immediate hazard to the public. 
(b)  If the vehicle is parked or standing upon the highway in such a manner as to create an immediate public hazard or an obstruction of traffic. 
(c)  If a vehicle is parked in a posted tow-away zone. 
(d)  If there is reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle or any part of the vehicle is stolen. 
(e)  If the vehicle must be seized to preserve evidence of a crime, or when there is reasonable cause to believe that the vehicle was used in the commission of a crime. 
(f)  If removal is necessary in the interest of public safety because of fire, flood, storm, snow, natural or manmade disaster, or other emergency. 
(g)  If the vehicle is hampering the use of private property by the owner or person in charge of that property or is parked in a manner which impedes the movement of another vehicle. 
(h)  If the vehicle is stopped, standing, or parked in a space designated for handicapper parking and is not permitted by law to be stopped, standing, or parked in a space designated for handicapper parking. 
(2)  A police agency which authorizes the removal of a vehicle under subsection (1) shall do all of the following: 
(a)  Check to determine if the vehicle has been reported stolen. 
(b)  Within 24 hours after removing the vehicle, enter the vehicle into the law enforcement information network if the vehicle has not been redeemed. This subdivision does not apply to a vehicle that is removed from the scene of a motor vehicle traffic accident. 
(c)  If the vehicle has not been redeemed within ten days after moving the vehicle, send to the registered owner and the secured party as shown by the records of the secretary of state, by first-class mail or personal service, a notice that the vehicle has been removed; however, if the police agency informs the owner or operator of the vehicle of the removal and the location of the vehicle within 24 hours after the removal, and if the vehicle has not been redeemed within 30 days and upon complaint from the towing service, the police agency shall send the notice within 30 days after the removal. The notice shall be by a form furnished by the secretary of state. The notice form shall contain the following information: 
(i)  The year, make, and vehicle identification number of the vehicle. 
(ii)  The location from which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
(iii)  The date on which the vehicle was taken into custody. 
(iv)  The name and address of the police agency which had the vehicle taken into custody. 
(v)  The location where the vehicle is being held. 
(vi)  The procedure to redeem the vehicle. 
(vii)  The procedure to contest the fact that the vehicle was properly removed or the reasonableness of the towing and daily storage fees. 
(viii)  A form petition which the owner may file in person or by mail with the specified court which requests a hearing on the police agency's action. 
(ix)  A warning that the failure to redeem the vehicle or to request a hearing within 20 days after the date of the notice may result in the sale of the vehicle and the termination of all rights of the owner and the secured party to the vehicle or the proceeds of the sale or to both the vehicle and the proceeds. 
(3)  The registered owner may contest the fact that the vehicle was properly removed or the reasonableness of the towing fees and daily storage fees by requesting a hearing. A request for a hearing shall be made by filing a petition with the court specified in the notice within 20 days after the date of the notice. If the owner requests a hearing, the matter shall be resolved after a hearing conducted pursuant to sections 2.5e and 2.5f. An owner who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by posting a towing and storage bond with the court in an amount equal to the accrued towing and storage fees. The owner of a vehicle who requests a hearing may obtain release of the vehicle by paying the towing and storage fees instead of posting the towing and storage bond. If the court finds that the vehicle was not properly removed, the police agency shall reimburse the owner of the vehicle for the accrued towing and storage fees. 
(4)  If the owner does not request a hearing, he may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle. 
(5)  If the owner does not redeem the vehicle or request a hearing within 20 days, the secured party may obtain the release of the vehicle by paying the accrued charges to the custodian of the vehicle prior to the date of the sale. 
(6)  Not less than 20 days after the disposition of the hearing described in subsection (3), or if a hearing is not requested, not less than 20 days after the date of the notice described in subsection (2)(c), the police agency shall offer the vehicle for sale at a public sale unless the vehicle is redeemed. The public sale shall be held pursuant to section 2.5g. 
(7)  If the ownership of a vehicle which has been removed under this section cannot be determined either because of the condition of the vehicle identification numbers or because a check with the records of the secretary of state does not reveal ownership, the police agency may sell the vehicle at public sale pursuant to section 2.5g, not less than 30 days after public notice of the sale has been published. 
Sec. 2.5e. Abandoned vehicle, jurisdiction of court. 
(1)  The following courts shall have jurisdiction to determine if a police agency has acted properly in processing a vehicle under section 2.5a, 2.5b(6) to (10), 2.5c, or 2.5d: 
(a)  The district court. 
(b)  A municipal court. 
(c)  The common pleas court of the City of Detroit. 
(2)  The court specified in the notice prescribed in section 2.5a(4)(c), 2.5b(6), 2.5c(4), or 2.5d(2)(c) shall be the court which has territorial jurisdiction at the location from where the vehicle was removed or deemed abandoned. Venue in the district court shall be governed by section 8312 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1961 (MCL 600.8312, MSA 27A.8312), as amended. 
(3)  If the owner fails to pay the accrued towing and storage fees, the towing and storage bond posted with the court to secure release of the vehicle under section 2.5a, 2.5b, 2.5c, or 2.5d shall be used to pay the towing and storage fees. 
Sec. 2.5f. Abandoned vehicle, duties of court. 
(1)  Upon receipt of a petition prescribed in section 2.5a, 2.5b, 2.5c, or 2.5d, signed by the owner of the vehicle which has been taken into custody, the court shall do both of the following: 
(a)  Schedule a hearing within 30 days for the purpose of determining whether the police agency acted properly. 
(b)  Notify the owner and the police agency of the time and place of the hearing. 
(2)  At the hearing specified in subsection (1) the police agency shall have the burden of showing by a preponderance of the evidence that it has complied with the requirements of this act in processing the abandoned vehicle or vehicle removed pursuant to section 2.5d. 
(3)  After the hearing the court shall make a decision which shall include one or more of the following: 
(a)  A finding that the police agency complied with the procedures established for the processing of an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle removed under section 2.5d, and an order providing a period of 20 days after the decision for the owner to redeem the vehicle. If the owner does not redeem the vehicle within 20 days, the police agency shall dispose of the vehicle pursuant to section 2.5b or 2.5g. 
(b)  A finding that the police agency did not comply with the procedures established for the processing of an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle removed pursuant to section 2.5d. After making such a finding, the court shall issue an order directing that the vehicle immediately be released to the owner, and that the police agency is responsible for the accrued towing and storage charges. 
(c)  A finding that the towing and daily storage fees were reasonable. 
(d)  A finding that the towing and daily storage fees were unreasonable and issue an order directing an appropriate reduction. 
Sec. 2.5g. Abandoned vehicle, public sale. 
(1)  A public sale for a vehicle which has been deemed abandoned under section 2.5a or 2.5c or removed under section 2.5d shall be conducted in the following manner: 
(a)  It shall be under the control of the police agency or agent of the police agency. 
(b)  It shall be open to the public and consist of open auction bidding or bidding by sealed bids. If sealed bids are received, the person submitting the bid shall receive a receipt for the bid from the police agency or agent of the police agency. 
(c)  Except as provided by sections 2.5a(9) and 2.5d(7), it shall be held not less than five days after public notice of the sale has been published. 
(d)  The public notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper having a general circulation within the county in which the vehicle was abandoned. The public notice shall give a description of the vehicle for sale and shall state the time, date, and location of the sale. 
(2)  The money received from the public sale of the vehicle shall be applied in the following order of priority: 
(a)  Towing and storage charges. 
(b)  Expenses incurred by the police agency. 
(c)  To the secured party, if any, in the amount of the debt outstanding on the vehicle. 
(d)  Remainder to the owner. A reasonable attempt shall be made to mail the remainder to the registered owner. If delivery of the remainder cannot be accomplished, the remainder shall become the property of the unit of government that the police agency represents. 
(3)  If there are no bidders on the vehicle, the police agency may do one of the following: 
(a)  Turn the vehicle over to the towing firm to satisfy charges against the vehicle. 
(b)  Obtain title to the vehicle for the police agency or the unit of government the police agency represents, by doing the following: 
(i)  Paying the towing and storage charges. 
(ii)  Applying for title to the vehicle. 
(c)  Hold another public sale pursuant to subsection (1). 
(4)  A person who acquires ownership of a vehicle under subsection (1) or (3), which vehicle has been designated as a distressed vehicle, shall make application for a salvage certificate of title within 15 days after obtaining the vehicle. 
(5)  Upon disposition of the vehicle, the police agency shall cancel the entry into the law enforcement information network. 
Sec. 5.15. Persons under the influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled substance; operating motor vehicles; punishments; prior convictions; payment of costs; plea bargains; special verdicts. 
(1)  A person whether licensed or not, shall not operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, within the city if either of the following applies: 
(a)  The person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance. 
(b)  The person has an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
(2)  The owner of a vehicle or a person in charge or in control of a vehicle shall not authorize or knowingly permit the vehicle to be operated on a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, within the city by a person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, or who has an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
(3)  A person, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles within the city when, due to the consumption of an intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of an intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, the person's ability to operate the vehicle is visibly impaired. If a person is charged with violating subsection 1, a finding of guilty under this subsection may be rendered. 
(4)  If a person is convicted of violating subsection (1), all of the following apply: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) and (c), the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following: 
(i)  Community service for not more than 45 days. 
(ii)  Imprisonment for not more than 93 days. 
(iii)  A fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00. 
(b)  If the violation occurs within seven years of one prior conviction, the person shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $500.00 and one or more of the following: 
(i)  Performing service to the community for not less than ten days or more than 93 days and may be imprisoned for not more than 90 days. 
(ii)  Imprisonment for not less than 48 consecutive hours or more than 93 days and may be sentenced to community service for not more than 90 days. 
(c)  A term of imprisonment imposed under subsection (b)(ii) shall not be suspended. 
(d)  A person sentenced to perform service to the community under this subsection shall not receive compensation, and shall reimburse the state and/or appropriate local unit of government for the cost of supervision incurred by the state or local unit of government as a result of the person's activities in that service. 
(e)  As used in this subsection, a "prior conviction" means a conviction for a violation of  MCL 257.625(1),(3),(4),(5),(6) and (7) or  5.15(1)(a) and (b), (3), (11) of Chapter 70 of the Plymouth City Code, or a former corresponding Plymouth Code Chapter, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to Michigan law. 
(f)  In the judgment of sentence under subsection (a), the court may order vehicle immobilization as provided in  MCLA 257.904d. In the judgment of sentence under subsection (b), the court shall, unless the vehicle is ordered forfeited under  MCLA 257.625n, order vehicle immobilization as provided in  MCLA 257.904d. 
(5)  In addition to imposing the sanctions prescribed under subsection (4), the court may pursuant to MCL 760.1 et seq., order the person to pay the cost of prosecution. 
(6)  A person who is convicted of violating subsection (2) is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days, or a fine of not less than $ 100.00 or more than $500.00, or both. 
(7)  Subsection (3) violations; misdemeanor, penalty. If a person is convicted of violating subsection (3), the following shall apply: 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subdivisions (b) and (c), the person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following: 
(i)  Service to the community for a period of not more than 45 days. 
(ii)  Imprisonment for not more than 93 days. 
(iii)  A fine of not more than $300.00. 
(b)  If the violation occurs within seven years of one prior conviction or more, the person shall be sentenced to both a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $500.00 and either of the following: 
(i)  Imprisonment for not more than 93 days. 
(ii)  Community service for not more than 90 days. 
(c)  If the violation occurs within ten years of two or more prior convictions, the person shall be sentenced to both a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $500.00 and either of the following: 
(i)  Imprisonment for not more than 93 days. 
(ii)  Community service for not more than 90 days. 
(d)  As used in this subsection, a "prior conviction" means a conviction for a violation of MCLA 257.625(1), (3), (4), (5), (6) and (7), or  5.15(1), (3) or (11) of Chapter 70 of the Plymouth City Code, or any corresponding chapter a former Plymouth City Code, or any law of another state substantially corresponding with Michigan law. 
(e)  In addition to imposing the sanctions prescribed under subsection (4), the court may, pursuant to MCL 760.1 et seq., order the person to pay the cost of prosecution. 
(f)  A person sentenced to perform service to the community under this subsection shall not receive compensation, and shall reimburse the state or appropriate local unit of government for the cost of supervision incurred by the state or local unit of government as a result of the person's activities in that service. 
(8)  If the prosecuting attorney intends to seek an enhanced sentence under subsection (4)(b) or subsection (7)(b) or (c) based upon the defendant having one or more prior convictions, the prosecuting attorney shall include on the complaint filed in district court a statement listing the defendant's convictions. 
(9)  A prior conviction shall be established at sentencing by one or more of the following: 
(a)  An abstract of conviction; 
(b)  A copy of the defendant's driving record; 
(c)  An admission by the defendant. 
(10)  A person who is convicted of an attempted violation of MCLA 257.625(l)  5.15(l) or (3) of Chapter 70 of the Plymouth City Code shall be punished as if the offense has been completed. 
(11)  A person who is less than 21 years of age, whether licensed or not, shall not operate a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, within the state if the person has any bodily alcohol content. As used in this subsection, "any bodily alcohol content" means any of the following: 
(a)  An alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or more than 0.07 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
(b)  Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of intoxicating liquor, other than consumption of intoxicating liquor as a part of generally recognized religious service or ceremony. 
(12)  A person who operates a vehicle in violation of subsections (1), (3) and (4) while another person who is less than 16 years of age is occupying the vehicle is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00 or both. The judgment may impose the sanction permitted under  5.15. If the violation occurs within seven years of a prior conviction or within ten years of two or more prior convictions, the court shall, unless the vehicle is ordered forfeited, order the vehicle immobilized in the judgment of sentence. This section does not prohibit a person from being charged with, convicted of, or punished for a violation of subsection (1), (3) or (4) that is committed by the person while violating this subsection. However, points will not be assessed for both a violation of subsections (1), (3) or (4) and a violation of this subsection arising out of the same transaction. 
Sec. 5.15a. Driving under influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled substance; warrantless arrest; preliminary chemical breath analysis, administration; evidence, presumption. 
(1)  A peace officer may arrest a person without a warrant under either of the following circumstances: 
(a)  The peace officer has reasonable cause to believe the person was, at the time of an accident in this state, the operator of a motor vehicle involved in the accident and was operating the vehicle in violation of  5.15(1), (3), (11), or (12) of Chapter 70 of the Plymouth City Code or MCLA 257.625. 
(b)  The person is found in the driver's seat of a vehicle parked or stopped on a highway or street within the state if any part of the vehicle intrudes into the roadway and the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe the person was operating the vehicle in violation of  5.15 (1), (3), (11) or (12) of Chapter 70 of the Plymouth City Code or MCLA 257.625. 
(2)  A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a person was operating a vehicle upon a public highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within the city, and that the person by the consumption of intoxicating liquor may have affected his ability to operate a vehicle, or reasonable cause to believe that a person who is less than 21 years of age was operating a vehicle upon a public highway or other place open to the public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an areas designated for the parking of vehicles within the city while the person had any bodily alcohol content as that term is defined in  5.15(11) may require the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The following provisions apply with respect to a preliminary chemical breath analysis administered under this subsection: 
(a)  A peace officer may arrest a person based in whole or in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis; 
(b)  The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis are admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime enumerated in  5.15(c)(1) or an administrative hearing for one or more of the following purposes: 
(i)  To assist the court or hearing officer in determining a challenge to the validity of an arrest. This subsection does not limit the introduction of other competent evidence offered to establish the validity of an arrest. 
(ii)  As evidence of the defendant's breath alcohol content, if offered by the defendant to rebut testimony elicited on cross-examination of a defense witness that defendant's breath alcohol content was higher at the time of the charged offense than when a chemical test was administered. 
(iii)  As evidence of the defendant's breath alcohol content, if offered by the prosecution to rebut testimony elicited on cross-examination of a prosecution witness, that the defendant's breath alcohol content was lower at the time of the charged offense than when a chemical test was administered. 
(c)  A person who submits to a preliminary chemical breath analysis shall remain subject to the requirements of MCL 257.625c, d, e, and f, and  5.15(c), (d), (e) of Chapter 70 of the Plymouth City Code for the purposes of chemical tests described in those sections. 
(d)  A person who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis upon a lawful request by a peace officer is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(3)  The following provisions apply with respect to chemical tests and analysis of a person's blood, urine or breath, other than preliminary, chemical breath analysis: 
(a)  The amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance or both in a driver's blood or urine or the amount of alcohol in a person's breath at the time alleged as shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine or breath is admissible into evidence in any civil or criminal proceeding. 
(b)  A person arrested for a crime described in  5.15(c)(1) of Chapter 70 of the Plymouth City Code shall be advised of all of the following: 
(i)  That if a person takes a chemical test of blood, urine, or breath administered at the request of a peace officer, he or she has the right to demand that a person of his or her own choosing administer one of the chemical tests. 
(ii)  The results of the tests are admissible in a judicial proceeding as provided under this Act and will be considered with other admissible evidence in determining the defendant's innocence or guilt. 
(iii)  He or she is responsible for obtaining a chemical analysis of a test sample obtained pursuant to his or her own request. 
(iv)  If he or she refuses the request of a peace officer to take a test described in subsection (i), a test shall not be given without a court order, but the peace officer may seek to obtain a court order. 
(v)  Refusing a peace officer's request to take a test described in subsection (i) will result in the suspension of his or her operator's or chauffeur's license and vehicle group designation or operating privilege and the addition of six points to his or her driver's record. 
(c)  A sample or specimen of urine or breath shall be taken and collection in a reasonable manner. Only a licensed physician, or a licensed nurse or medical technician under the direction of a licensed physician and qualified to draw blood acting in a medical environment, at the request of a peace officer, may withdraw blood for the purpose of determining the amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance or both in a person's blood, as provided in this subsection. Liability for a crime of civil damages predicated on the act of withdrawing or analyzing blood and related procedures shall not attach to a qualified person who withdraws or analyzes blood or assists in withdrawal or analysis in accordance with this act unless the withdrawal or analysis is performed in a negligent manner. 
(d)  A chemical test described in this subsection shall be administered at the request of a peace officer having reasonable grounds to believe the person has committed a crime described in MCL 257.675C(1), or 5.15c(1) of Chapter 70 of the Plymouth City Code. A person who takes a chemical test administered at the request of a peace officer, as provided in this section, shall be given a reasonable opportunity to have a person of his or her own choosing administer one of the chemical tests described in this subsection within a reasonable time after his or her detention, and the results of the test shall be admissible and shall be considered with other competent evidence in determining the innocence or guilt of the defendant. If a person charged is administered a chemical test by a person of his own choosing, the person charged shall be responsible for obtaining a chemical analysis of the sample. 
(e)  If, after an accident, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident is transported to a medical facility and a sample of the driver's blood is withdrawn at the time for the purpose of medical treatment, the results of a chemical analysis, that sample shall be admissible in any civil or criminal proceeding to show the amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance or both in the person's blood at the time alleged, regardless of whether the person had been offered or received a chemical test. The medical facility or person performing the chemical analysis shall disclose the results of the analysis to a prosecuting attorney who requests the results for use in a criminal prosecution as provided in this subsection. A medical facility or person disclosing information in compliance with this subsection shall not be civilly or criminally liable for making the disclosure. 
(f)  If, after an accident, the driver of a vehicle involved in the accident is deceased, a sample of the decedent's blood shall be withdrawn in a manner directed by the medical examiner for the purpose of determining the amount of alcohol or the presence of a controlled substance or both in the decedent's blood. The medical examiner shall give the results of the chemical analysis of the sample to the law enforcement agency investigating the accident, and that agency shall forward the results to the state police. 
(4)  The provisions of subsection (3) relating to chemical testing do not limit the introduction of any other competent evidence bearing upon the question of whether or not a person was impaired by, or under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, or whether the person had a blood alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath or per 67 milliliters of urine, or if the person is less than 21 years of age, whether the person had any bodily alcohol content within his or her body. As used in this section, "any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following: 
(a)  An alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or more than 0.07 grams per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath or per 67 milliliters of urine; 
(b)  Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of intoxicating liquor, other than consumption of intoxicating liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony. 
(5)  If a chemical test described in subsection (3) is administered, the results of the test shall be made available to the person charged or the person's attorney upon written request to the prosecution, with a copy of the request filed with the court. The prosecution shall furnish the results at least two days before the day of trial. The results of the test shall be offered as evidence by the prosecution in the trial. Failure to fully comply with the request shall bar the admission of the results into evidence by the prosecution. 
(6)  Except in a prosecution relating solely to a violation of  5.15(1)(b) of Chapter 70 of the Plymouth City Code of 1995, the amount of alcohol in the driver's blood, breath, or urine at the time alleged as shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, breath or urine shall give rise to the following presumptions: 
(a)  If there was at the time 0.07 grams or less of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the defendant's blood, per 210 liters of breath or per 67 milliliters of urine, it shall be presumed that the defendant's ability to operate a motor vehicle was not impaired due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor and that the defendant was not under the influence of intoxicating liquor. 
(b)  If there was at the time in excess of 0.07 grams but less than 0.10 grams of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the defendant's blood, per 210 liters of breath or per 67 milliliters of urine, it shall be presumed that the defendant's ability to operate a motor vehicle was impaired within the provisions of  5.15(3) of Chapter 70 of the Plymouth City Code of 1995 due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor. 
(c)  If there was at the time 0.10 grams or more of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the defendant's blood, per 210 liters of breath or per 67 milliliters of urine, it is presumed that the defendant was under the influence of intoxicating liquor. 
(7)  A person's refusal to submit to a chemical test as provided in subsection (3) shall be admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime described in  5.15(c) (1) only for the purposes of showing that a test was offered to the defendant but not as evidence in determining innocence or guilt of the defendant. The jury shall be instructed accordingly. 
Sec. 5.15c. Consent to chemical tests; exceptions; administration of tests. 
(1)  A person who operates a vehicle upon a public highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles, within the city, is considered to have given consent to a chemical test of his or her blood, breath or urine for the purpose of determining the amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance or both in his or her blood or urine or the amount of alcohol in his or her breath in all of the following circumstances: 
(a)  If a person is arrested for a violation of Chapter 70 of the Plymouth City Code of 1995,  5.15(1), (3), (11), (12) or MCLA 257.625. 
(2)  A person who is afflicted with hemophilia, diabetes or a condition requiring the use of an anticoagulant under the direction of a physician, shall not be considered as giving consent to withdrawal of blood. The test shall be administered according to the provisions of MCL 257.625a(6) or  5.15a(3) of Chapter 70 of the Plymouth City Code. 
Sec. 5.15d. Refusal to submit to chemical tests; court orders; report to Secretary of State; form. 
(1)  If a person refuses the request of a peace officer to submit to a chemical test offered pursuant to  MCL 257.625a(6), or  5.15a(3) of Chapter 70 of the Plymouth City Code, a test shall not be given without a court order, but the peace officer may seek to obtain a court order. 
(2)  A written report shall immediately be forwarded to the Secretary of State by the peace officer. The report shall state that the officer had reasonable grounds to believe that the person had committed a crime described in MCL 257.625(c)(1) or  5.15c(l) of Chapter 70 of the Plymouth City Code, and that the person had refused to submit to the test upon the request of the peace officer and had been advised of the consequences of the refusal. The form of the report shall be prescribed and furnished by the Secretary of State. 
Sec. 5.15e. Duties of peace officer if person refuses chemical test or if test reveals blood alcohol content of 0. 10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 milliliters of breath or for 67 milliliters of urine, the peace officer who requested the person to submit to the test shall do all of the following. 
(a)  On behalf of the Secretary of State, immediately confiscate the person's license or permit to operate a motor vehicle, and, if the person is otherwise eligible for a license or permit, issue a temporary license or permit to the person that is valid until the criminal charges against the person are dismissed or until the person pleads guilty or nolo contendere to or is found guilty of those charges. The temporary license or permit shall be on a form provided by the Secretary of State. 
(b)  Except as provided, immediately do all of the following: 
(i)  Forward a copy of the written report of the person's refusal to submit to a chemical test to the Secretary of State; 
(ii)  Notify the Secretary of State by means of the law enforcement information network that a temporary license or permit was issued to the person; 
(iii)  Except as provided, destroy the person's driver's license or permit; 
(iv)  Immediately notify the person in writing that within 14 days of the date of the notice, the person may request a hearing. The form of the notice shall be prescribed and furnished by the Secretary of State. 
(v)  The notice shall specifically state that failure to request a hearing within 14 days will result in the suspension of the person's license or permit to drive. The notice shall also state that there is not a requirement that the person retain counsel for the hearing, although counsel would be permitted to represent the person at the hearing. 
Sec. 5.16a. Transportation or possession of alcoholic liquor in container open or uncapped or upon which seal broken; violation punishable as a misdemeanor; nonapplicability. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2), a person shall not transport or possess alcoholic liquor in a container that is open or uncapped or upon which the seal is broken within the passenger compartment of a vehicle upon a highway, or within the passenger compartment of a moving vehicle in any place open to the general public or generally accessible to more vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles in the city. 
(2)  A person may transport or possess alcoholic liquor in a container that is open or uncapped or upon which the seal is broken within the passenger compartment of a vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles in this state, if the vehicle does not have a trunk or compartment separate from the passenger compartment, the container is enclosed or encased, and the container is not readily accessible to the occupants of the vehicle. 
(3)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a term of imprisonment of not more than 90 days and a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(4)  This section does not apply to a passenger in a chartered vehicle authorized to operate by the Michigan Department of Transportation. 
Sec. 5.16b. Consumption of alcoholic liquor on a highway, public place, or area generally accessible to motor vehicles, including area designated for parking of vehicles; violation punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(1)  A person shall not consume alcoholic liquor within the passenger compartment of a moving vehicle upon a highway or in any place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of vehicles in the city. 
(2)  A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a term of imprisonment of not more than 90 days and a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
Sec. 5.16c. is hereby deleted. 
Sec. 5.62a. Operation of motor vehicle by person whose license suspended, revoked, denied, or who has never applied for license; violations; penalties; subsequent offenses; confiscation of plates. 
(1)  A person whose operator's or chauffeur's license or registration certificate has been suspended or revoked and who has been notified as provided in MCL 257.212, MSA 9.1912, of that suspension or revocation, whose application for license has been denied, or who has never applied for a license, shall not operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of motor vehicles within the city. A person shall not knowingly permit a motor vehicle owned by the person to be operated upon a highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for parking of vehicles, within the city by a person whose license or registration certificate is suspended or revoked, whose application has been denied, or who has never applied for a license, except as permitted by the Motor Vehicle Code. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as follows: 
(a)  If the person's operator's or chauffeur's license has been suspended under MCL 257.321a, MSA 9.2021(1), because that person has failed to answer a citation or has failed to comply with an order or judgment issued pursuant to MCL 257.907, MSA 9.2607, by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(b)  For a violation, other than a violation punishable under subsection (a), by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both. Unless the vehicle was stolen or used with the permission of a person who did not knowingly permit an unlicensed driver to operate the vehicle, the registration plates of the vehicle shall be confiscated. 
(c)  For a second or subsequent violation punishable under subsection (b), by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both. Unless the vehicle was stolen, the registration plates of the vehicle shall be confiscated. 
(2)  Before a person is arraigned before a district court magistrate or judge on a charge of violating this section, the arresting officer shall obtain the driving record of the person from the secretary of state and shall furnish the record to the court. The driving record of the person may be obtained from the secretary of state's computer information network. 
(3)  This section shall not apply to a person who operates a vehicle solely for the purpose of protecting human life or property, if the life or property is endangered and the summoning of prompt aid is essential. 
Sec. 5.62b. Order of impoundment. 
(1)  When a person is convicted under section 5.62a(1) of operating a motor vehicle while his license to operate a motor vehicle is suspended, revoked, or denied, the motor vehicle, if it is owned in whole or in part by that person, may be ordered impounded for not less than 30 or more than 120 days from the date of judgment. The order of impoundment shall include the implied consent of the owner of the vehicle to the storage for insurance coverage purposes. 
(2)  The owner of a motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this section is liable for expenses incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle whether or not the vehicle is returned to him. The vehicle shall be returned to the owner only if the owner pays the expenses for removal and storage. If redemption is not made or the vehicle is not returned as provided in this section within 30 days after the time set in the impoundment order for return of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be considered an abandoned vehicle and disposed of as provided in section 2.5a(9)-(12) of the Uniform Traffic Code as adopted by the city. 
(3)  Nothing in this section affects the rights of a conditional vendor, chattel mortgagee or lessor of a motor vehicle registered in the name of another person as owner who becomes subject to this section. 
Sec. 5.82. Mandatory child restraints. 
(1)  Except as provided in this section, or as otherwise provided by law, a rule promulgated pursuant to the administrative procedures act of 1969, Act No. 306 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1969 (MCL 24.201 et seq., MSA 3.560(101) et seq.), as amended, or federal regulation, each driver transporting a child in a motor vehicle shall properly secure each child in a child restraint system as follows: 
(a)  Any child less than one year of age in a child restraint system which meets the standards prescribed in 49 CFR 571.213, except as provided in subsection (6). 
(b)  Any child one year of age or more but less than four years of age, when transported in the front seat, in a child restraint system which meets the standards prescribed in 49 CFR 571.213, except as provided in subsection (6). 
(c)  Any child one year of age or more but less than four years of age, when transported in the rear seat, in a child restraint system which meets the standards prescribed in 49 CFR 571.213, unless the child is secured by a safety belt provided in the motor vehicle, except as provided in subsection (6). 
(2)  This section does not apply to any child being nursed. 
(3)  This section does not apply if the motor vehicle being driven is a bus, school bus, taxicab, moped, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle not required to be equipped with safety belts under federal law or regulations. 
(4)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(5)  Points shall not be assessed for a violation of this section. 
(6)  The secretary of state may exempt by rules promulgated pursuant to Act No. 306 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1969 (MCL 24.201 et seq., MSA 3.560(101) et seq.), as amended, a class of children from the requirements of this section, if the secretary of state determines that the use of the child restraint system required under subsection (1) is impractical because of physical unfitness, a medical problem, or body size. The secretary of state may specify alternate means of protection for children exempted under this subsection. 
Sec. 5.83. Safety belt required; enforcement. 
(1)  This section shall not apply to a driver or passenger of: 
(a)  A motor vehicle manufactured before January 1, 1965. 
(b)  A bus. 
(c)  A motorcycle. 
(d)  A moped. 
(e)  A motor vehicle if the driver or passenger possesses a written verification from a physician that the driver or passenger is unable to wear a safety belt for physical or medical reasons. 
(f)  A motor vehicle which is not required to be equipped with safety belts under federal law. 
(g)  A commercial or United States postal service vehicle which makes frequent stops for the purpose of pickup or delivery of goods or services. 
(h)  A motor vehicle operated by a rural carrier of the United States postal service while serving his rural postal route. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to a passenger of a school bus. 
(3)  Each driver and front seat passenger of a motor vehicle operated on a street or highway in this state shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt, except that a child less than four years of age shall be protected as required in section 5.82. 
(4)  Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child four years of age or more but less than 16 years of age in a motor vehicle shall secure the child in a properly adjusted and fastened safety belt. 
(5)  Enforcement of this section by state or local law enforcement agencies shall be accomplished only as a secondary action when a driver of a motor vehicle has been detained for a suspected violation of another section of this act. 
(6)  Failure to wear a safety belt in violation of this section may be considered evidence of negligence and may reduce the recovery for damages arising out of the ownership, maintenance, or operation of a motor vehicle. However, such negligence shall not reduce the recovery for damages by more than five percent. 
(7)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(8)  Points shall not be assessed for a violation of this section. 
(9)  This section does not apply if the motor vehicle is transporting more children than there are safety belts available for use and if all safety belts available in the motor vehicle are being utilized in compliance with this section. 
Sec. 5.97. School buses; overtaking, meeting, or passing. 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle overtaking or meeting a school bus which has stopped and is displaying two alternately flashing red lights located at the same level shall bring the vehicle to a full stop not less than 20 feet from the school bus and shall not proceed until the school bus resumes motion or the visual signals are no longer actuated. At an intersection where traffic is controlled by an officer or a traffic stop-and-go signal a vehicle need not be brought to a full stop before passing a stopped school bus, but may proceed past the school bus at a speed not greater than is reasonable and proper but not greater than ten miles an hour and with due caution for the safety of passengers being received or discharged from the school bus. The driver of a vehicle who fails to stop for a school bus as required by this subsection, who passes a school bus in violation of this subsection, or who fails to stop for a school bus in violation of an ordinance that complies with this subsection, is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(2)  The driver of a vehicle upon a highway which has been divided into two roadways by leaving an intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or clearly indicated dividing sections so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, need not stop upon meeting a school bus which has stopped across the dividing space, barrier, or section. 
(3)  In a proceeding for a violation of subsection (1), proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation was in violation of subsection (1), together with proof that the defendant named in the citation was, at the time of the violation, the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the driver of the vehicle at the time of the violation. 
(4)  In addition to a civil fine and costs, the judge, district court referee, or district court magistrate may order a person who violates this section to perform not to exceed 100 hours of community service at a school. 
(Code 1982,  10.4; Ord. No. 92-3,  3-5, 1-21-92; Ord. No. 99-10,  1, 10-18-99) 
Secs. 70-30-70-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC CONTROL ORDERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 70-51-70-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRUCK ROUTES 

Sec. 70-61. - Intent. 
    The intent and purpose of this division is to protect the surfacing and pavements of the public streets, highways and alleys in the city and to such end same shall be liberally construed. 
(Code 1982,  10.41) 
Sec. 70-62. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial vehicle includes all motor vehicles used for the transportation of passengers for hire, or constructed or used for the transportation of goods, wares or merchandise, and/or motor vehicles designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn. 
    Through commercial vehicle routes or through truck routes are those which must be used by trucks and commercial vehicles not beginning, terminating or delivering to or from any point within the city. 
    Truck means every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property. 
(Code 1982,  10.42(1)-(3)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 70-63. - Enforcement. 
    The chief of police and other officers of the city shall enforce all weight, size and other vehicle and load limitations imposed by the Motor Vehicle Code, being Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1949 (MCL 257.1 et seq., MSA 9.1801 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1982,  10.45) 
Sec. 70-64. - Exception; permit. 
    The restrictions imposed under this division upon the use of certain public streets, highways and alleys in the city shall not apply to any vehicle the weight of which, loaded or unloaded, is 5,000 pounds or less, and shall not prevent the delivery of any person or property to any place within the city or prevent a vehicle from receiving any person or property within the city, provided that the chief of police, in his discretion, may issue a permit for the operation of any truck to use any street other than herein provided. 
(Code 1982,  10.42) 
Sec. 70-65. - Truck routes. 
    No person shall operate, or cause to be operated a commercial vehicle or truck on any of the public streets, highways or alleys in the city, except as herein otherwise provided, except upon the following public streets or highways which are hereby designated as through commercial vehicle routes or through truck routes: 
(1)  Ann Arbor Road, from east city limits (Mill Street) to west city limits (Sheldon Road), 
(2)  Mill Street, from Northville Road to south city limits (Ann Arbor Road), 
(3)  Northville Road, from north city limits to Mill Street, 
(4)  Plymouth Road, from east city limits to North Mill Street, 
(5)  Sheldon Road, from south city limits (Ann Arbor Road) to C & O Railroad, 
subject to the weight restrictions of the board of county road commissioners. 
(Code 1982,  10.43) 
Sec. 70-66. - Local deliveries. 
    The operation of commercial vehicles and trucks upon all public streets, highways or alleys, except as herein otherwise provided, in the city, is hereby prohibited; except, however, none of the restrictions herein imposed shall prevent the delivery or pickup of goods or persons any place within the city as provided in section 70-62; nor shall the restrictions herein imposed be construed to prevent any vehicle from going to and returning to the property where it is stored, maintained or serviced. 
(Code 1982,  10.43) 
Sec. 70-67. - Notice. 
    Notice of the prohibitions and limitations of this division shall be given by the posting of appropriate and legible signs such as may be seen by an ordinarily observant person upon or at the entrance to such highways or parts thereof affected by the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1982,  10.44) 
Secs. 70-68-70-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-91. - Parking between curb and lot line. 
    On all streets within the city where there is a curb in place, it shall be unlawful for any person to park, or stand any vehicle between the curb and the lot line nearest the street, such area being commonly known as the lawn extension. Provided, however, that in cases where it can be shown that this prohibition will create an undue hardship and the parking of vehicles within this area will not constitute a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the general public, the city manager is hereby authorized to issue a permit allowing parking within this area. This permit shall be issued on an annual basis. 
(Code 1982,  10.4(8.25)) 
Sec. 70-92. - Parking on shoulder of streets. 
    On any streets, or roads located within the city where there is not a curb it shall be permissible for persons to park, or stand vehicles on the shoulder of such streets, or roads, provided that their vehicles shall be completely off the traveled portion of such streets, or roads. Provided, however, that the city commission may by resolution prohibit parking on the shoulders of the streets, or roads within the city limits in such areas as it deems that such parking shall be hazardous to the health, safety and welfare of the general public. Where such resolution is adopted, signs prohibiting parking on the shoulder of the streets, or roads, shall be posted. 
(Code 1982,  10.4(8.26)) 
Sec. 70-93. - Overnight parking. 
    No person shall park any vehicle, trailer, boat or other conveyance, required to be registered with the Secretary of State or other governmental agency for use on a public roadway, on any public street, road, road shoulder, court, or alley within the city between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., with the exception of Sundays and holidays. This prohibition does not include a service vehicle, such as a delivery truck, van or pickup parking in front of a house while it is providing emergency service at a residence or a temporary standing delivery vehicle making deliveries during these hours. 
(Code 1982,  10.4(8.27); Ord. No. 2000-11,  2, 10-16-00) 
Sec. 70-94. - Overnight parking, municipal parking lots. 
    Overnight parking in municipal parking lots is permitted unless otherwise posted. 
(Ord. No. 90-2,  1, 8-6-90(8.27a)) 
Sec. 70-95. - Overnight parking authorization to issue permits. 
    The city manager is authorized to establish procedures for the issuance of permits for parking overnight on public streets, courts, alleys and municipal parking lots. 
(Code 1982,  10.4(8.27b)) 
Sec. 70-96. - Parking on private property. 
    No person shall park any vehicle on any private property in the city without the express or implied consent, authorization or ratification of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of such property. Proof that any vehicle is parked on any private property in the city contrary to the command, direction, condition or limitation clearly set forth on any sign posted on such property shall be prima facie evidence that the registered owner of such vehicle parked the same in violation hereof. Complaint for the violation of this section shall be made by the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent or trustee of such property. 
(Code 1982,  10.4(8.29)) 
Sec. 70-97. - Parking meter zone areas. 
    The city commission may designate by resolution the street or streets or parts thereof or areas within any public parking lot or lots which are to be included within the parking meter zone area. Any area so designated shall become subject to the provisions of this section upon the installation and placing in operation of parking meters in such area. 
(1)  The city commission shall by resolution establish fees for the parking of any vehicle metered parking zone and shall also by resolution establish the hours and days during which the meters in each parking meter zone shall be in operation. Such fees, hours and days as thus established shall be posted in the parking meter zone area so as to give notice thereof to the general public. 
(2)  No person shall deface, tamper with, open, break or impair the usefulness of any parking meter, standard or sign pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(3)  No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device or metallic substance as a substitute for a coin of the United States. 
(4)  National holidays, namely, New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day shall not be governed by parking meter regulations. 
(Code 1982,  10.4(8.30)) 
Secs. 70-98-70-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING SYSTEM 

Sec. 70-111. - Supervision. 
    The automobile parking system of the city shall be under the supervision and direction of the city manager. 
(Code 1982,  10.21) 
Sec. 70-112. - Rates. 
    The rates for parking in off-street parking lots and structures, operated as a part of the automobile parking system, shall be established by resolution of the city commission from time to time upon recommendation of the city manager. Such rates need not be uniform throughout the system, but shall be based upon demand for parking in the area which the lot or structure serves and such other considerations as the commission shall deem pertinent. The rates and charges in effect upon the date of the adoption of this Code shall remain in effect until thereafter changed as herein provided. 
(Code 1982,  10.22) 
Sec. 70-113. - Park in designated areas. 
    No person shall park any motor vehicle in any parking lot or structure other than within the boundaries of the space designated as allocated for the parking of a single motor vehicle, by appropriate lines or other markings. Any person parking any motor vehicle in any parking lot or structure otherwise than as herein prescribed, shall be guilty of a violation of this division. 
(Code 1982,  10.23) 
Sec. 70-114. - Garage and nonmetered lot parking. 
    Every person who parks a motor vehicle in any nonmetered parking lot or garage of the automobile parking system, shall pay the rates duly established for such parking before removing such vehicle from the parking lot or structure. 
(Code 1982,  10.24) 
Sec. 70-115. - Metered parking lots. 
    In parking lots of the system where parking charges are collected by means of parking meters installed adjacent to the parking spaces in such lots, no person shall: 
(1)  Park a motor vehicle in any metered space without placing a United States coin of proper denomination in the meter in accordance with the regulations posted on the meter during the hours the regulations require the payment of parking charges. 
(2)  Permit a motor vehicle in his custody, or owned by him, to remain in any metered zone except while lawful parking time appears on the meter regulating the space occupied by such motor vehicle. 
(3)  Deface, injure, open or tamper with any parking meter installed on any such parking lot, except as authorized by the city manager. 
(Code 1982,  10.25) 
Sec. 70-116. - Central parking lot. 
    In the public parking lot known as the Central Parking Lot situated within the area bounded by Penniman Avenue, S. Main Street, W. Ann Arbor Trail, S. Harvey Street, no owner or operator of a motor vehicle or conveyance shall park the same or permit the same to be parked in such parking lot and structure for a continuous period of time in excess of those time restrictions placed on such motor vehicle and duly posted. Such time restrictions shall be posted at the entrances and/or designated time zone restriction areas excluding special events designated by the city manager. Such posted time limitations upon parking in such parking lot and structure shall be in force all days of the week excepting Sunday and legal holidays known as New Year's Day, Memorial or Decoration Day, July the Fourth or Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day and other days deemed appropriate by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 84-6,  1(10.26), 11-19-84; Ord. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 70-117. - Moving vehicle to avoid time limitation. 
    The movement of a motor vehicle or conveyance from place to place in a parking lot or the removal of same from such lot and immediate return thereof to the lot shall not be deemed to interrupt the running of the two-hour parking limitation hereby imposed. Such conduct shall be deemed prima facie evidence of intent to violate this article. 
(Code 1982,  10.26) 
Sec. 70-118. - Truck parking licenses. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized and empowered to set aside and reserve in any of the parking lots, owned or operated by the city, parking places or stalls for the use of trucks owned or used in connection with businesses operated within the city. Such parking places shall be used only by the holders of licenses duly issued by the city clerk in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Any person, desiring a license for a reserved parking place for a truck in any city parking lot shall make a written application therefor, addressed to the city clerk, identifying the vehicle to be parked therein by motor number, weight and such other information or data as the clerk may require and stating the use to which the vehicle to be parked therein shall be put. 
(c)  The city manager, if satisfied that the issuance of such license is desirable, will not interfere with the purpose of the city to provide parking for the general public and that the truck to be parked in any such space is not used for any purpose offensive to considerations of health and sanitation, may approve such application. 
(d)  When such application is approved by the city manager, the city clerk shall issue a license to the applicant for the current fiscal year beginning July 1 and ending on June 30, at a fee or charge of $75.00 per year. The fee for any license issued after the beginning of the fiscal year shall be based upon the remainder of such year and pro rated accordingly. All such licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year and application for renewal thereof shall be made on or before June 1 of each year. 
(e)  When a license is issued to an owner or user of a truck for a reserved place in any city parking lot, such place shall be marked as reserved for the licensee and it shall be unlawful for any vehicle other than the described vehicle of the licensee to be parked in such reserved place. The clerk shall issue to the licensee a plate, card or sticker which shall be attached to the licensed vehicle and it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any reserved space without such plate, card or sticker being attached to such vehicle. 
(f)  No license shall be issued to permit and it shall be unlawful for any person to park a semi-tractor and/or trailer; except for deliveries, in a residential district as defined by the Plymouth City Zoning Ordinance. Further, no license shall be issued to permit and it shall be unlawful for any person to park a semi-tractor and/or trailer, except for deliveries, in a mixed use district as defined by the Plymouth City Zoning Ordinance. 
(Code 1982,  10.27; Ord. No. 90-1,  1, 1-15-90; Ord. No. 98-7, 11-2-98) 
Sec. 70-119. - Vehicle abandonment. 
    Any motor vehicle parked for over 48 consecutive hours, without moving in any parking space, lot or structure of the system, shall be deemed abandoned and maybe removed by the city and impounded. Vehicles with residential permits shall not be considered abandoned until at least 120 hours (five days) has passed without the vehicle moving. Residents may notify the police department for special vacation privileges to allow vehicle parking for a period not to exceed 14 days without the vehicle moving. Any motor vehicle otherwise parked in violation of this division may be removed by the city from the parking lot or structure in which it is parked any impounded. Any vehicle so impounded by the city shall not be released to the owner until all parking charges, storing and towing charges shall have been paid by the owner. The procedure for disposing of impounded vehicles shall be as specified in this chapter. The abandonment of a vehicle as provided in this section shall constitute of violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1982,  10.28; Ord. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 70-120. - Presumption from ownership. 
    In any proceeding for violation of the provisions of this division relating to parking, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of this division, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Code 1982,  10.29) 
Secs. 70-121-70-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU 

Sec. 70-131. - Established. 
    Pursuant to section 8395 of the Revised Judicature Act, as added by Act No. 154 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1968 (MCL 600.8101, MSA 27A.8101 et seq.), a parking violations bureau, for the purpose of handling alleged parking violations within the city, is hereby established. The parking violations bureau shall be under the supervision and control of the city treasurer. 
(Code 1982,  10.61) 
Sec. 70-132. - Treasurer's duties. 
    The city treasurer shall, subject to the approval of the city commission, establish a convenient location for the parking violations bureau, appoint qualified city employees to administer the bureau and adopt rules and regulations for the operation thereof. 
(Code 1982,  10.62) 
Sec. 70-133. - Violations handled. 
    No violation not scheduled pursuant to section 70-136 shall be disposed of by the parking violations bureau. The fact that a particular violation is scheduled shall not entitle the alleged violator to disposition of the violation at the bureau and in any case the person in charge of such bureau may refuse to dispose of such violation, in which case any person having knowledge of the facts may make a sworn complaint before any court having jurisdiction of the offense as provided by law. 
(Code 1982,  10.63) 
Sec. 70-134. - Option of violators. 
    No violation may be settled at the parking violations bureau except at the specific request of the alleged violator. No penalty for any violation shall be accepted from any person who denied having committed the offense and in no case shall the person who is in charge of the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to such alleged violation. No person shall be required to dispose of a parking violation at the parking violations bureau and all persons shall be entitled to have any such violation processed before a court having jurisdiction thereof if they so desire. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the parking violations bureau shall not prejudice him or in any way diminish the rights, privileges and protection accorded to him by law. 
(Code 1982,  10.64) 
Sec. 70-135. - Issuing tickets. 
    The issuance of a traffic ticket or notice of violation by a police officer or parking enforcement officer of the city shall be deemed an allegation of a parking violation. Such traffic ticket or notice of violation shall indicate the length of time in which the person to whom the same was issued must respond before the parking violations bureau. It shall also indicate the address of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the penalty scheduled for the offense for which the ticket was issued and advise that a warrant for the arrest of the person to whom the ticket was issued will be sought if such a person fails to respond within the time limited. 
(Code 1982,  10.65; Ord. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 70-136. - Schedule of offenses and fines. 
    The amount of each fine coming under this division shall be established by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1982,  10.66) 
Secs. 70-137-70-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - HANDICAPPER PARKING 

Sec. 70-146. - Purpose. 
    The city commission enacts this ordinance for the purpose of providing handicapped parking areas for the handicapped (handicappers) in order to improve the quality of their lives; to comply with Act No. 88 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 257.942a, MSA 9.2642(1)), which mandates that each municipality provide by ordinance certain handicapper parking facilities, and to provide penalties for the violation of its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 82-10,  2, 7-19-82) 
Sec. 70-147. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Handicapper means a person who has a physical characteristic categorized as a handicap, which limits ambulation, or necessitates the use of a wheelchair for mobility, or a person who is blind. 
    Handicapper parking space means a parking space 12 feet wide marked off in blue or yellow paint. A sign located approximately six feet above grade inscribed with the international wheelchair symbol or a reasonable facsimile thereof shall identify the handicapper space. 
    Shopping center means a minimum area of three acres of land on which there is located one or more stores or business establishments, and where there is provided a parking area. 
(Ord. No. 82-10,  3, 7-19-82) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 70-148. - General requirements. 
    There shall be handicapper parking facilities as specified in this division in all parking areas of shopping centers. 
(Ord. No. 82-10,  4, 7-19-82) 
Sec. 70-149. - Space required. 
    Each shopping center shall provide handicapper parking spaces in numbers to conform with the following table. 
Total Parking in Lot Required Number of Accessible Spaces Up to 25 1 26 to 50 2 51 to 75 3 76 to 100 4 101 to 150 5 151 to 200 6 201 to 300 7 301 to 400 8 401 to 500 9 501 to 1,000 2% of the total Over 1,000 20 plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000  
(Ord. No. 82-10,  5, 7-19-82) 
Sec. 70-150. - Spaces provided in on-street parking. 
    It is the intention of the city to provide handicapper parking spaces on streets where legal parking is permitted by the city traffic engineer as follows: 
(1)  At the request of a handicapper, in front of or adjacent to his residence, on a showing of a handicapper's certificate issued by the secretary of state. 
(2)  Adjacent to places of handicapper occupation under the jurisdiction of the city where there is parking under the jurisdiction of the city and where there are otherwise insufficient off-street handicapper spaces provided. 
(Ord. No. 82-10,  6, 7-19-82) 
Sec. 70-151. - Manner of parking; display of certificate. 
    A person shall not park a vehicle, except in compliance with the directions of a police officer in a parking space clearly identified by an official sign as being reserved for use by handicappers which is on public property available for public use, unless the person is a handicapper or unless the person is parking the vehicle for the benefit of a handicapper. A certificate of identification issued to a handicapper shall be displayed on the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 82-10,  7, 7-19-82) 
Sec. 70-152. - Penalty for violation. 
    A person who parks a vehicle in violation of this division shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00, nor more than $100.00, and/or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. An additional penalty in the form of a late charge set at $5.00 will be imposed for fines not paid on or before the 14th day after the date of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 82-10,  8, 7-19-82) 
Secs. 70-153-70-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RESIDENTIAL ONLY ON-STREET PARKING AREAS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Vehicular parking districts,  78-301 et seq. 

Sec. 70-161. - Definitions. 
    City commission is the duly elected city commission of the City of Plymouth, Michigan. 
    Entrance of each street shall mean an area where two public streets intersect and a vehicle can gain access to another street other than the one they were traveling on. 
    On-street parking is such parking of a licensed motorized vehicle on the street next to the curb in areas in which it is not otherwise prohibited. 
    Resident is a person who is the owner, holder, lessee, agent, occupant, or trustee of a property in a residential only parking area. 
(Ord. No. 87-3,  1, 3-16-87) 
Sec. 70-162. - Residential only parking designation. 
    Upon receipt of petition signed by the residents representing at least 60 percent of the properties on a given city block requesting that parking on their street should be limited to residents of the designated street only, the city administration shall designate said street as a residential only parking area. The parking prohibition shall be between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 3:00 a.m. local time. 
(Ord. No. 87-3,  1, 3-16-87) 
Sec. 70-163. - Posting. 
    The department of public works shall install and maintain at a minimum of one official sign at the entrance of each street. Said sign shall state "RESIDENTIAL PARKING ONLY BETWEEN 7:00 P.M. & 3:00 A.M. ALL OTHERS SUBJECT TO TICKETING AND/OR TOWING". 
(Ord. No. 87-3,  1, 3-16-87) 
Sec. 70-164. - Violations (issuance of ticket and/or impounding). 
    Vehicles found to be in violation of said posted sign shall be subject to the issuance of a traffic ticket or notice of violation by a police officer of the city. In addition, any motor vehicle parked in violation of this division may be removed by the city and impounded. Any vehicle so impounded by the city shall not be released to the owner until all storing and towing charges shall have been paid by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 87-3,  1, 3-16-87) 
Sec. 70-165. - Presumption from ownership. 
    In any proceeding for violation of the provisions of this division relating to parking, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parking in violation of this division, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 87-3,  1, 3-16-87) 
Sec. 70-166. - Supervision. 
    As supervisor of the automobile parking system of the city the city manager and/or his designee is authorized to establish procedures for the issuance of permits for the parking of residents' vehicles on the street during the parking regulation period. In addition, the city manager and or his designee shall design and furnish a form to the residents who express an interest in having their street or block become a part or be dropped from the residential parking program. 
(Ord. No. 87-3,  1, 3-16-87) 
Sec. 70-167. - Termination of designation. 
    This parking regulation may be removed by city commission resolution and or by the city receiving a form showing the signatures of 60 percent of the residents of a street or block requesting that the regulation be removed. 
(Ord. No. 87-3,  1, 3-16-87) 
Sec. 70-168. - Penalties. 
    Violation of this division shall be a civil offense punishable by a $25.00 fine. If the fine is not paid in ten days the fine shall double. 
(Ord. No. 87-3,  1, 3-16-87) 
Secs. 70-169-70-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BICYCLES, SKATES AND SKATEBOARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 70-176. - Enforcement. 
    This article may be enforced by issuance of traffic violation notices requiring appearance at the traffic violations bureau. 
(Code 1982,  10.105) 
Sec. 70-177. - Driver regulations applicable. 
    Every person riding a bicycle upon a street or highway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle under the Uniform Traffic Code, except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. The word "bicycle" shall have the meaning prescribed in the Uniform Traffic Code. 
(Code 1982,  10.81) 
Sec. 70-178. - Registration required. 
    No person who resides within this city shall ride or propel a bicycle on any street, sidewalk, or upon any public path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, unless such bicycle has been registered and a registration plate is attached thereto. 
(Code 1982,  10.82) 
Sec. 70-179. - Application for registration. 
    Application for a bicycle registration and registration plate shall be made upon a form provided by the city clerk and shall be made to the department of police. A permanent registration fee of $1.00 shall be paid to the city before any registration plate is issued. 
(Code 1982,  10.83) 
Sec. 70-180. - Issuance of registration. 
(a)  The police department shall not issue any registration plate for any bicycle when it knows or has reasonable ground to believe that the applicant is not the owner of, or entitled to the possession of, such bicycle. 
(b)  The police department shall keep a record of the number of each registration, the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom issued, and the number on the frame of the bicycle for which issued, and a record of all bicycle registration fees collected by the department. The department may place numbers on the frames of bicycles which shall be peculiar to the city. 
(Code 1982,  10.84) 
Sec. 70-181. - Registration plate. 
(a)  The police department, upon issuing a bicycle registration, shall also issue a registration plate bearing the registration number assigned to the bicycle and the name of the city. 
(b)  The department shall cause such registration plate to be firmly attached to the rear fender or frame of the bicycle for which issued in such position as to be plainly visible from the rear. 
(c)  No person shall remove a registration plate from a bicycle except upon a transfer of ownership or if the bicycle is dismantled and no longer operated upon any street in the city. 
(d)  A charge of $0.50 for any renewal, replacement or transfer of ownership on any licensed bicycle shall be paid to the city. 
(Code 1982,  10.85) 
Sec. 70-182. - Inspection required. 
    The police department shall inspect each bicycle before registering the same, and shall refuse a registration for any bicycle which it determines is in unsafe mechanical condition. 
(Code 1982,  10.86) 
Sec. 70-183. - Ownership, transfer. 
    Upon the sale or other transfer of ownership of a registered bicycle, the licensee by payment of the fee as herein provided, shall have such plate assigned to the transferee or to another bicycle owned by the applicant. 
(Code 1982,  10.87) 
Sec. 70-184. - Rental agencies. 
    A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent, unless the bicycle is registered and a registration plate is attached thereto as provided herein and such bicycle is equipped with the lamps and other equipment required in this division. 
(Code 1982,  10.88) 
Sec. 70-185. - Bicycle dealers. 
    Each person engaged in the business of buying or selling new or secondhand bicycles shall make a report to the police department of each bicycle purchased from or sold by such dealer, giving the name and address of the person from whom purchased or to whom sold, a description of such bicycle by name or make, the frame number thereof, and the number of the registration plate, if any, found thereon. 
(Code 1982,  10.89) 
Sec. 70-186. - Obedience to traffic control devices. 
(a)  Each person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs and other control devices applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or "U" turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction of any such sign, except whenever such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1982,  10.90) 
Sec. 70-187. - Number and manner of carrying persons. 
(a)  No person propelling a bicycle shall ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto. 
(b)  No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. 
(Code 1982,  10.91) 
Sec. 70-188. - Riding on roadways and bicycle paths. 
(a)  Each person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction. 
(b)  No person riding a bicycle upon a street or highway shall ride more than two abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles. 
(c)  Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a street or highway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall not use the street or highway. 
(d)  Bicycle riders under the age of 12 years of age shall not operate bicycles on city streets or highways. 
(Code 1982,  10.92) 
Sec. 70-189. - Speed; safety; dismounting required. 
(a)  No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions existing. 
(b)  If any person riding a bicycle on any street or sidewalk under such conditions as may interfere with safety of such person or any pedestrian or any other vehicle, then the operator of such bicycle shall dismount and walk through such district or area. 
(Code 1982,  10.93) 
Sec. 70-190. - Emerging from alley or driveway. 
    The operator of a bicycle, when emerging from an alley, driveway or building, shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on such sidewalk or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway. 
(Code 1982,  10.94) 
Sec. 70-191. - Clinging to vehicles. 
    No person operating a bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway. 
(Code 1982,  10.95) 
Sec. 70-192. - Carrying articles. 
    No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars. 
(Code 1982,  10.96) 
Sec. 70-193. - Parking. 
    No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1982,  10.97) 
Sec. 70-194. - Riding on sidewalks. 
(a)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(b)  No person shall ride any bicycle on the sidewalk in congested business districts, and shall dismount before entering any such business area. 
(Code 1982,  10.98) 
Sec. 70-195. - Lamps and other equipment required. 
(a)  Each bicycle, when in use after sundown, shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of the lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
(b)  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheels skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(c)  No bicycle shall be operated or used one-half hour after sundown or one-half hour before sunrise unless all lamps on the bicycle are lighted and in working order. 
(Code 1982,  10.99) 
Sec. 70-196. - Parents, guardians; responsibilities. 
    No parent of any child, nor guardian of any ward, shall authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1982,  10.100) 
Sec. 70-197. - Impoundment. 
    Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove bicycles from a public place to a bicycle pound or other place of safety, under the circumstances hereafter enumerated: 
(1)  When any bicycle is deemed to have been abandoned. 
(2)  When a violation notice cannot be presented to the owner or operator of the bicycle in person. 
(3)  When any bicycle is ridden in any public place without a bicycle license and registration. 
(4)  When any bicycle is ridden in any public place without lights as required herein. 
(5)  When any bicycle is left on the sidewalk blocking pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1982,  10.101) 
Sec. 70-198. - Notice. 
    When a bicycle is impounded under the provisions of this division and the police department knows or is able to ascertain the owner thereof, the police department shall, within a reasonable period of time, give and cause to be given a notice in writing to such owner of the fact of impoundment and the reasons therefor. 
(Code 1982,  10.102) 
Sec. 70-199. - Release. 
    No impounded bicycle shall be discharged or removed from the bicycle pound except upon the payment by the owner or his authorized representative of the sum of $3.00 as an impounding fee. Such fee shall be paid at the violations bureau of the district court #35 in the city. 
(Code 1982,  10.103) 
Sec. 70-200. - Sale. 
    Any bicycle impounded under the provisions of this article, may, after one month from the date of impoundment, be sold by the police department at public sale in substantially the same manner as provided for motor vehicles in MCL 257.252, MSA 9.1952. 
(Code 1982,  10.104) 
Secs. 70-201-70-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ROLLER SKATING, SKATEBOARDING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 97-4, adopted July 7, 1997, deleted and replaced div. 2,  70-211-70-218 with new provisions, designated herein as div. 2,  70-211-70-220. Former div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter as derived from Ord. No. 87-4, adopted Apr. 6, 1987. 

Sec. 70-211. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Roller skate means to skate on any type of roller skates or street skates. 
    Roller skates means small wheels attached to a shoe or to a frame attached to a shoe or foot which are used for gliding on a hard surface, such as a floor, sidewalk, street, etc. Devices known as in-line skates, street skates or roller blades are included within this definition. 
    Skateboard means a device consisting of a short board or platform with small wheels attached and capable of being utilized to ride upon a hard surface, such as a floor, sidewalk, street, etc. The activity of riding or operating a skateboard device is included within this definition. 
(Ord. No. 97-4,  1, 7-7-97) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 70-212. - Compliance. 
    No person shall roller skate or ride a skateboard within the city without complying with the terms of this division. 
(Ord. No. 97-4,  1, 7-7-97) 
Sec. 70-213. - Penalties. 
    The penalties for violating sections 70-211 through 70-220 shall be, as follows: 
(1)  Ejection of any person who is using roller skates or a skateboard within any area defined by sections 70-215, 70-216, 70-218 and 70-219. 
(2)  Impound for use as evidence any roller skates or skateboard which is used contrary to the provisions of sections 70-211 through 70-220, pending the prosecution of an alleged violation of such sections. If a person is determined to be not responsible for an offense or determined to be responsible for an offense and pays all applicable fine(s) and cost(s), the impounded evidence shall be released to the person, unless subsection (3)d. of this section applies. 
(3)  The violation of any provision of sections 70-211 through 70-220 shall be a municipal civil infraction with a civil fine in the following amounts: 
a.  The civil fine for a first offense shall be $50.00, plus costs, for such infraction. 
b.  The civil fine for any repeat offense which is a second offense shall be $150.00, plus costs and other sanction, for such infraction. 
c.  The civil fine for any repeat offense which is a third offense or any subsequent offense shall be $250.00, plus costs and other sanction, for each infraction. 
d.  In addition to any civil fine, a person who admits to being responsible or is determined to be responsible for an offense shall have the following sanction(s) imposed: 
1.  For a repeat offense which is a second offense the person shall serve and complete one day of community service as directed by the court. 
2.  For a repeat offense which is a third or subsequent offense the person shall serve and complete one day of community service as directed by the court for each repeat offense occurring after the second offense. 
3.  For a repeat offense which is a third or subsequent offense the impounded roller skates or skateboard shall be confiscated. 
(Ord. No. 97-4,  1, 7-7-97) 
Sec. 70-214. - Skating or riding on sidewalks. 
    Whenever any person is roller skating or riding a skateboard upon a sidewalk or other paved surface intended for use by pedestrians, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall not approach, overtake or pass such pedestrian in a reckless or careless manner, and shall not pass such pedestrian except in single file if such person is roller skating or riding a skateboard with other such skaters or riders. 
(Ord. No. 97-4,  1, 7-7-97) 
Sec. 70-215. - Banned in central business district. 
    No person shall roller skate or skateboard on any property owned or leased by the public in the central business district, which is the area circumscribed by Church, Harvey, Wing, Deer, Maple, Elizabeth and Union Streets and depicted by the "Section 70-215 Map" incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 97-4,  1, 7-7-97) 
Sec. 70-216. - Posting prohibited areas outside the central business district. 
    The city manager is authorized to designate areas outside the central business district where roller skating and skateboarding shall be prohibited. Any area proscribed for roller blading and skateboarding by the city manager shall be posted with signs reasonably sized and placed according to the direction of the city manager informing the public of the proscription. 
(Ord. No. 97-4,  1, 7-7-97) 
Sec. 70-217. - Negligent, reckless/careless roller skating or skateboarding. 
    No person shall roller skate or skateboard within the limits of the city in the following wise or manner: 
(1)  Negligently endanger, injure or harm any person or property; or 
(2)  Recklessly or carelessly endanger, injure or harm any person or property. 
(Ord. No. 97-4,  1, 7-7-97) 
Sec. 70-218. - Permission required on private property. 
    No person shall roller skate or ride a skateboard on private property without first obtaining and carrying on his person the written permission of the owner of such private property to allow such skating or riding. Failure of a person who has been roller skating or riding a skateboard on private property to produce such written permission, upon the request of any police officer, shall constitute prima facie evidence that such person is in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 97-4,  1, 7-7-97) 
Sec. 70-219. - Banned on public streets. 
    No person shall roller skate or skateboard upon any public roadway, except while crossing a street on a crosswalk. When crossing a street on a crosswalk, a person on roller skates or skateboard shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 97-4,  1, 7-7-97) 
Sec. 70-220. - Public and private property protected. 
    No person shall engage in roller skating or skateboarding anywhere within the limits of the city which shall cause, whether intentionally or not, damage to any public or private property. Such person shall be strictly liable for all loss, cost or expense relating to their roller skating or skateboarding activity. 
(Ord. No. 97-4,  1, 7-7-97) 
Secs. 70-221-70-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RAILROADS 

Sec. 70-241. - Obstruction of vehicular traffic by train; restrictions; penalites. 
(a)  A railroad shall not permit a train to obstruct vehicular traffic on a public street or highway for longer than five minutes at any time, except the obstruction shall not be considered a violation under the following circumstances: 
(1)  If the train is continuously moving in the same direction at not less than ten miles per hour for not more than seven minutes. 
(2)  If the railroad can show that the incident occurred as a result of a verifiable accident, mechanical failure or unsafe condition. 
(b)  A railroad shall not permit successive train movements to obstruct vehicular traffic on a public street or highway until all vehicular traffic previously delayed by such train movements has been cleared. 
(c)  A railroad company shall not permit its employees to allow the activation of active traffic control devices at a railroad grade crossing for more than two minutes if there is no intention to move a train or track equipment through the crossing within 20 seconds to 60 seconds after the activation of the devices. 
(d)  Each offense under this section shall be a separate civil municipal infraction violation and punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(e)  All fines, civil or otherwise, collected by the city in excess of $10,000.00 annually from the enforcement of this section shall be allocated as follows: 
(1)  Fifteen percent shall be retained by the city for costs of enfrocement of this section. 
(2)  Eighty-five percent shall be deposited in a railroad grade crossing safety fund. The revenue collected in this fund shall be used solely for railroad grade crossing safety projects in the city. A municipal fund designated the "City of Plymouth Railroad Safety Fund" is established for the purpose of receiving and disbursing railroad grade crossing safety projects funds as determined and authorized by the city commission, which fund shall receive all funds, civil or otherwise, collected by the city pursuant to this subsection and may be utilized for any purpose not inconsistent with State of Michigan statute or regulation. 
(Code 1982,  10.51; Ord. No. 97-2,  2, 4-7-97) 
Secs. 70-242-70-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-03, adopted June 3, 2013, amended former Art. VII,  70-256-70-282, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 95-5,  1-27, adopted June 18, 1995. 

Sec. 70-256. - Motor Carrier Safety Act. 
(a)  The Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963 (PA 181 of 1963), and as subsequently amended, is hereby adopted by reference. 
(b)  Penalties. Violations of this section shall be punished as proscribed by the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1963, and as subsequently amended. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, 6-3-13) 
Chapter 74 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; zoning, ch. 78. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Inspectors. 
    The city engineer and other duly authorized officials or employees of the city and agents of the SWRC bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter at any time during reasonable or usual business hours. Any person guilty of refusing or obstructing such entry shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1982,  2.110) 
Sec. 74-2. - Notice to cease violation. 
    Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter except sections 74-1 and 74-129 shall be served with written notice stating the nature of such violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, take such corrective action as may be necessary. 
(Code 1982,  2.111) 
Sec. 74-3. - Continued violation. 
(a)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in section 74-2 shall upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(b)  Each day or fraction of a day in which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. Any officer, agent, or employee guilty of aiding or abetting such violation, or, being responsible therefor, refuses or neglects to take corrective action, shall be guilty as a principal. 
(Code 1982,  2.112) 
Sec. 74-4. - Civil liability. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned to the city by reason of such violation, and recovery therefor may be had in an appropriate action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1982,  2.113) 
Sec. 74-5. - Abatement. 
    Any continued violation, after due notice as provided in section 74-2, shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated by the city upon complaint in any court of competent jurisdiction. This remedy shall be in addition to those heretofore provided for. 
(Code 1982,  2.114) 
Secs. 74-6-74-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-26. - Violations. 
    No person shall use water without permission, nor use water in violation of a declaration of water supply emergency as provided herein, nor cause willful or needless waste of water by allowing constant flow of a faucet or otherwise, nor allow the occupant of any building not paying water rates to use the water from such premises. Upon the violation of any provision of this section, in addition to the penalties provided by this Code, the offender shall be liable to have his supply of water shut off by the city without notice. 
(Code 1982,  2.64; Ord. No. 94-9,  1, 7-11-94) 
Sec. 74-27. - Water supply emergencies-Authority. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized to declare a water supply emergency whenever he determines, on the basis of existing or anticipated drought conditions, depletion of the water supply, reduction in water pressure, failure of one or more parts of the supply system, or for other good reasons, that there is a threat of loss of water supply to the city or a portion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-9,  1, 7-11-94) 
Sec. 74-28. - Same-Method of declaration. 
(a)  A water supply emergency shall exist when the city manager has caused a declaration of such emergency to be made by: 
(1)  Public posting in at least three places as provided in the city Charter; 
(2)  Announcement on the city hall telephone answering system; 
(3)  Announcement on any city information channels available on subscription television services operating within the city; and 
(4)  Announcement on one or more radio or television stations with a normal operating range covering the city; provided, that this requirement shall be deemed to be satisfied if such an announcement is made by the Detroit Water Board, specifically including the city in its applicability. 
(b)  When practical, and if the duration of the anticipated emergency warrants it, such declaration shall also be announced in local newspapers. The city manager shall make a record of the time and date for implementation of each method of such declaration. Irrespective of such methods of declaration, a water supply emergency shall be deemed to exist for any person, and the property under his direct supervision or control, as soon as such person has received a direct written notice of such declaration. 
(Ord. No. 94-9,  1(a), 7-11-94) 
Sec. 74-29. - Same-Content of declaration. 
    A declaration of water supply emergency shall include: 
(1)  The effective date and time of such emergency, which may be immediate; the period of time during which such emergency shall be in effect, which may be for as much as 24 hours per day, and until further notice is given; 
(2)  The types of outside water usage which are prohibited, which may include all outside uses except fire protection, and may permit certain outside uses on alternating days or during restricted hours; and 
(3)  The types of inside water usage which are requested to be reduced or avoided in the interest of conservation of water. 
(Ord. No. 94-9,  1, 7-11-94) 
Sec. 74-30. - Same-Water use restricted. 
    Whenever a water supply emergency exists, it shall be unlawful for any person to utilize water from the city water supply system for any type of outdoor use which is in violation of the terms of such declaration. 
(Ord. No. 94-9,  1, 7-11-94) 
Sec. 74-31. - Entry to premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any building in which water is used from such system of waterworks to refuse to the duly authorized employees of the city admission to all parts of such building and the premises on which the same is situated, wherever water pipes or water fixtures are located, to ascertain whether there is any waste of water, or for the purpose of installing, repairing or testing any meter used in connection with such waterworks, or to count the number of fixtures from which water is used. 
(Code 1982,  2.65) 
Sec. 74-32. - Damage to system. 
    No person not duly authorized shall bore any pipe, open any hydrant or stop-cock or interfere in any part of the city waterworks system, or attach to any part of such system a booster pump or other contrivance for the purpose of withdrawing water therefrom without special permit from the city. In addition to the penalty for a violation of this Code, any damages caused by such unlawful interference with such waterworks system may be collected from the offender. 
(Code 1982,  2.66) 
Sec. 74-33. - Shut-off charge. 
    Where owners or occupants of property desire the city to shut off the water from their premises at the curb cock either because the premises are to be vacant or for the purpose of repairs, a charge of $10.00 shall be made and collected before the water is turned on again. 
(Code 1982,  2.67) 
Sec. 74-34. - Meter required. 
(a)  All new water services shall be metered. The city reserves the right to place a meter on any existing service without application from the consumer where such action shall be deemed necessary to prevent waste or to protect the interests of the water department or to continue the policy of metering all consumers. The meters shall be furnished by the city and shall remain the property of the city. Where premises have no cellar or basement or where no suitable place for a meter is provided by the property owner, or where the water department has been unable to make a meter reading for a period of not less than two successive billing periods, the property owner shall pay the cost of installation of an outside meter well, or some other outside meter reading device approved by the city manager. All new buildings shall be equipped with outside meter reading devices at the owner's expense. The meters will be read and repaired by the water department of the city as often as may be necessary, and no additional charge will be made for such service, except that when a meter is damaged by frost or hot water or otherwise through the fault of the consumer and not of the city, the cost of the repair of such damage shall be paid by the consumer, the bill for the same to be included with the next water bill. 
(b)  Consumers or property owners where meters are located within the building, must not cover the meters or place obstructions that may prevent convenient access to the meter at any time by the employees of the water department for the purpose of reading or making repairs. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to determine the size and number of meters required for any service. 
(d)  When water has been used for a period without the meter registering, the water so used shall be estimated by the city, on the basis of past consumption by the user or by similar users. The current meter schedule shall apply to water used through a meter out of order. 
(e)  Notice shall at once be given to the city manager when a meter is found by owner, occupant or tenant, to be out of order. 
(Code 1982,  2.68) 
Secs. 74-35-74-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 74-46. - Permit required. 
    No person shall make a connection with the waterworks system of the city without first obtaining a connection permit. 
(Code 1982,  2.61) 
Sec. 74-47. - Permit application. 
    All applications to make connection with the city waterworks system shall be made to the building department in writing and upon blanks to be furnished by the city. Such applications shall fully describe the locality where such connection is desired. A tapping fee and such other deposits, payments and charges shall be made at the time of such application as is required by this chapter. 
(Code 1982,  2.62) 
Sec. 74-48. - Making connection. 
    Upon the filing of the application for a permit under this article and the payment of the tapping fee and such other deposits, payments and charges and other costs of water main installations, which have not already been paid in connection with the property to be serviced, such installation charges to be upon a front-foot basis, the city manager shall cause suitable service pipes to be laid from the water main to and including the curb cock, which shall be located between the curb line and the sidewalk line and be provided with a suitable service box. The work of furnishing and laying the pipe up to and including the curb cock shall be done at the expense of the city. If the installation shall be other than as above provided, any extra cost thereof shall be paid by the applicant. The applicant shall furnish and lay the balance of the service pipe at his own expense, subject, however, to the supervision and direction of the city manager. Such pipes laid by the applicant shall be laid to the depth of the bottom of the water main unless otherwise permitted by the city manager. All pipe between the shut-off in the street and the meter shall be extra strong lead pipe or copper pipe. No steel pipe shall be used between the meter and the street. A valve for shutting off the water shall be installed on each service pipe immediately inside the cellar or basement wall. A template to be furnished by the city shall be placed in a horizontal position in the service line immediately after the shut-off. Another shut-off shall then be placed in the service line before any branches are taken therefrom. Both valves shall be drainable gate valves, either Scott drainage gate valves or those of equivalent quality. The service pipe must be executed to the point in the basement or cellar where the template is placed before any branches are taken therefrom. The city will furnish the necessary templates at the time of application for a water tap to the city treasurer. Where, on services now in place, it becomes necessary to replace the inside shut-off valve, the valve shall comply with the specifications for new valves as given above. 
(Code 1982,  2.63) 
Secs. 74-49-74-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER CONNECTION FINANCING 

Sec. 74-61. - Cash payments. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized, in his discretion, to charge for and collect through cash payments the cost of water mains heretofore or hereafter laid or installed for the benefit of property to be served thereby in all cases where property or the owners thereof have not been assessed therefor, such cash payments to be made upon application for water connections. 
(Code 1982,  2.72) 
Sec. 74-62. - Front-foot charge. 
    The charge for the cost or installation of water mains is hereby fixed at the rate of $3.00 per front foot of the property benefited. Such charge shall be in addition to all water rates and connection charges and deposits required by this Code. 
(Code 1982,  2.73) 
Sec. 74-63. - Alternate procedure. 
    The procedure provided in this division for the cash payment for water main improvements or benefits, is for the purpose of effecting savings for the city and the benefited property owners. Nothing in this division shall prevent levy and collection of special assessments for such water main improvements under the provisions of the city Charter or other applicable law whenever such action is deemed preferable. 
(Code 1982,  2.74) 
Secs. 74-64-74-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CROSS CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 74-76. - Adoption of rules by reference. 
    The city adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the Michigan Department of Public Health being R 325.11.401 to R 325.11.407 of the Michigan Administrative Code. 
(Code 1982,  2.151) 
Sec. 74-77. - Inspections. 
    It shall be the duty of the city water department, or its authorized representative, to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be established by the city water department, or its authorized representative, and as approved by the state department of public health. 
(Code 1982,  2.152) 
Sec. 74-78. - Entry to premises. 
    The representative of the city water department, or its authorized representative, shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. On request the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(Code 1982,  2.153) 
Sec. 74-79. - Violations. 
    The city is authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this division exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1982,  2.154) 
Sec. 74-80. - Protection of potable water supply. 
    The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this article and by the state plumbing code and section 18-186 et seq. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
WATER UNSAFE 
FOR DRINKING 
(Code 1982,  2.155) 
Sec. 74-81. - Conflict with other laws. 
    This division does not supersede the state plumbing code and section 18-186 et seq., but is supplementary to them. 
(Code 1982,  2.156) 
Sec. 74-82. - Penalty. 
    Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this division, or any written order of the city water department, or its authorized representative, shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 1982,  2.157) 
Sec. 74-83. - Testable backflow prevention devices. 
    That all testable backflow prevention devices shall be tested initially upon installation to be sure that the device is working properly. Subsequent testing of devices shall be conducted at a time interval specified by the city water department or their representative and in accordance with Michigan Department of Environmental Quality requirements. Only individuals approved by the city or their representatives shall be qualified to perform such testing. That individual(s) shall certify the results of his/her testing. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06,  1, 6-20-05) 
Secs. 74-84-74-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-106. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in parts per million by weight. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drain pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Combination sewer or combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, processing and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes, solids, or semisolids from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of water, either surface water or groundwater. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the cooking, preparation and dispensing of food that has been cut or shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting property have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater and surface water are not intentionally admitted; provided, that sanitary sewer includes weeping tile (drains surrounding basement footings) when installed under regulations that would prevent excessive amounts of groundwater from entering the system. 
    Sewage means any combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business and commercial buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means any pipe, tile, tubes, or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwater, surface water and drainage but which excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Suspended solids means the solids that either float on the surface of, or are suspended in water, sewage, or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    SWRC means the state water resources commission. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1982,  2.81) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Secs. 74-107-74-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC SEWERS 

Sec. 74-116. - Waste deposits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon any public or private property within the city any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(Code 1982,  2.82) 
Sec. 74-117. - Water pollution. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural watercourse or any storm sewer, within the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial waste, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the standards established by the SWRC. 
(Code 1982,  2.83) 
Sec. 74-118. - Privies and septic tanks. 
    Except as hereinafter provided it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1982,  2.84) 
Sec. 74-119. - Sewer connection required. 
    The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, right-of-way, or public utility easement in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city is hereby required at his own expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly to the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division, within 90 days after date of the official notice to do so has been issued by the city manager, provided that such public sewer is located within a public easement contiguous to and not further than 200 feet from any such houses, buildings, structures, or properties. 
(Code 1982,  2.85) 
Sec. 74-120. - Unpolluted water. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater (except weeping tile), roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters into any sanitary sewer. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the city engineer and/or the SWRC. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the city engineer into a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1982,  2.99) 
Sec. 74-121. - Prohibited uses. 
(a)  Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge any industrial or commercial type wastes into the city sewer system which is deleterious to the public health and safety of the people of the city. Any waste will be considered deleterious that may cause damaging effects as stated under subsection (a)(1) of this section and/or does not conform to the limitations stated under subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(1)  General conditions: 
a.  Chemical reaction, either directly or indirectly, with the materials of construction to impair the strength or durability of sewer structures. 
b.  Mechanical action that will destroy or damage the sewer structures. 
c.  Restriction of the hydraulic capacity of sewer structures. 
d.  Restriction of the normal inspection or maintenance of the sewer structures. 
e.  Placing of unusual demands on the sewage treatment equipment or process. 
f.  Limitation of the effectiveness of the sewage treatment process. 
g.  Danger to public health and safety. 
h.  Obnoxious conditions inimical to the public interest. 
(2)  Specific conditions: 
a.  Acidity or alkalinity must be neutralized to a pH of 7.0 as a daily average on a volumetric basis, with a maximum temporary variation of pH 5.0 to 10.0. 
b.  Must not contain more than ten ppm of the following gases: hydrogen sulphide, sulphur dioxide, oxides of nitrogen, or any of the halogens. 
c.  Must not contain any explosive substance. 
d.  Must not contain any flammable substance with a flash point lower than 187 degrees Fahrenheit. 
e.  Must have a temperature within the range of 32 degrees to 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
f.  Must not contain grease or oil or other substance that will solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
g.  Must not contain insoluble substance in excess of 10,000 ppm or exceeding a daily average of 500 ppm. 
h.  Must not contain total solids (soluble and insoluble substance) in excess of 20,000 ppm, or exceeding a daily average of 2,000 ppm. 
i.  Must not contain soluble substance in concentrations that would increase the viscosity to greater than 1.1 specific viscosity. 
j.  Must not contain insoluble substance having a specific gravity greater than 2.65. 
k.  Must not contain insoluble substance that will fail to pass a No. 8 standard sieve, or having any dimension greater than one-half inch. 
l.  Must not contain gases or vapors, either free or occluded, in concentrations toxic or dangerous to humans or animals. 
m.  Must not have a chlorine demand greater than 15 ppm. 
n.  Must not contain more than 100 ppm of any antiseptic substance. 
o.  Must not contain phenols in excess of 0.005 ppm. 
p.  Must not contain any toxic or irritating substance which will create conditions hazardous to public health and safety. 
q.  Must not contain in excess of 100 ppm or exceed a daily average of 25 ppm of any grease or oil or any oily substance. 
(b)  All of the preceding standards and regulations are to apply at the point where industrial or commercial type wastes are discharged into a public sewer and all chemical and/or mechanical corrective treatment must be accomplished to practical completion before this point is reached. 
(Code 1982,  2.100) 
Sec. 74-122. - Interceptors. 
    Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when in the opinion of the city engineer and/or the SWRC they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any inflammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city engineer and/or the SWRC and shall be located so as to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be substantially constructed, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. 
(Code 1982,  2.101) 
Sec. 74-123. - Interceptor maintenance. 
    Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(Code 1982,  2.102) 
Sec. 74-124. - Preliminary treatment facilities. 
(a)  The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes having: 
(1)  A five-day BOD greater than 300 parts per million by weight; 
(2)  Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; 
(3)  Containing any quantity or substance having the characteristics described in section 74-121; or 
(4)  Having a daily average flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city, 
shall be subject to the review and approval of the city commission and/or the SWRC. 
(b)  Where necessary in the opinion of the city commission and/or the SWRC, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
(1)  Reduce the BOD to 300 parts per million and the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight; or 
(2)  Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in section 74-121; or 
(3)  Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. 
(c)  Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for approval of the city commission and/or the SWRC and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such approvals are obtained in writing. 
(Code 1982,  2.103) 
Sec. 74-125. - Maintenance of preliminary facilities. 
    Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained in satisfactory and effective operation, by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 1982,  2.104) 
Sec. 74-126. - Control manholes. 
    When required by the city commission or the SWRC, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city commission. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1982,  2.105) 
Sec. 74-127. - Measurements and tests. 
    All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in sections 74-121 and 74-124 shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in section 74-126 or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(Code 1982,  2.106) 
Sec. 74-128. - Agreements. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to the payment by the industrial concern of the estimated cost of such treatment. 
(Code 1982,  2.107) 
Sec. 74-129. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage system or treatment plant. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-13. 
(Code 1982,  2.108) 
Secs. 74-130-74-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE SEWERS 

Sec. 74-141. - When permitted. 
    Where a public sanitary sewer or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 74-119, the building sewer shall be connected with a private disposal system complying with the regulations and orders of the SWRC and the city engineer, and the provisions of chapter 18. 
(Code 1982,  2.87) 
Sec. 74-142. - Discontinuance of system. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with the provisions of this article, and any septic tank, privy, privy vault, cesspool or similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Code 1982,  2.88) 
Sec. 74-143. - Maintenance of system. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1982,  2.89) 
Sec. 74-144. - Additional requirements. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer or the SWRC with respect to private sewage disposal. 
(Code 1982,  2.90) 
Secs. 74-145-74-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BUILDING SEWERS; CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 74-156. - Permit required. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or open into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or any appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the building department. 
(Code 1982,  2.92) 
Sec. 74-157. - Permit fee. 
    All connections with the sanitary or combined sewers of the city shall be made only on written authorization and permits issued by the city on such forms and on payments of such fees as shall be established from time to time by the city commission. 
(Code 1982,  2.93) 
Sec. 74-158. - Installation costs. 
    All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner of such property. The owner shall indemnify the city from all loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1982,  2.94) 
Sec. 74-159. - Plans and specifications. 
    All applicants for sewer connection permits shall first submit plans and specifications of all plumbing construction within such building or premises and such plans and specifications shall meet the requirements of the plumbing code of the city. When such plans and specifications have been approved by the building inspector a construction permit shall be issued, subject to final inspection and approval when construction is completed and ready for connection with the city sewer system. 
(Code 1982,  2.95) 
Sec. 74-160. - Inspection. 
    The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the building inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The building inspector shall then inspect the building and plumbing construction therein and if such construction meets the previous requirements as approved in the construction permit, a sewer connection permit shall be issued, subject to the applicable provisions of other sections of this article. 
(Code 1982,  2.96) 
Sec. 74-161. - Repairs. 
    The cost of all repairs, maintenance and replacements of existing building sewers and their connection to public sewers shall be borne by the property owner. Such owner shall make application to perform such work to the city engineer. 
(Code 1982,  2.97) 
Secs. 74-162-74-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - STORM SEWERS 

Sec. 74-171. - Permits required for certain storm water construction activities. 
(a)  Certain storm water construction activities that are located within a Wayne County road right-of-way or Wayne County drain right-of-way shall require a permit from the Wayne County permit office, and in addition to other City of Plymouth approvals, shall meet the requirements of the Wayne County Storm Water Management Ordinance No. 2003-530. 
(b)  Maintenance of storm water facilities required by Wayne County or the city shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(c)  All storm water construction activities in the city, not under Wayne County jurisdiction as described above, shall require the review and approval of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2005-04,  1, 6-20-05) 
Sec. 74-172. - Maintenance. 
    Storm water management systems approved by Wayne County are required to provide maintenance in perpetuity. Long-term maintenance shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property identified in the final storm water approval. If the storm water system requires maintenance or repairs, and the maintenance and repairs are not performed by the property owner, the city upon notification to the property owner shall perform any required maintenance or repairs to the storm water system and place any costs incurred as a lien against the property. The property owner shall be invoiced and have 30 days to pay from date of issuance. Outstanding invoices will be placed on the next collection of city taxes with a penalty of six percent added. 
(Ord. No. 2005-04,  1, 6-20-05) 
Secs. 74-173-74-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER AND SEWER RATES 

Sec. 74-181. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department means the city department of water. 
    Premises means each lot or parcel of land, building or premises having any connection to the water distribution system of the city, or the sewage disposal system of the city. 
(Code 1982,  2.121) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally,  1-2. 
Sec. 74-182. - Basis of charges. 
    All water service shall be charged for on the basis of water consumed as determined by the meter installed in the premises of water or sewage disposal service customers by the department. All sewage disposal service shall be charged for on the basis of water consumed. No free water service or sewage disposal service shall be furnished to any person. 
(Code 1982,  2.122) 
Sec. 74-183-74-187. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 99-1, effective April 5, 1999, repealed former sections 74-183-74-187 in their entirety which pertained to various water rates and derived from the Code of 1982. Ord. No. 99-1 provided for the setting of water rates by resolution of the city commission. 
Sec. 74-188. - Taps restricted. 
    The term "tap" as used herein shall include any opening or outlet heretofore or hereafter made in the water system, for the purpose of withdrawing water therefrom for any use, public or private, either commercial or domestic, excepting fire hydrants. No taps shall be made to the system unless authorized by the proper city authorities. 
(Code 1982,  2.128) 
Secs. 74-189-74-194. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 99-1, effective April 5, 1999, repealed former sections 74-189-74-194 in their entirety which pertained to various water and sewer rates and charges and derived from the Code of 1982. Ord. No. 99-1 provided for the setting of such rates by resolution of the city commission. 
Sec. 74-195. - Special rates. 
    For miscellaneous services for which a special rate shall be established, such rates shall be fixed by the city commission. Where a user uses a large amount of water which is not discharged into the sanitary sewer system a special rate for sewer service of such user may be established. 
(Code 1982,  2.135) 
Sec. 74-196. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 99-1, effective April 5, 1999, repealed former section 74-196 in its entirety which pertained to billing and derived from the Code of 1982. 
Sec. 74-197. - Collection, deposits, turn on fees. 
(a)  The city treasurer is hereby authorized to enforce the payment of charges for water service to any premises by discontinuing the water service to such premises and the payment of charges for sewage disposal service to any premises may be enforced by discontinuing either the water service or the sewage disposal service to such premises, or both, and an action of assumpsit may be instituted by the city against the customer. The charges for water service and sewage disposal service, which, under the provisions of Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.) of the State of Michigan, as amended, are made a lien on the premises to which furnished, are hereby recognized to constitute such lien; and the city treasurer shall, annually, on April 1, certify all unpaid charges for such services furnished to any premises which, on March 31 preceding, have remained unpaid for a period of six months, to the city assessor who shall place the same on the next tax roll of the city. Such charges so assessed shall be collected in the same manner as general city taxes. 
(b)  In cases where the city is properly notified in accordance with Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), as amended, that a tenant is responsible for water or sewage disposal service charges, no such service shall be commenced or continued to such premises until there has been deposited with the city treasurer, a sum sufficient to cover three times the average bimonthly bill for such premises as estimated by the treasurer, such deposit to be in no case less than $15.00. 
(c)  Where the water service to any premises is turned off to enforce the payment of water service charges or sewage disposal service charges, the water service shall not be recommenced until all delinquent charges have been paid and a turn on charge of $35.00 added to these past due amounts. Also, if the request for water turn on is after the normal beginning and ending of the work day for the department of public services, the turn-on charge amount will double ($70.00). Such working hours are: 
(1)  Summer: Memorial Day, Labor Day; Monday through Friday, except holidays, 7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. 
(2)  Winter: Monday through Friday, except holidays, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. 
(d)  In any other case where, in the discretion of the city treasurer, the collection of charges for water or service disposal service may be difficult or uncertain, he may require a similar deposit. Such deposits may be applied against any delinquent water or sewage disposal service charges, and the application thereof shall not affect the right of the treasurer of the department to turn off the water service and/or sewer service to any premises for any delinquency thereby satisfied. 
(e)  No deposit shall bear interest, and such deposit, or any remaining balance thereof, shall be returned to the customer making the same when he shall discontinue receiving water and sewage disposal service. 
(f)  Any request by the property owner for water service to be turned off or on for any reason during nonworking hours will result in the actual cost being added to the property owner's next water bill following such request. 
(Code 1982,  2.137; Ord. No. 90-5,  1, 12-3-90) 
Sec. 74-198. - Sewer user charge system. 
(a)  Rates and charges for the use of the wastewater system of the city shall be based upon the methodology in the user charge system approved by the state department of natural resources. 
(b)  Revisions to the rates for total sewer service charges are to be established by the city by resolution of the city commission, which shall be enacted apart from the published ordinances as necessary to ensure sufficiency of revenues in meeting operation, maintenance and debt service costs. 
(c)  User charges for operation, maintenance and replacement shall be subject to the annual review of the user charge system. User charges shall be the same for all customers of the system regardless of geographic boundaries. 
(d)  The rates hereby fixed are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the expenses of operation and maintenance of the system as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order. Such rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts. An annual audit shall be prepared. Based on such audit, rates for sewage services shall be reviewed annually and revised as necessary by the city by resolution of the city commission to meet system expenses and to ensure that all user classes pay their proportionate share of operation, maintenance and debt service costs. 
(e)  No free service shall be allowed for any user of the wastewater collection and transport system. 
(f)  All customers of the city water and sewer system will receive annual notification, either printed on the bill or enclosed in a separate letter, which will show the breakdown of the sewer service charge into its components for administration, operation, maintenance and debt service. 
(Ord. No. 93-1,  2(2.138), 2-16-93) 
Sec. 74-199. - Water charges. 
(a)  Rates and charges for the supply of water services and procedures relating to the payment of same shall be established by the city by resolution of its city commission. 
(b)  Rates and charges for the supply of water services shall be fixed by the city commission in such amounts as are necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order, to provide for the payment of debt obligations and the maintenance of any resources therefor and to provide for all other obligations, expenditures and funds for the system as are required by law and ordinances of the city. The rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time and reviewed by the administration on an annual basis to insure that rates are adequate to provide for expenses as required. Such rates shall be published thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 74-199,  2, eff. 4-5-99) 
Secs. 74-200-74-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE CONTROL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-4, adopted Nov. 1, 2010, amended former Art. V, Divs. 1-4, in its entirety which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 02-01, adopted Jan. 22, 2002; and Ord. No. 2005-63, adopted April 4, 2005. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-221. - Applicability of article. 
    This article shall apply to all users that discharge into the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority's (YCUA or DWSD) publicly owned treatment works (the POTW). In addition, it shall be unlawful for any user located outside the city limits to continue discharges to the POTW except as provided in this article. In addition, this article shall establish permit requirements for connections or alterations to city or YCUA or DWSD sewage works facilities or the POTW; govern the design, construction, alteration or use of and connection to the sewage works and POTW; regulate the discharge of wastewater into the sewage works and POTW; prohibit certain detrimental conduct; authorize the issuance of permits; authorize inspections; provide for administration and enforcement of this article; establish civil and criminal penalties for violations; and authorize the enforcement of and ensure compliance within the city of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, the Clean Water Act and the Michigan Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, more specifically defined herein, and regulations promulgated and adopted under said acts and statutes. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-222. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: Act, the Act, the Federal Water Pollution Control Act and the Clean Water Act are used interchangeably in this article and refer to Public Law 92-500, as adopted in 1972 and amended by Public Law 95-217 in 1977, and any succeeding amendments and any administrative rules promulgated thereunder, as amended or revised from time to time. 
    Alternative discharge limit means limits set by the YCUA or DWSD in lieu of the promulgated national categorical pretreatment standard for integrated facilities in accordance with the combined wastestream formula as set by the EPA. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)  A responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user is a corporation, who shall be a president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation or means the principal manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having a gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second quarter 1980 dollars) if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures; 
(2)  A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; 
(3)  A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above and if all of the following apply: 
a.  The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in subsections (1) or (2) of this definition. 
b.  This authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and 
c.  The written authorization is submitted to the director. If an authorization is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of this definition shall be submitted to the director or YCUA or DWSD prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
    Best management practices (BMP) means programs, practices, procedures or other directed efforts, initiated and implemented by users, which can or do lead to the reduction, conservation or minimization of pollutants being introduced into the ecosystem, including, but not limited to, the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority (YCUA) publicly owned treatment system. BMPs include, but are not limited to, equipment or technology modifications, process or procedure modifications, reformulation or design of products, substitution of raw materials, and improvements in housekeeping, maintenance, training, or inventory control, and may include technical and economic considerations. BMPs may be structural or nonstructural or both. In determining what BMPs will be required of a user in a particular case, the director may consider all relevant technological, economical, practical, and institutional considerations as determined relevant and appropriate by the director, consistent with achieving and maintaining compliance with the requirements of this article and other applicable laws and regulations. 
    Best management practices plan (BMPP) means a written document that describes how the BMPs will be accomplished. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter). 
    Board means the board of commissioners of the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the drainage from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means that extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other places of disposal. 
    Bypass means intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means a measure of the oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specified test. It does not differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter and thus does not necessarily correlate with biochemical oxygen demand. Also known as OC and DOC, oxygen consumed and dichromate oxygen consumed, respectively. 
    Chlorine demand means the difference between the amount of chlorine added to water or wastewater and the amount of residual chlorine remaining at the end of a specified contact period. The demand for any given water varies with the amount of chlorine applied, time of contact and temperature. 
    City means the City of Plymouth, or the Plymouth City Commission. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Combined wastestream means the wastestream at industrial facilities where regulated process effluent is mixed with other wastewaters (either regulated or unregulated) prior to treatment. 
    Compatible pollutant means a substance amenable to treatment in the wastewater treatment plant such as biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the NPDES permit if the publicly owned treatment works was designed to treat such pollutants, and in fact does remove such pollutant to a substantial degree. Examples of such additional pollutants may include: chemical oxygen demand, total organic carbon, and phosphorus and phosphorus compounds, nitrogen compounds, fats, oils and greases of animal or vegetable origin. 
    Composite sample means a sample formed either by continuous sampling or by mixing discrete samples obtained at intervals over a period of time. The individual samples shall be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the YCUA. Where time-proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the YCUA, the samples must be representative of the discharge. Manual generation of a composite sample through the collection and combining of grab samples may be approved if the user demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. 
    The decision to allow the alternative sampling must be documented in the industrial user's file for that facility or facilities. Composite sampling protocols delineated in the user's permit take precedence. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Daily maximum means the concentration or mass loading that shall not be exceeded on any single calendar day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetical average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged during the day. If a composite sample is required for a parameter, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded on a single calendar day shall be based on the composite sample collected for that parameter on that calendar day. If grab samples are required for a parameter, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded on a calendar day shall be based on the average of all grab samples collected for that parameter on that calendar day. If only one grab sample is collected for a parameter on a given day, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded for the day shall be based on the results of that single grab sample. If the pollutant concentration in any sample is less than the applicable detection limit, that value shall be regarded as zero when calculating the daily maximum concentration. 
    Debt service charges means the charges levied to customers of the wastewater system which are used to pay principal, interest and administrative costs of retiring the debt incurred for construction of the sewage works. 
    Department of Natural Resources and Environment or MDNRE DNRE means the State of Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment, Natural Resources and Environment Administrator or other duly authorized official. 
    Director means the director of the YCUA or DWSD or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Domestic sewage means waste and wastewater from humans or household operations, which is discharged to, or otherwise enters, a POTW. 
    Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, administrator or other duly authorized official. 
    Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) means any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils, or any other nonvolatile or semi-volatile material of animal, vegetable or mineral origin that is extractable by solvents in accordance with standard methods. 
    Flow proportional sample means a composite sample taken with regard to the flow rate of the wastestream. 
    Food service establishment (FSE) means a nondomestic user that engages in one or more of the following food preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods); baking (all methods); grilling; sauteing; rotisserie cooking; broiling (all methods); boiling; blanching; roasting; toasting; poaching; infrared heating; searing; barbecuing; and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, nondrinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing. 
    Footing drain means a pipe or conduit which is placed around the perimeter of a building foundation and which intentionally admits groundwater. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Grab sample means a sample taken from a wastestream on a onetime basis over a period of time of not more than 15 minutes without regard to the flow in the wastestream. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Incompatible pollutants means any pollutant which is not a compatible pollutant. 
    Industrial wastes means the wastewater discharge from industrial, manufacturing, trade or business processes, or wastewater discharges from any structure with these characteristics, as distinct from their employee's domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences. 
    Industrial user means a person who contributes, causes or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW, including, but not limited to, a place of business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private, commercial or charitable, but excludes single family and multifamily residential dwellings with discharges consistent with domestic waste characteristics. 
    Industrial user permit or industrial user pretreatment permit means a discharge permit issued by the director under this article and the YCUA Industrial Pretreatment Program. 
    Infiltration means that portion of groundwater which is unintentionally admitted to a sewer. 
    Interference means a discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, to which both of the following provisions apply: (1) the discharge inhibits or disrupts the publicly owned treatment works, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; (2) pursuant to paragraph (1) of this definition, the discharge is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the YCUA or DWSD or the Act or the State Act, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder, or more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC Section 2601 et seq., including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act: the Clean Air Act, 42 USC Section 7401 et seq.; the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 USC Section 2601 et seq.; the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act, 33 USC Section 1401 et seq. 
    Instantaneous maximum concentration means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any instant in time (independent of the flow rate or duration of the sampling event). If the concentration determined by analysis of any grab sample, composite sample, or discrete portion of a composite sample exceeds the instantaneous maximum concentration, the instantaneous maximum concentration shall be deemed to have been exceeded. Any discharge of a pollutant at or above a specified instantaneous maximum concentration is a violation of this article and the YCUA Industrial Pretreatment Program. 
    Mercury reduction plan means a plan to ensure that the maximum allowable mercury loading to the POTW is not exceeded as described in section 74-297. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard, categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC Section 1317, which apply to a specific category of nondomestic users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N (1990), Parts 405-471. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system or NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 USC 1342). 
    National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard means any regulation developed under the authority of Section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    New source means any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge and for which construction commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act will be applicable to the source if the standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307(c), and if any of the following provisions apply: 
(1)  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
(2)  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(3)  The production of wastewater-generated processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation is substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. 
The extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source and the extent of integration of the new facility with the existing plant should be considered in determining whether the process is substantially independent. 
    Nondomestic user means an industry, commercial establishment, or other entity that discharges wastewater to a publicly owned treatment works other than, or in addition to, sanitary sewage. 
    Operation and maintenance means all work, materials, equipment, utilities, administration and other effort required to operate and maintain the sewage works consistent with insuring adequate treatment of wastewater to produce an effluent in compliance with the NPDES permit and other applicable state and federal regulations, and includes the cost of replacement. 
    Operator means the person responsible for the overall operation of a facility. 
    Owner means the person who owns a facility or part of a facility. 
    Pass through means a discharge that exits the WWTP into state waters in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Act, the State Act, or the NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, limited liability company, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or its legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
    pH means the logarithm (base ten) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution or expressed in standard units (SU). 
    Pollutant means any of the following: substances regulated by categorical standards; substances discharged to the POTW that are required to be monitored, are limited in the POTW's permit, or are or are to be identified in the POTW's permit application; substances for which control measures on nondomestic users are necessary to avoid restricting the approved residuals management program of the POTW; substances for which control measures on nondomestic users are necessary to avoid operational problems at the POTW; substances for which control measures on nondomestic sources are necessary to avoid worker health and safety problems in the POTW. 
    Pollution means the manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, or radiological integrity of water. 
    Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sewage works. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process changes or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard, imposed on a nondomestic user. Pretreatment standards means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act and the State Act. This term includes prohibited discharges and local limits defined in R323.2303 and categorical standards. 
    Properly shredded garbage means garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW) means the treatment works owned and/or operated by the YCUA or DWSD and includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. The term also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances if they convey wastewater to or through the publicly owned treatment works. The term also means the municipality (the City of Ypsilanti) that has jurisdiction over indirect discharges to, and discharges from, the treatment works. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    Replacement means the replacement in whole or in part of any equipment in the wastewater transportation or treatment systems to ensure continuous treatment of wastewater in accordance with the NPDES permit and other state and federal regulations. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surfacewaters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial or permanent toss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
    Sewage or wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surfacewater, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the sewage works. 
    Sewage treatment or wastewater treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all municipal facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Sewer service charge means the sum of any applicable user charges, surcharges and debt service charges. 
    Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
    Significant industrial user (SIU) means either of the following: 
(1)  A nondomestic user subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR S403 (1992) and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N (1990); or 
(2)  A nondomestic user that, in the opinion of YCUA or DWSD or of the city, has a reasonable potential to adversely affect the POTW's operation, or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement or that contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant, or that discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW, excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater. 
Any user designated as significant may petition the city to be deleted from the list of significant industrial users on the grounds that it has no potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may determine that a user that meets the criteria of subsections (1) and (2) of this definition above is not currently a significant industrial user, if the director finds that the user has no reasonable potential to adversely affect the operation of the POTW, to violate any pretreatment standard or requirement, or that a industrial user permit is not required to meet the purposes and objectives of this article. A determination that a user is not a significant industrial user (or that a permit is therefore not required) shall not be binding and may be reversed by the director at any time based on changed circumstances, new information, or as otherwise determined necessary by the director to meet the purposes and objectives of this article. 
    Significant noncompliance means any of the following: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as results of analyses in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed, by any magnitude, a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l); 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as results of analyses in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable technical review criteria. (Technical review criteria equals 1.4 for compatible pollutants and 1.2 for all other pollutants, except pH.); 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l), (daily maximum, longer-term average, instantaneous limits, or narrative standard) that the YCUA or DWSD determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through, including endangering the health of city or YCUA or DWSD personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or the environment or has resulted in the YCUA or DWSD's exercise of its emergency authority under Rule 323.2306(a)(vi) of the Part 23 Rules under the State Act or its emergency authority under this article to halt or prevent the discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after a scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a YCUA or DWSD or other local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, a required report such as, but not limited to, a baseline monitoring report, 90-day or other compliance report, periodic self-monitoring report, or report on compliance with a compliance schedule; 
(7)  Failure to timely or accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices, that YCUA or DWSD determines will affect or has adversely affected the operation or implementation of the YCUA or DWSD pretreatment program or operation of the POTW. 
    Slug, slug loading, slug discharge means either: 
(1)  Any discharge of pollutants at a volume or concentration that causes upset of or interference with the POTW or causes the pass-through of pollutants to receiving waters; or 
(2)  Any discharge of a pollutant(s), measured by a grab sample, at a concentration exceeding five times the composite or grab sample discharge limit; or 
(3)  Any discharge of wastewater outside the pH range of 5-11 S.U. for either a continuous duration of greater than or equal to 15 minutes or for a sum total of 30 minutes within one day; or 
(4)  Any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or noncustomary batch discharge. 
    State means State of Michigan. 
    State Act means Public Act 451 of 1994, the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (NREPA), as amended, and any administrative rules promulgated there under, as amended or revised from time to time. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surfacewaters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
    Surcharge means an extra charge to cover the cost of treating, sampling and testing extra strength sewage. 
    Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants which is or can potentially be harmful to the public health or the environment, including those listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of CWA 307(a) or other acts. 
    User means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the sewage works. 
    User charge means a charge levied on users of a treatment works for the cost of operation and maintenance of sewerage works pursuant to Section 204(b) of PL 92-500 and includes the cost of replacement. 
    User class means the kind of user connected to sanitary sewers including, but not limited to, residential, industrial, commercial, institutional and governmental, defined as follows: 
(1)  Residential user means a user of the treatment works whose premises or buildings are used primarily as a domicile for one or more persons, including dwelling units such as detached, semidetached and row houses, mobile homes, apartments, or permanent multifamily dwellings (transient lodging is not included, it is considered commercial); 
(2)  Industrial user means any user who discharges an "industrial waste" as defined in this article or any nondomestic source who discharges pollutants to the sewage works or POTW; 
(3)  Commercial user means an establishment involved in a commercial enterprise, business or service which, based on a determination by the YCUA or DWSD discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences and which is not a residential user or an industrial user; 
(4)  Institutional user means any establishment involved in a social, charitable, religious, or educational function which, based on a determination by the YCUA or DWSD discharges primarily segregated domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary conveniences; and 
(5)  Governmental user means any federal, state or local government user of the wastewater treatment works. 
    Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-223. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations shall have the following meanings: 
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials BMP Best management practices BMPP Best management practices plan BOD Biochemical oxygen demand CFR Code of Federal Regulations COD Chemical oxygen demand CWA Clean Water Act DNRE Department of Natural Resources and Environment (State of Michigan) EPA Environmental Protection Agency FOG Fats, oils, and grease l Liter MRP Mercury reduction plan mg Milligrams mg/l Milligrams per liter NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System O&M Operation and maintenance POTW Publicly owned treatment works SIC Standard Industrial Classification SS Suspended solids USC United States Code WWTP The Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority Wastewater Treatment Plant WEF Water Environment Federation YCUA or 
DWSD   
Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority  
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-224. - Protection from damage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works or POTW. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Secs. 74-225-74-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 74-241. - Permit or authorization required. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge to the waters of the state within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of such city and/or to the sewage works, any wastewater except as provided by an NPDES permit and/or as authorized by the city and the YCUA or DWSD in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-242. - Information required prior to connection to system. 
    All industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the sewage works shall submit information on the use, processes and wastewater to the director before connecting to or contributing to the sewage works. The information submitted must be sufficient for the YCUA or DWSD to determine the impact of the user's discharge on the sewage works and the need for pretreatment. The user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and location of the user. 
(2)  The SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended and the Industrial Category subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, 40 CFR, Chapter I, Subchapter N, Part 403, Appendix C, if applicable. 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those pollutants mentioned in sections 74-293 through 74-303 of this article, when required by the director, as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 (March 26, 2007), as amended from time to time. Where 40 CFR Part 136 (March 26, 2007) does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 (March 26, 2007) sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods of any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the publicly owned treatment works or other parties, approved by the EPA. 
(4)  The time and duration of contribution. 
(5)  The average daily wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any. 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation, if the user is a SIU or as required by the YCUA or DWSD. 
(7)  A description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials, which are or could be discharged. 
(8)  The nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any YCUA or DWSD, state, or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required by the industrial user to meet applicable pretreatment standards. 
(9)  If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment shall be provided. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards. 
b.  No increment referred to in subsection (9)a of this section shall exceed nine months. 
c.  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the director including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production. 
(11)  The type and amount of raw materials processed, average and maximum per day. 
(12)  The number and type of employees, hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system. 
(13)  Any other information as may be deemed by the director to be necessary to evaluate the impact of the discharge on the sewage works. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-243. - Reporting required after promulgation or revision of a pretreatment standard and reporting from a new source. 
(a)  Within 180 days or the promulgation or revision of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under R323.2311(2) of the Part 23 Rules promulgated under the State Act, whichever is later, existing nondomestic users subject to the categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging, or scheduled to discharge, to the POTW shall submit, to the YCUA or DWSD, a report that contains all of the information listed in this section. Where reports containing this information already have been submitted to the YCUA or DWSD or EPA in compliance with the requirements of 40 CFR S128.140(b) (1977), the nondomestic user will not be required to submit the information again. Not less than 90 days before the commencement of a discharge, sources that become nondomestic users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard and new sources shall be required to submit, to the YCUA or DWSD, a report that contains the information listed in subsections (1) to (5) of this section. New sources shall also be required to include in this report information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. 
    New sources shall give estimates of the information requested in subsections (4) and (5) of this subsection (a). All of the following information shall be submitted pursuant to this section. 
(1)  The name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners. 
(2)  A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the operation or operations carried out by the nondomestic user. The description shall include a facility drawing and schematic process diagram that indicates points of discharge to the POTW and from which processes the discharges originate. 
(4)  Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW for each of the following: 
a.  Regulated process streams. 
b.  Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula specified in R323.2311(6). YCUA or DWSD may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or feasibility considerations. 
(5)  All of the following information shall be provided with respect to the measurement of pollutants: 
a.  The identity of the pretreatment standards, including state or local standards, applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration or mass, where required by the standard or YCUA or DWSD, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. 
c.  A minimum of four grab samples shall be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples shall be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques. The YCUA or DWSD may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any nondomestic user that demonstrates that time-proportional sampling is representative of the discharge during the sampling period. Samples obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples may be approved by the director or designee when the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. 
d.  With the exception of the pollutants specified in paragraph c of this subsection, the user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection. 
e.  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if the facilities exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if pretreatment facilities do not exist. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater before pretreatment, the nondomestic user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula specified in R323.2311(7) to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with R323.2311(5), the adjusted limit and supporting data shall be submitted to YCUA or DWSD. 
f.  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 (March 26, 2007). Where 40 CFR part 136 (March 26, 2007) does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 (March 26, 2007) sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by YCUA or DWSD or other parties, approved by the EPA. 
g.  The YCUA or DWSD may allow the submission of a baseline report that utilizes only historical data if the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures. 
h.  The baseline report shall indicate the time, date, and place of sampling and the methods of analysis and shall certify that the sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
(6)  A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the nondomestic user and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance or additional pretreatment is required for the nondomestic user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  If additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the nondomestic user will provide such ten additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance. The completion date in the schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. All of the following conditions shall apply to compliance schedules: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the nondomestic user to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards. The events may include any of the following: 
(i)  The hiring of an engineer; 
(ii)  Completing preliminary plans; 
(iii)  Completing final plans; 
(iv)  Executing contracts for major components; 
(v)  Commencing construction; 
(vi)  Completing construction; or 
(vii)  Other similar major events. 
b.  An increment referred to in this subsection shall not be more than nine months. 
c.  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the nondomestic user shall submit a progress report to YCUA or DWSD, including, at a minimum, whether or not the user complied with the increment of progress to be met on a particular date and, if not, the date on which the user expects to comply with the increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the nondomestic user to return the construction to the schedule established. Not more than nine months shall elapse between progress reports to YCUA or DWSD. 
(8)  Where the nondomestic user's categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by a removal allowance under R323.2311(7) or a fundamentally different factors variance under R323.2313(b) at the time the nondomestic user submits the report required by this rule, the information required by subsections (6) and (7) of this section shall pertain to the modified limits. 
(9)  Any changes to information requested under subsections (1) to (5) of this section shall be submitted by the nondomestic user to YCUA or DWSD within 60 days. 
(b)  Where YCUA performs sampling for a significant industrial user, YCUA must perform any required repeat sampling and analysis within 30 days of becoming aware of a violation. All periodic compliance reports shall be certified and signed by the authorized representative of the industrial user. The authorized representative shall state the following certification when submitting the periodic compliance reports to YCUA: 
    "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquire of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-244. - Powers of the YCUA or DWSD. 
    Wastewater discharges shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article, the Act and State Act and all other applicable regulations established by the YCUA or DWSD. The YCUA or DWSD may: 
(1)  Limit the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
(2)  Limit the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or make requirements for flow regulations and equalization. 
(3)  Require the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities. 
(4)  Establish specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule. 
(5)  Establish compliance schedules. 
(6)  Require submission of technical reports or discharge reports. 
(7)  Require the maintaining, retaining and furnishing of plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the YCUA or DWSD, and affording YCUA or DWSD access thereto, and copying thereof. 
(8)  Require notification of slug discharges and accidental spills. 
(9)  Require other conditions as deemed appropriate by the YCUA or DWSD to ensure compliance with this article, the Act and the State Act. The YCUA or DWSD shall require notification of the YCUA or DWSD for any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-245. - Additional reporting required and periodic report requirements. 
(1)  Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the sewage works, POTW or the WWTP, any nondomestic user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director and/or YCUA or DWSD a report containing the information required in subsections (a)(4) through (6), inclusive, of section 74-243. For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by YCUA or DWSD in accordance with the procedures in R 323.2311(5) of the Part 23 Rules promulgated under the State Act or otherwise established by the Act or the State Act or rules promulgated thereunder, the report shall contain a reasonable measure of the nondomestic user's long-term production rate. For all other nondomestic users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production, or other measure of operation, the report shall include the nondomestic user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. 
(2)  The YCUA or DWSD may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases in which the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(3)  All of the following provisions shall apply to periodic reports on continued compliance: 
(a)  Any nondomestic user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard after the compliance date of the pretreatment standard or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the publicly owned treatment works shall submit, to the YCUA or DWSD semiannually, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the YCUA or DWSD, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent that are limited by the categorical pretreatment standards. In addition, the report shall include a record of measured or appropriately estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the discharge reported in subsection 74-243(4), except that YCUA or DWSD may require more detailed reporting of flows. 
(b)  Where YCUA or DWSD has imposed mass limitations on nondomestic users as provided for by R323.2311(5) of the Part 23 Rules promulgated under the State Act or where such limitations are otherwise established by the Act or the State Act or rules promulgated thereunder, the report required by subsection (1) immediately above shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the discharge from the nondomestic user. 
(c)  For nondomestic users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the YCUA or DWSD or under the Act or the State Act or rules promulgated thereunder, the report required by subsection (1) immediately above shall contain a reasonable measure of the nondomestic user's long-term production rate. For all other nondomestic users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production, or other measure of operation, the report required by subsection (1) immediately above shall include the nondomestic user's actual average production rate for the reporting period. 
(4)  All categorical and noncategorical nondomestic users shall notify the YCUA or DWSD immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings. 
(5)  All of the following provisions apply to significant industrial users that are categorical industrial users or noncategorical industrial users in regards to monitoring and analysis to demonstrate continued compliance: 
(a)  The reports required in this section 74-243 or in this section shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the YCUA or DWSD, of pollutants contained in the discharge that are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The sampling and analysis may be performed by the YCUA or DWSD instead of the nondomestic user. Where the YCUA or DWSD elects to perform the required sampling and analysis instead of the nondomestic user, the nondomestic user will not be required to submit the compliance certification required under subsection 74-243(b) and subsection (1) of this section. In addition, where the YCUA or DWSD collects all the information required for the report, including flow data, the nondomestic user will not be required to submit the report. The YCUA or DWSD shall provide, to the nondomestic user, within ten days after the results are available, the results of any sampling the YCUA or DWSD performs for nondomestic user self-monitoring that show a violation of any pretreatment standard. Any certification required by a categorical pretreatment standard shall be included with the semiannual compliance reports. 
(b)  If sampling performed by a nondomestic user indicates a violation of pretreatment standards, the nondomestic user shall notify the YCUA or DWSD within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The nondomestic user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the YCUA or DWSD within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation; however, the nondomestic user is not required to resample if the YCUA or DWSD performs sampling at the nondomestic user at a frequency of at least once per month or if the YCUA or DWSD performs sampling at the nondomestic user between the time when the nondomestic user performs its initial sampling and the time when the nondomestic user receives the results of the sampling. 
(c)  The reports required by this section shall be based upon data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, which data is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. The YCUA or DWSD may require a frequency of monitoring that is necessary to assess and assure compliance by nondomestic users with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(d)  All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(h) of the Clean Water Act and contained in 40 CFR Part 136 (March 26, 2007) or with any other test procedures approved by the EPA. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the EPA. Where the provisions of 40 CFR Part 136 (March 26, 2007) do not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 (March 26, 2007) sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical methods or any other sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the YCUA or DWSD or other parties and approved by the EPA. 
(e)  If a nondomestic user monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the YCUA or DWSD using the procedures prescribed in subsection (d) immediately above, the results of the monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(f)  A minimum of one grab sample shall be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples shall be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques. The YCUA may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any nondomestic user that demonstrates that time-proportional sampling is representative of the discharge during the sampling period. Samples obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples may be approved by the director or designee when the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. 
(6)  The YCUA or DWSD may require appropriate reporting from nondomestic users that have discharges which are not subject to categorical pretreatment standards. Significant industrial users shall submit, to the YCUA or DWSD, at least semiannually, a description of the nature, concentration, and flow of the pollutants required to be reported by the YCUA or DWSD. The reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report and performed in accordance with the techniques described in 40 CFR Part 136 (March 26, 2007). Where the provisions of 40 CFR Part 136 (March 26, 2007) do not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 (March 26, 2007) sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the YCUA or DWSD or other persons and approved by the EPA. The sampling and analysis may be performed by the YCUA or DWSD instead of the significant industrial user. Where the YCUA or DWSD collects all of the information required for the report, the significant industrial user will not be required to submit the report. The YCUA or DWSD shall provide, to the nondomestic user, within ten days after the results are available, the results of any sampling it performs for nondomestic user self-monitoring that show a violation of any pretreatment standard. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-246. - Sampling and monitoring facilities may be required. 
    The YCUA or DWSD shall, when determined necessary by the director, require to be provided and operated at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the YCUA or DWSD and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the YCUA or DWSD. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-247. - Right to access of facilities for inspection, sampling, records examination, record copying or other duties. 
    The YCUA or DWSD shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the YCUA or DWSD or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, records copying or in the performance of any of their duties. The YCUA or DWSD, DNRE and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property, at the user's expense, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards or other appropriate personnel so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the YCUA or DWSD, DNRE and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-248. - Compliance with article provisions required. 
(1)  Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article, the Act and State Act and shall achieve compliance with all pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations and as required by the YCUA or DWSD, the Act or the State Act. Any industrial user that qualifies as a new source is required to have pretreatment equipment installed and operational before discharging and shall be in full compliance within 90 days of initial discharge. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the YCUA or DWSD shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the YCUA or DWSD for review, and shall be approved by the YCUA or DWSD before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the YCUA or DWSD under the provisions of this article, the Act or the State Act. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the YCUA or DWSD prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(2)  As required by Section 403.8(D)(viii) of the Federal Register, the YCUA or DWSD shall publish at least annually in a newspaper(s) of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW of the city the industrial users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with any applicable pretreatment requirements. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or DNRE upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-249. - Confidentiality of information. 
    Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the DNRE and the EPA without restriction and shall be available to the public without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user, in accord with applicable provisions of the state freedom of information act, Public Act 442 of 1976, as amended and Rule 323.2314 of the Part 23 Rules promulgated under the State Act. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-250. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
    The director and other duly authorized employees of the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article, the Act and State Act. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-251. - Enforcement process. 
(1)  Emergency suspension. The director may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or any permit issued under this article when such a suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the director, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present an imminent or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, the POTW, or constitutes a violation of any condition of a NPDES or other permit, this article, the Act or State Act. Any user notified of a suspension of wastewater treatment services or a permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its discharge into a city or YCUA or DWSD sanitary sewer. If a user fails to immediately comply with such a suspension order and as required in this section, the YCUA or DWSD shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate termination or severance of the user's sewer connection to prevent or minimize damage to any person, the POTW or the environment. The YCUA or DWSD shall allow the user to recommence its discharge upon receipt of proof of compliance with this article and the elimination of the discharge and/or identified danger. A user whose wastewater treatment service or permit has been suspended under this article shall submit, within 15 days of the suspension, a written statement to the director describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent future harmful discharges in addition to other information required by this article or otherwise required by the Act or State Act under such circumstances. 
(2)  Notice letter. The minimum enforcement response that the director or his/her designee will use to notify a user that a violation of the local applicable sewer use article or YCUA Industrial pretreatment program has occurred or is occurring. 
(3)  Notification of violation. Whenever the director finds that any user has violated or is violating any provision of this article or a wastewater discharge permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act, the director may serve upon said user written notice of the violation. Within 30 days of receipt of such notice the user shall submit to the director or designee an explanation of the violation and a written plan for satisfactory correction. Submission of this plan does not relieve the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation or as otherwise provided in this article, the Act or State Act. 
(4)  Show cause order. The director may order any user violating this article or the IPP a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act, or State Act, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The show cause notice shall require the user to appear before the director for a show cause meeting within a reasonable time, not less than ten days after first class mailing of the order to the user's recorded or last known address. Enforcement action may be pursued whether or not a user appears at a show cause meeting and issuance of a show cause order does not relieve the user of liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of the notice or as otherwise provided in this article, the Act, or State Act. 
(5)  Consent order. The director is empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance and other similar documented agreements establishing an agreement with a user responsible for noncompliance with an order, permit, this article, the Act or State Act. Such a document may include compliance schedules, stipulated fines or penalties, the amount of which shall not be limited by the civil fine assessment provision of this article, remedial actions and signatures of the director and user. Consent orders or similar documented agreements prepared and executed under this section shall have the same force and effect as other orders issued under this article. 
(6)  Compliance order. When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act, an order may be issued to the user directing that, following a specified time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances have been installed and are properly operated and compliance is otherwise achieved. Such an order may contain other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including, but not limited to, the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring and new management practices. Issuance of a compliance order does not relieve the user of liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of the notice or as otherwise provided in this article, the Act or State Act. 
(7)  Cease and desist order. When the director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act, an order may be issued to the user responsible for the violation directing that such violations cease and desist immediately. In an emergency, the order to cease and desist may be given by telephone. In a nonemergency situation, the cease and desist order may be used to suspend or permanently revoke an industrial wastewater discharge permit or permits. A cease and desist order may require the user to take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order does not relieve the user of liability for any violation occurring before or after receipt of the order or as otherwise provided in this article. 
(8)  Termination of wastewater discharge permit. Any user who has a permit who violates the following conditions of a wastewater discharge permit or violates this article, the Act or State Act or any applicable state or federal law or regulation is subject to permit termination: 
(a)  Failure to accurately report wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(b)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(c)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises or records for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling or for any other purpose permitted under this article, the Act or State Act; 
(d)  Failure to comply with an order issued under this article; or 
(e)  For those reasons stated in section 74-276 or for any other reason permitting such termination as provided in this article, the Act or State Act. Such users shall be notified of the proposed permit termination and shall be offered an opportunity to show cause under the provision of subsection (4) of this section, why the proposed action should not be taken. 
(9)  Administrative assessments. Notwithstanding any other section of this article, any user who violates any provision of this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act, shall be liable to the YCUA or DWSD and/or city for any expense loss or damage occasioned by reason of such violation, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorney's fees and may be subject to an administrative assessment by the YCUA or DWSD in an amount of $1,000.00 per violation, per day. Each day on which noncompliance shall occur or is continued shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such expense, loss, damage or assessments may be added to a user's sewer service charges and the YCUA or DWSD and the city shall have such other collection rights and remedies as designated by law, the Act, the State Act and this article to collect these sewer service charges. 
(10)  Judicial remedies. A person who violates any provision of this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act, is subject to the judicial remedies described below in addition to being responsible for a civil fine assessment or a misdemeanor or any administrative remedy or enforcement action provided for in this article: 
(a)  Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or the State Act, the director, through counsel, may petition the circuit court for issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both to restrain or compel certain activities on the part of the user. 
(b)  Any user who has violated or continues to violate any order or permit issued hereunder may be liable to the YCUA or DWSD in such judicial proceedings for a civil fine assessment of $1,000.00, plus actual damages, direct or indirect, incurred by the YCUA or DWSD, per violation, per day, for as long as the violation continues. Additionally, the YCUA or DWSD may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs and other expenses associated with any enforcement activities, including sampling, monitoring and analysis expenses. 
(c)  The director, through counsel, may petition the circuit court to impose, assess, and recover such assessments and sums. In determining the amount of liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude or duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained by the user through the violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user and any other relevant factor. 
(11)  Liens. Any fine or other assessment issued or imposed under this article or other costs or charges imposed under this article may be added to the user's sewer service charges and the YCUA or DWSD shall have such other collection rights and remedies as designated by law and this article to collect said charges and all unpaid charges, fines, assessments, penalties and service charges shall constitute and may be recorded as a lien against the user's property if not paid within the time frame allocated by YCUA or DWSD or a court for payment. 
(12)  Appeals. Any person or user subject to enforcement action under the provisions of this article, the Act or State Act, except for civil fine assessment notices, consent orders, emergency actions under this article or judicial actions by YCUA or DWSD, may request a hearing before the director within ten days of receipt of notification of the proposed enforcement action. A hearing shall then be held by the director concerning the violation, the reasons why the enforcement action has been taken, the proposed enforcement action, and the user's explanation or other relevant evidence. An appeal may be taken from the director's final decision. The following rules shall apply to the hearing and appeal: 
(a)  The director may issue notices of such a hearing requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses or the production of evidence relative to the hearing. 
(b)  In the event a request for hearing is not filed within ten days of the user's notice of an enforcement action, failure to file such a request shall be deemed a waiver of any and all hearing or appeal rights established under this article. 
(c)  A request for hearing shall state the basis for the request, the reasons in support of the request and any alternative relief which the aggrieved party seeks. 
(d)  During the pendency of any hearing process or appeal the user must comply with the enforcement action or YCUA or DWSD order from which the appeal is taken. 
(e)  At the hearing, testimony may be taken under oath and recorded stenographically. A transcript of the hearing shall be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of usual and reasonable charges. 
(f)  After the director has held such a hearing and reviewed the evidence, he may issue an order affirming, modifying or withdrawing the enforcement action. 
(g)  Within 15 days from receipt of the director's final decision, the aggrieved party may appeal the decision to the board stating the grounds on which the appeal is based together with all documents, evidence, transcripts and information in support of the aggrieved party's position. In addition, the aggrieved party shall file five copies of the appeal and supporting documentation with the board and serve an additional copy on the director. 
(h)  The director shall have 30 days to respond to the appeal and to submit all evidence, documents and information in support of the director's decision and shall file five copies with the board and shall serve an additional copy on the aggrieved party. 
(i)  Within 30 days of receiving the director's response the board shall meet and review all documents and evidence pertaining to the appeal and shall issue an order affirming the director's order, affirming the director's order in part and reversing in part, or reversing the director's order in full. The board shall forward a copy of its decision to all interested parties. 
(13)  Industrial pretreatment program (IPP) and enforcement response plan (ERP). This article, the Act and State Act shall also be enforced by the YCUA or DWSD pursuant to a written industrial pretreatment program adopted by YCUA or DWSD, as required by the Act and State Act which plan shall include those plan elements required by the Act and State Act including, but not limited to, an enforcement response plan designed to achieve enforcement of that program. That enforcement response plan shall provide for, at minimum, those powers of enforcement granted by this article, the Act and State Act. 
(14)  Time limits. YCUA's failure to strictly comply with and/or to meet an enforcement procedure time deadline or other time deadline specified in this article, the Act, State Act, or the enforcement response plan, shall not prohibit or prevent YCUA from taking enforcement or other action outside of or not in compliance with such a time deadline, unless the user or permittee in question has been and is able to demonstrate that it has been materially prejudiced by action taken by YCUA outside of or not in compliance with such a time deadline. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-252. - Enforcement by city. 
    All orders, directives, legal and/or equitable actions, which are necessary and appropriate to enforce this article, the Act and State Act shall be carried out by YCUA or DWSD and/or the city. Nothing contained in this section shall preclude the city or YCUA or DWSD from instituting, maintaining or joining any legal and/or equitable actions to enforce this article, the Act and State Act. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-253. - Reserved. 
Sec. 74-254. - Records, accounts, audits, classification of users, insurance. 
(1)  The YCUA or DWSD will maintain and keep proper books of records and accounts, separate from all other records and accounts, in which shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to the POTW. The YCUA or DWSD will cause an annual audit of such books of record and account for the preceding operating year to be made by a recognized independent certified public accountant, and will supply such audit report to authorized public officials on request. 
(2)  In conjunction with the audit there shall be an annual review of the sewer charge system for adequacies meeting expected expenditures for the following year. 
(3)  Classification of old and new industrial users may also be reviewed annually. 
(4)  The YCUA or DWSD will maintain and carry insurance on all physical properties of the system, of the kinds and in the amounts normally carried by public utility companies and municipalities engaged in the operation of sewage disposal systems. 
(5)  Retention of records. A user shall retain records of all monitoring information, including, all calibration and maintenance records and all original strip chart recordings for continuous monitoring instrumentation, copies of all reports required by this article, an order, or a permit, all documentation associated with best management practices, and the records of all data used to complete the application for a permit, for a period of at least three years from the date of a sample, measurement, report application or orders. This period may be extended by the Ypsilanti Community Utilities Authority at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-255. - Reserved 
Sec. 74-256. - Surcharges, fees. 
    The director shall also establish appropriate surcharges or fees to reimburse the YCUA or DWSD for the additional cost of operation and maintenance of the sewage works or POTW due to the violations of this article, the Act or State Act. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Secs. 74-257-74-270. - Reserved 
DIVISION 3. - PRETREATMENT PERMIT 

Sec. 74-271. - Permit required. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof or any part of the sewage works or POTW without first obtaining a written permit from the director. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-272. - Permit; requirements for nondomestic users. 
(1)  All nondomestic users must notify the director of the nature and characteristics of their wastewater prior to commencing their discharge. The director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for significant industrial users to discharge wastewater, either directly or indirectly, into the sewage works or POTW without first obtaining an industrial user pretreatment permit from the YCUA or DWSD. Any violation of the terms and conditions of an industrial user pretreatment permit shall be deemed a violation of this article. Obtaining an industrial user pretreatment permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to obtain other permits required by federal, state or local law. 
(3)  The director may require that other industrial users, including liquid waste haulers, obtain industrial user pretreatment permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(4)  Any industrial user located beyond the city limits shall submit a permit application within 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. New industrial users located beyond the city limits shall submit such applications to the director 60 days prior to discharging into the sewage works or POTW. Upon review and approval of such application, the director may enter into a contract with the user which requires the user to subject itself to, and abide by this article, including all permitting, compliance monitoring, reporting, and enforcement provisions contained in this article, the Act or State Act. 
(5)  Any significant industrial user which discharges nondomestic waste into the sewage works or POTW prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 90 days after such date, apply to the YCUA or DWSD for an industrial user pretreatment permit and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 180 days from and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived except in accordance with a permit issued by the director. 
(6)  Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging nondomestic wastes into the sewage works or POTW must obtain a pretreatment permit prior to beginning or recommencing such discharge. An application for this permit must be filed at least 60 days prior to the anticipated start up date. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-273. - Application-Pretreatment permit. 
(1)  In order to be considered for a pretreatment permit, all industrial users required to have a permit must submit the information required by section 74-242 on an application form approved by the director. 
(2)  When required, plans must be certified for accuracy by a state-registered professional engineer. 
(3)  All applications must contain the following certification statement and be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(4)  The director will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require additional information. After evaluation of the data furnished, the director may issue an industrial user pretreatment permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(5)  At the time an application for a permit is made, the user shall pay to YCUA or DWSD a permit fee in an amount established from time to time by the board, which fee shall be refunded to the user in the event the permit is denied. In addition to the above-stated permit fee, the user shall pay to YCUA or DWSD a nonrefundable permit application fee equal to YCUA or DWSD's expenses, and YCUA or DWSD expenses incurred in hiring laboratories, engineers, or other consultants, for the purpose of evaluating the permit application submitted by the user to YCUA or DWSD. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-274. - Contents. 
    Pretreatment permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the director to prevent pass-through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the POTW's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate POTW sludge management and disposal, protect ambient air quality, and protect against damage to the POTW collection system or plant and ensure compliance with this article, the Act and State Act. Permits shall contain a statement of the duration of the permit which shall not be more than five years; a statement of permit nontransferability without prior notification to the YCUA or DWSD and provision of a copy of the existing permit to the new owner or operator; effluent limits based on applicable general pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law; self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements, including identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based on the applicable general pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment standards, local limit, and state and local law; and a statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable compliance schedule. The schedule may not extend the compliance date beyond applicable federal or state deadlines. Permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization. 
(2)  Limits on the average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater constituents or properties. 
(3)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices, or similar requirements designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewage works or POTW. 
(4)  Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including additional management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routing discharges. 
(5)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the sewage works or POTW. 
(6)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities. 
(7)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and reporting schedules. 
(8)  Compliance schedules. 
(9)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports. 
(10)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the director and affording the director, or his representatives, access thereto. 
(11)  Requirements for notification of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or of any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater being introduced in the sewage works or POTW. 
(12)  Requirements for the notification of any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by the permittee. 
(13)  Requirements for notification to YCUA or DWSD of excessive, accidental, or slug discharges. 
(14)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this article and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations, including the Act and State Act. 
(15)  A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal, state or local pretreatment standards or limits, including those which become effective during the term of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-275. - Application-Building sewer permit. 
    There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (1) for residential and commercial service; and (2) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city or YCUA or DWSD. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent, in the judgment of the city or YCUA or DWSD. A permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-276. - Issuance process. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the director. 
(2)  The director will provide all interested persons with notice of final permit terms. Upon notice by the director, any person, including the industrial user, may petition to appeal the terms of the permit within 30 days of the notice. 
(a)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the appeal. 
(b)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to be placed in the permit. 
(c)  The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending a reconsideration by the board. If, after considering the petition and any arguments put forth by the director, the board determines that reconsideration is proper, it shall remand the permit back to the director for reissuance. Those permit provisions being reconsidered by the director shall be stayed pending reissuance. 
(d)  A board's decision not to reconsider a final permit shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review. 
(3)  The director may modify or terminate the permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Material or substantial alterations or additions to the discharger's operation processes, or discharge volume or character which were not considered in drafting the effective permit. 
(c)  A change in any condition in either the industrial user or the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge. 
(d)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the sewage works or POTW or POTW personnel or the receiving waters. 
(e)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit. 
(f)  Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or in any required reporting. 
(g)  Revision of or a grant of variance from such categorical standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13. 
(h)  To correct typographical or other errors in the permit. 
(i)  To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner/operator. 
(j)  Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create a violation of any applicable requirements, standards, laws, or rules and regulations. 
(k)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports. 
(l)  Tampering with monitoring equipment. 
(m)  Refusing to allow timely access to the facility premises and records. 
(n)  Failure to meet effluent limitations. 
(o)  Failure to pay fines. 
(p)  Failure to pay sewer charges. 
(q)  Failure to meet compliance schedules. 
(r)  As provided in section 74-251. 
(4)  The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit modification, revocation and reissuance, or termination, or a notification of planned changes or anticipated noncompliance, does not stay any permit condition. 
(5)  Permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator with prior approval of the director, if: 
(a)  The permittee must give at least 30 day's advance notice to the director; and 
(b)  The notice must include a written certification by the new owner which: 
(i)  States that the new owner has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes. 
(ii)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur. 
(iii)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing permit. 
(6)  The user shall apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. An expired permit will continue to be effective and enforceable until the permit is reissued, if: 
(a)  The industrial user has submitted a complete permit application at least 90 days prior to the expiration date of the user's existing permit; and 
(b)  The failure to reissue the permit, prior to expiration of the previous permit, is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the industrial user. 
(7)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the POTW and any user whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character is accepted into the POTW and specially treated and subject to any payments or user charges, as may be applicable. However, no discharge which violates pretreatment standards will be allowed under the terms of such special agreements. If, in the opinion of the director, the wastewater may have the potential to cause or result in any of the following circumstances, no such special agreement will be made: 
(a)  Pass-through or interference; or 
(b)  Endanger municipal employees or the public. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-277. - Penalty for violation of article; liability of user. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act, shall become liable to the city for and may be subject to a civil fine assessment of $1,000.00 per violation, per day, plus any costs, damages and expenses, direct or indirect, incurred by the city or YCUA or DWSD in connection with the violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. 
(2)  Any person who violates any provision of this article that is listed below shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction is subject to a fine of not more than $500.00, exclusive of any civil fine assessment or other costs, damages and expenses, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. Misdemeanor violations include: 
(a)  Intentional unpermitted discharge; 
(b)  Falsification of a monitoring report or the making of any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article; 
(c)  Improper sampling, with evidence of an intent to falsify or mislead; 
(d)  Intentional failure to install monitoring equipment after a deadline established by an order issued under this article or the tampering with or knowingly rendering inaccurate any monitoring device or equipment or method required under this article; 
(e)  Intentional recurring violation of a compliance schedule in a permit or a violation of a compliance schedule in an order issued under this article; or 
(f)  Illegal discharge when the discharge causes harm and there is evidence of intent. 
(3)  The purpose of this section is to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the POTW. The applicable charges or fees established by the board shall be sufficient to meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system, or as provided by law or by board action. 
(4)  The board shall adopt charges and fees which shall include, but not necessarily [be] limited to: 
(a)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of establishing, operating, maintaining, or improving the YCUA's industrial pretreatment programs and enforcement response plan; 
(b)  User fees based upon volume of waste and concentration or quantity of specific pollutants in a discharge, and to cover other treatment costs including sludge handling and disposal; and 
(c)  Reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs for enforcement hearings or other enforcement action including, but not limited to, expenses regarding hearings officers, court reporters, and transcriptions; and 
(d)  Other fees, which the board may deem necessary, to carry out the requirements contained herein and continued in other IPP and ERP, or as may be required by law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
DIVISION 4. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS 

Sec. 74-278. - Costs of connection to be borne by owner; indemnification of city and YCUA or DWSD. 
    All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city and the YCUA or DWSD from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-279. - Separate building sewer for each building required; exception. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-280. - Use of old building sewers with new buildings. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city or YCUA or DWSD, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-281. - Construction specifications. 
    The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of a building sewer; and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or YCUA or DWSD. In the absence of the Code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WEF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-282. - Elevation. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-283. - Prohibited connections. 
(1)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which, in turn, is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer or combined sewer. 
(2)  The YCUA or DWSD shall not allow any connection to the sanitary sewer unless there is sufficient capacity in the sewage works to convey and adequately treat the additional wastewater from the proposed connection. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-284. - Connection specifications. 
(1)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules land regulations of the YCUA or DWSD or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WEF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. 
(2)  Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the YCUA, DWSD or city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-285. - Inspection; supervision of connection. 
    The contractor installing the building sewer shall notify the YCUA or DWSD when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of YCUA, DWSD or city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-286. - Guards for excavations; restoration of public property. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city and YCUA or DWSD. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-287. - Required. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under its jurisdiction, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this article. 
(3)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(4)  The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer or combined sewer of the city, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable sewage facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after the date of official notice to do so provided that such public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Secs. 74-288-74-292. - Reserved. 
Sec. 74-293. - Unpolluted discharges. 
(1)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, water from footing drains, roof water, or other unpolluted water to any sanitary sewer or sewer connection except as otherwise provided in this article. Any premises connected to a storm sewer shall comply with county, state and federal requirements as well as those by the city and the YCUA or DWSD. 
(2)  Stormwater, groundwater, water from footing drains and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers, or to a natural outlet, except as otherwise provided in this article. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon application and approval of the YCUA or DWSD and the appropriate state agency to a storm sewer, or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-294. - Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) interceptor and sand interceptors. 
    Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing fats, oils, or grease discharges in which the concentration in a grab sample exceeds the 100 mg/l limit, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for single-family or multiple-family dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted into place shall be gastight and watertight. When installed, all fats, oils, and grease, and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. A user may petition the director for an exemption from having to install a fats, oils, and grease (FOG) interceptor in accordance with provisions specified in the YCUA FOG Mitigation Program Policy, as amended from time to time. Upon approval by the director, YCUA's contract communities that have a fats, oils, and grease ordinance/policy can implement said ordinance/policy in lieu of this section and the YCUA Fats, Oils, and Grease Mitigation Program Policy. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-295. - Prohibited discharges. 
    No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will pass through or interfere with the operation or performance of the sewage works. A user may not contribute the following substances to the sewage works: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the sewage works or to the operation of the sewage works. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than 11.0; or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants or of high chlorine demand in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the sewage works, or exceed the limitation set forth in the EPA categorical pretreatment standard, or any other federal, state or county standards. 
(5)  Pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause worker health and safety problems. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, wastewaters which contain liquids, solids, or gases that cause gases, vapors, or fumes from the discharge to exceed ten percent of the immediately dangerous to life and health (IDLH) concentration. Discharges which contain more than one pollutant which may contribute to fume toxicity shall be subject to more restrictive limitations, as determined necessary by the director. The more restrictive discharge limits shall be calculated based on the additive fume toxicity of all compounds identified or reasonably expected to be present in the discharge. 
(6)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(7)  Any substance which may cause the sewage works, such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for land application or reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. 
(8)  Any substance which will cause the sewage works to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(9)  Any wastewater with color of sufficient light absorbency to interfere with treatment plant process, prevent analytical determinations, or create any aesthetic effect on the treatment plant effluent, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(10)  Daily maximum concentration or mass loading shall not be exceeded on any single calendar day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetical measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged during the day. If a composite sample is required for a parameter, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded on a single calendar day shall be based on the composite sample collected for that parameter on that calendar day. If grab samples are required for a parameter, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded on a calendar day shall be based on the average of all grab samples collected for that parameter on that calendar day. If only one grab sample is collected for a parameter on a given day, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded for the day shall be based on the results of that single grab sample. If the pollutant concentration in any sample is less than the applicable detection limit, that value shall be regarded as zero when calculating the daily maximum concentration. 
(11)  Any wastewater having a temperature, which will inhibit biological activity in the sewage works, resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the sewage works, which exceeds 60 degrees Celsius (140 degrees Fahrenheit) or is lower than zero degrees Celsius (32 degrees Fahrenheit). 
(12)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by applicable state or federal regulations. 
(13)  Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. 
(14)  Organic solvent extractable substances such as fats, wax, grease, or oils of petroleum origin, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees Fahrenheit (zero degrees Celsius) and 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius). 
(15)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases; or other pollutants which cause the wastewater to have a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius), or which cause an exceedance of ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) at any point within the collection system or containing gasoline, benzene, xylene or toluene which causes the wastewater to exceed the state surface water quality standard. 
(16)  Any garbage that has not been ground by household type or other suitable garbage grinders. 
(17)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch, manure or any other solids or viscous substances capable of causing obstructions or other interferences with the proper operation of the sewer system. 
(18)  Toxic or poisonous substances in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, or to constitute hazards to humans or animals, or to create any hazard in waters which receive the POTW effluent, which shall include, but are not limited to, wastes containing cyanide, chromium, cadmium, mercury, copper, and nickel ions. 
(19)  Solids of such character and quantity that special and unusual attention is required for their handling. 
(20)  Any substance which would cause the treatment plant to be in noncompliance with sludge use, recycle or disposal criteria pursuant to guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the federal Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act or other regulations or criteria for sludge management and disposal as required by the state. 
(21)  Any medical or infectious wastes prohibited from being discharged under federal or state law and regulations. 
(22)  Material considered a hazardous waste under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). 
(23)  Any commercial or industrial waste that may cause pass-through of pollutants or interference with the wastewater treatment plant operations or that violates federal, state, or local restrictions. 
(24)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW. 
(25)  Trucked and hauled waste, except at discharge points designated by the POTW. 
(26)  Pollutants causing toxic gases, vapors, and fumes. 
(27)  Any leachate from a hazardous waste landfill. 
(28)  Any landfill leachate unless permitted and authorized under a written contract, within YCUA's sole discretion, between YCUA and the user. 
(29)  Any pollutant discharge which constitutes a slug. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-296. - Promulgation of more stringent standards. 
    Upon the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment standards, alternative discharge limits, or other federal or state limitations, for a particular industrial subcategory, the pretreatment standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article and shall be considered part of this article. The YCUA or DWSD shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-297. - Prohibited concentrations of certain pollutants and mercury reduction plan. 
(1)  No person shall discharge wastewater such that the concentration of pollutants in one grab sample exceeds the following limits for oil and grease or pH: 
(a)  100 mg/l oil and grease. 
(b)  <5 or >11 standard units pH. 
(c)  1.0 mg/l total cyanides. 
(d)  1.0 mg/l Total phenolic compounds. 
(2)  No person shall discharge wastewater such that the concentration of pollutants contained in a representative composite sample is at or above the following surcharge threshold, except as otherwise permitted in writing by the director and on payment of a surcharge fee, and no person shall discharge wastewater such that the concentration of pollutants contained in a representative composite sample exceeds the following upper limits, with respect to the following compatible pollutants: 
COMPATIBLES 
Surcharge 
Threshold Upper Limits 300 mg/l 1,000 mg/l 5-day BOD (Biochemical Oxygen Demand) 350 mg/l 2,500 mg/l Total SS (Suspended Solids) 600 mg/l 2,000 mg/l COD (Chemical Oxygen Demand 15 mg/l 75 mg/l Total Phosphorus 30 mg/l 700 mg/l Ammonia-Nitrogen  
(3)  No person shall discharge wastewater such that the concentration of pollutants contained in a representative composite sample shall exceed the following limits with respect to the following inorganic or organic pollutants or phenolic compounds: 
INORGANICS 
1.0 mg/l Arsenic 0.002 mg/l Beryllium 0.50 mg/l Cadmium 4.0 mg/l Chromium (Total) 3.0 mg/l Copper 0.3 mg/l Lead Nondetectable Mercury 3.0 mg/l Nickel 0.15 mg/l Silver 3.0 mg/l Zinc  
ORGANICS 
Nondetectable Polychlorinated Biphenyls 
(Nondetectable per U.S. EPA Method 608. Any detectable sample exceeds this limit.) 
The local discharge limitation for Polychlorinated Biphenyls is established at the level of detection in accordance with the following: 
There shall be no detectable amounts of Polychlorinated Biphenyls discharged to a city or YCUA sanitary sewer. Polychlorinated Biphenyls sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall be in accordance with EPA Method 608. The level of detection, developed in accordance with the procedure specified in 40 CFR 136, shall not exceed 0.2 g/l for Polychlorinated Biphenyls, unless higher levels are appropriate due to matrix interference. 
(4)  The total phenols limit is based on the discharge of any or all of the following phenolic compounds: 2-Chlorophenol, 4-Chlorophenol, 2,4-Dichlorophenol, 2,4-Dimethylphenol, 2, 4-Dinitrophenol, 2-Methyphenol, 3-Methylphenol, 4-Methylphenol, 2-Nitrophenol, 4-Nitrophenol, and Phenol. Discharge of other phenolic compounds is prohibited except as specifically authorized by the director. 
(5)  The director shall annually review the quantities of industrial pollutants listed above which are discharged or proposed to be discharged to the sewage works. The director shall recommend any revisions to these limits necessary to insure that the NPDES permit, federal pretreatment standards and water resources limits are met and to insure that the industrial discharge will not interfere with the treatment process of sludge disposal. At such time as the previously cited limits are changed by the city or YCUA or DWSD, the unit authorizing such change shall notify the remaining units of such change. 
(6)  The local discharge limitation for mercury is established at the level of detection in accordance with the following: 
(a)  There shall be no detectable amounts of mercury discharged to a city or YCUA or DWSD sanitary sewer. Mercury sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall be in accordance with EPA Method 245.1. The level of detection, developed in accordance with the procedure specified in 40 CFR 136, shall not exceed 0.2 g/l for mercury, unless higher levels are appropriate due to matrix interference. 
(b)  The evaluation of potential matrix interference(s) shall include, at a minimum, the following: 
(i)  A demonstration that the laboratory conducting the analysis is capable of achieving the level of detection of 0.2 g/l in reagent water; 
(ii)  A demonstration that the level of detection of 0.2 g/l cannot be achieved in the effluent; and 
(iii)  A demonstration that an attempt has been made to resolve the matrix interference(s). 
(c)  In cases where true matrix interference(s) can be demonstrated, a discharge-specific level of detection will be developed in accordance with the procedure in 40 CFR 136. Discharge specific levels of detection will be incorporated into the wastewater discharge permit of the nondomestic user. 
(d)  To ensure that the maximum allowable mercury loading to the POTW is not exceeded, YCUA or DWSD may require any nondomestic user with a reasonable potential to discharge mercury to develop, submit for approval and implement a mercury reduction plan (MRP). The MRP may be required by permit if the nondomestic user has not violated the local limit for mercury, but YCUA or DWSD has determined that a reasonable potential for such violation may exist. MRPs may be required in notices of violations, orders or other enforcement actions when the nondomestic user has violated the mercury local limit. 
At a minimum, an approvable MRP shall contain the following: 
(i)  A written commitment by the nondomestic user to reduce all nondomestic discharges of mercury to levels below the level of detection within three years of the MRP's original approval date; 
(ii)  Within 60 days of notification by YCUA or DWSD that a MRP is required, the nondomestic user shall supply an initial identification of all potential sources of mercury which could be discharged to the sanitary sewer system; 
(iii)  Specific strategies for mercury reduction with reasonable time frames for implementation, capable of ensuring that mercury discharges will be below the specified level of detection within three years; 
(iv)  A program for quarterly sampling and analysis of the nondomestic discharge for mercury in accordance with EPA Method 245.1; 
(v)  A demonstration of specific, measurable and/or otherwise quantifiable mercury reductions consistent with the goal of reducing mercury discharges below the specified level of detection. Where such reductions cannot be demonstrated through normal effluent monitoring (e.g., mercury discharges are already near level of detection), the demonstration should incorporate the following: 
a.  Internal process monitoring, documenting the results of mercury reduction strategies at sampling locations within the facility (e.g., a program of regular monitoring of sink traps where mercury containing reagents had previously been disposed, but have since been substituted by nonmercury containing compounds). 
b.  Internal and/or effluent sampling utilizing clean and/or ultra-clean sampling and analytical methods as referenced by EPA Federal Register. The results of such monitoring will not be used for compliance purposes unless performed in accordance with EPA Method 245.1 and collected at the appropriate compliance measurement location. 
c.  Loading calculations wherein the nondomestic user calculates the total mass of mercury reduced from the sanitary sewer discharge through reagent substitutions, changes in disposal practices and/or other approved MRP strategies implemented. 
(vi)  A semi-annual report on the status of the mercury reduction efforts. At a minimum, these reports shall: identify compliance or noncompliance with specific reduction commitments in the MRP; summarize the analytical, mass-based or other quantifiable demonstrations of mercury reductions performed to date; provide all applicable analytical data; provide an evaluation of effectiveness of actions taken to date; provide updates to the initial list of mercury containing compounds discharged to the sanitary sewer and propose for approval new strategies and/or modifications to the current MRP to continue and improve mercury reduction efforts; and 
(vii)  Any other conditions that YCUA or DWSD deems necessary to ensure that mercury reduction efforts are effective in achieving the goals of this section. 
(e)  Failure to submit an approvable MRP within 30 days of the required due date shall constitute significant noncompliance in accordance with this section, and will result in publication as a significant violator. 
(f)  A MRP may be evaluated for adequacy at any time by YCUA or DWSD. If such an evaluation determines that the mercury reduction plan is in adequate or the nondomestic user has not complied with its approved MRP, the nondomestic user will be notified. Failure to comply with the MRP requirement constitutes non-compliance. YCUA or DWSD will follow its enforcement response plan (ERP) to ensure that corrective actions are taken. 
(g)  A nondomestic user may request a release from MRP requirements if all samples of the discharge for a period of one year are less than the specified level of detection; the nondomestic user has complied with the minimum monitoring frequency of quarterly sampling events; and YCUA or DWSD deems that MRP commitments have been fulfilled sufficiently to ensure continued compliance with the mercury limitation. YCUA or DWSD shall notify the nondomestic user of any release from MRP requirements in writing. 
(h)  If the MRP requirement is waived by YCUA or DWSD, the nondomestic user remains subject to the local limitation for mercury in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(i)  Rediscovery of mercury in the nondomestic user discharge subjects said user to the submission of a new MRP, or escalation of enforcement in accordance with the ERP. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-298. - Sampling, measurements, tests and analyses. 
    Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 ( March 26, 2007). Where 40 CFR Part 136 ( March 26, 2007) does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the Part 136 ( March 26, 2007) sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable samplingand analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by YCUA or DWSD or other parties, approved by the EPA. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-299. - Surcharge for discharges of unusual strength. 
(1)  If the character of the wastewater from any manufacturing or industrial plant or any other building or premises exceeds the limits for compatible pollutants established in section 74-297 or shall be such as to impose any unreasonable burden upon the sewers of the system or upon the sewage works or POTW in excess of a maximum limit prescribed in this article, then an additional charge shall be made over and above the regular rates, or the director shall require that such sewage be treated by the person, firm or corporation responsible for the sewage being emptied into the sewer or the right to empty such sewage shall be denied, if necessary, to protect the system or any part thereof. Surcharges required shall be computed as the weight of excess compatible pollutant in pounds multiplied by the cost per pound specified in the applicable city rate ordinance. The strength of such wastes shall be determined by composite samples taken over a sufficient period of time to insure a representative sample. The cost of sampling and testing shall be borne by the industry or establishment, whether owner or lessee. Tests shall be made by the user, at an independent laboratory, or at the YCUA or DWSD wastewater treatment plant. 
(2)  Any wastewater discharged into the sewage works having a compatible pollutant in excess of those prescribed in section 74-297 may be permitted by the director provided payment by the industrial concern for the full cost of treating such excess constituents in the wastewater is made and acceptance of the waste does not cause violation of EPA guidelines, NPDES requirements, the Act or State Act. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-300. - Special agreements authorized. 
    With respect to compatible pollutants only, no statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any agreement between the director and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted, subject to payment therefore by the industrial concern, provided such agreement shall not violate EPA guidelines or NPDES requirements and provided user charges and surcharges as provided in this article are agreed to in the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-301. - Dilution of discharge. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in anyway, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical pretreatment standards, alternative discharge limits, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the YCUA or DWSD or the state. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-302. - Accidental discharges. 
(1)  Where required, a user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article, the Act or State Act. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the director for review, and shall be approved by the director before construction of the facility. All required users shall complete such a program within 90 days of notification by the director. If required by the director a user who commences contribution to the sewage works after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives shall not be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the director. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article, the Act or State Act. In the case of any discharge, whether accidental or not, that could cause problems to the YCUA or DWSD, the WWTP or POTW, including any slug loadings by the user, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the YCUA or DWSD of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
(2)  Within five days following any discharge, whether accidental or not, that could cause problems to the YCUA or DWSD, the WWTP or POTW, including any slug loadings by the user, the user shall submit to the director a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the sewage works or POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article, the Act or State Act, or other applicable law. Failure to file a report shall be a separate violation of this article. 
(3)  Slug control plan. Each significant industrial user shall prepare and implement an individualized slug control plan when in the opinion of the director a slug control is required. Existing significant industrial users that do not have a YCUA approved slug control plan shall provide an approvable slug control plan to the director within 90 days of being notified by YCUA that a slug control plan is required. New sources that are significant industrial users shall submit a slug control plan to the director for approval before beginning to discharge. Upon written notice from the director, users that are not significant industrial users may also be required to prepare and implement a slug control plan, and the plan shall be submitted to the director for approval as specified in the notice. Slug control requirements must be included in the SIU control mechanism (industrial user's permit). All slug control plans shall contain at least the following elements: a description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; a description of stored chemicals; the procedures for immediately notifying the director of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate any discharge prohibition, limitation or requirement under this article, and procedures for follow-up written notification within five days of the discharge; the procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and measures and equipment for emergency response. If a user has submitted to the director plans or documents pursuant to other requirements of local, state or federal laws and regulations which meet all applicable requirements of this article, the director may in its discretion determine that the user has satisfied the slug plan submission requirements of this section. Significant industrial users must immediately notify the director of any changes at their facilities affecting their slug control plan or spill/slug potential. 
(4)  Secondary containment requirements. 
(a)  Each user must, when in the opinion of the director [it] is required, provide and maintain at the user's sole expense secondary spill containment structures (including diking, curbing or other appropriate structures) adequate to protect all floor drains from accidental spills and discharges to the POTW of any pollutants or discharges regulated by this article, the Act or state law. The containment area shall be constructed so that no liquid polluting material can escape from the area by gravity through the building sewers, drains, or otherwise directly or indirectly into the POTW. 
(b)  The containment or curbing shall be sufficient to hold not less than ten percent of the total volume of the tanks or containers within the secondary containment structure or provide a capacity of 100 percent of the largest single tank or container within the secondary containment structure, whichever is larger, unless a lesser containment area or alternate control measures are approved in advance by the director. 
(c)  The containment structure must accommodate "squirt distance." Containers within the containment structure must be able to be placed sufficiently back from the edge of the structure so if punctured, the resulting leak will be contained. 
(d)  The containment structure must be designed or operated to prevent run-on or infiltration, rain or other liquids into the secondary containment system unless the containment system has sufficient excess capacity to contain run-on, infiltration, rain, or other liquids. Excess capacity when such prevention is not provided in the system must be sufficient to contain rain precipitation from a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
(e)  The containment structure shall be constructed with chemical-resistant water stops in place at all joints (if any) to be free of cracks or gaps. 
(f)  The containment structure shall be designed and installed to completely surround the tank or containers and to cover all surrounding earth likely to come into contact with the waste if released from the tank(s) or containers (i.e., capable of preventing lateral as well as vertical migration of the material). 
(g)  All floor drains found within the containment area must be plugged and sealed. 
(h)  Spill troughs and sumps within process areas must discharge to appropriate pretreatment tanks. 
(i)  Emergency containment shall also be provided for storage tanks that may be serviced by commercial haulers and for chemical storage areas. 
(j)  Solid pollutants shall be located in security areas designed to prevent the loss of the materials to the POTW. 
(k)  Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide the protection required by this article shall be submitted to the director for review, and shall be approved by the director before construction. 
(l)  Construction of approved containment for existing sources shall be completed within the time period specified by the director. 
(k)  No new source shall be permitted to discharge to the POTW until emergency containment facilities have been approved and constructed as required by this article. 
(l)  The director may order a user to take interim measures for emergency containment as determined necessary by the director under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-303. - Determination of sewage flow. 
    To determine the sewage flow from any establishment, the YCUA or DWSD may use one of the following methods: 
(1)  The amount of water supplied to the premises by the public water system as shown upon the water meter if the premises are metered. 
(2)  If the premises are supplied with river water or water from private wells, the amount of water supplied from such sources may be metered at the source or metered at its point of discharge prior to entry into the public sewer. 
(3)  If such premises are used for an industrial or commercial purpose of such a nature that the water supplied to the premises cannot be entirely discharged into the sewer system, the estimate of the amount of sewage discharged into the sewer system made by the utilities authority from the water, gas or electric supply, or metered at its point of discharge prior to entry into the public sewer. 
(4)  The volume of sewage discharged into the sewer system as determined by measurements and samples taken at a manhole installed by the owner of the property served by the sewer system at his own expense in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit issued by the YCUA or DWSD pursuant to this article. 
(5)  A figure determined by the YCUA or DWSD by any combination of the foregoing or by any other equitable method. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-304. - Disposal at sewage treatment plant. 
    Waste from industrial sewage disposal systems shall be disposed of at the sewage treatment plant or at any other refuse or disposal site approved by the director. No waters or wastes described in section 74-295 shall be disposed of at the sewage treatment plant. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-305. - Bypass. 
(1)  An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director, if possible at least ten days before the date of the bypass. An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the director within 24 hours from the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. 
(2)  Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take enforcement action against an industrial user for bypass, unless: 
(a)  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
(b)  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and 
(c)  The industrial user submitted notice as required under this section. 
The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in this subsection 75-305(2). 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-306. - Report of violation. 
    If the results of any sampling performed by the user indicates that any violation of this article, a permit, an order issued under this article, the Act or State Act has occurred, the user shall notify the YCUA or DWSD within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation and shall repeat the sampling and pollutant analysis and shall submit, in writing, the results of this repeat analysis within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. A written follow-up report shall be filed by the user with the YCUA or DWSD within 30 days of a user becoming aware of the violation. The report shall specify the following: 
(1)  A description of the violation, the cause thereof, and the violation's impact on the user's compliance status. 
(2)  Duration of the violation, including exact dates and times of the violation, and if not corrected, the anticipated time the violation is expected to continue. 
(3)  All steps taken or intended to be taken to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of such a violation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-307. - Notification of authorities upon discharge of hazardous waste. 
    All industrial users shall notify the YCUA or DWSD, the EPA regional waste management division director and the DNRE in writing of any discharge to the YCUA or DWSD of a substance that would be a regulated hazardous waste under any federal statute if disposed of otherwise. Such notice shall be given in accordance with CFR 403.12(p). 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Secs. 74-308-78-311. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 74-312. - Authorized under certain conditions. 
    Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of subsection 74-287(4), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-313. - Permit required; application; fees. 
    Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the plumbing inspector. The application for such a permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city or YCUA or DWSD and shall include specifications and other information deemed necessary by the city and YCUA or DWSD. A permit and inspection fee shall be paid to the city treasurer at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-314. - Inspection by city and YCUA or DWSD. 
    A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city and YCUA or DWSD. The city and YCUA or DWSD shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city and YCUA or DWSD when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of notice by the city or YCUA or DWSD. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-315. - Specifications. 
    The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the county health department. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 10,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-316. - Connection with public sewer. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 74-287, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-317. - Sanitary maintenance required. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city or the YCUA or DWSD. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Sec. 74-318. - Other requirements. 
    No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the state or county health department or DNRE. 
(Ord. No. 2010-4, 11-1-10) 
Secs. 74-319-74-340. - Reserved. 
Chapter 78 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An Ordinance adopted on Oct. 6, 2003 repealed former ch. 78, arts. I-XXVI, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former ch. 78 derived from an Ord. of Feb. 13, 1992 as amended. See the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume for a listing or ordinances amending former ch. 78. 
Cross reference- Administration ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; community development, ch. 30; environment, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection and emergency services, ch. 38; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; subdivisions, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate land use, Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006, as amended, MCL 125.3101. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and cited as the City of Plymouth Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to promote, protect, regulate, restrict and provide for the use of land and buildings within the City of Plymouth; to meet the needs of the state's residents for places of residence, recreation, industry, trade, service, and other uses of land; to insure that uses of the land shall be situated in appropriate locations and relationships; to limit the inappropriate overcrowding of land and congestion of population and transportation systems and other public facilities; to facilitate adequate and efficient provision for transportation systems, sewage disposal, water, energy, education, recreation, and other public service and facility needs; and to promote public health, safety, and welfare. 
    The city is divided for those purposes into districts of various number and shape, and are considered best suited to carry out this section. For each of those districts, regulations are imposed designating the uses for which buildings, structures, and land shall follow, and designating the trades, industries, and the land uses or activities that shall be permitted or excluded or subjected to special regulations. 
    It is also the purpose of this chapter to provide for the establishment of a zoning board of appeals and its powers and duties; to provide for the administration and enforcement hereof and for penalties for its violation; and to provide for the repeal of any and all ordinances inconsistent herewith. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-3. - Scope and construction of regulations. 
(a)  This chapter shall be liberally construed in such manner as to best implement its purpose. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the requirements shall be held to be the minimum for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare. 
(b)  No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered, and no new use or change shall be made of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except as permitted by the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Nothing within this chapter shall be construed to prevent compliance with an order by the appropriate authority to correct, improve, strengthen, or restore to a safe or healthy condition, any part of a building or premises declared unsafe or unhealthy. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-4. - Validity and severability clause. 
    If a court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any part of this chapter to be invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provisions of this chapter not specifically included in said ruling. 
    If a court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any provision of this chapter to a particular land, parcel, lot, district, use, building, or structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to any other parcel, lot, district, use, building, or structure not specifically included in said ruling. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-5. - Conflict with other laws, regulations, and agreements. 
    Where a condition imposed by a provision of this chapter upon the use of any lot, building, or structure is conflicting with a condition imposed by any other provision of this chapter, or by the provision of an ordinance adopted under any other law, the provision which is more restrictive shall govern. 
    This chapter is not intended to modify or annul any easement, covenant, or other private agreement provided that where any provision of this chapter is more restrictive or imposes a higher standard or requirement than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement, the provision of this chapter shall govern. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-6. - Vested right. 
    It is hereby expressly declared that nothing in this chapter be held or construed to give or grant to any person, firm, or corporation any vested right, license, privilege or permit. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-7. - Enabling authority. 
    The ordinance from which this chapter is derived is adopted pursuant to the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 as amended, MCL 125.3101 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04,  3, 11-5-12) 
Secs. 78-8-78-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 78-20. - Construction of language. 
    The following rules of construction apply to the text of this chapter: 
(1)  The particular shall control the general. 
(2)  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
(3)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
(4)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(5)  A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. 
(6)  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for" or "occupied for." 
(7)  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
(8)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," "either... or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.  "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
c.  "Either . . . or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(9)  Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory use or accessory means a use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and located on the same zoning lot, unless otherwise specified, as the principal use to which it is related. When the word "accessory" is used in this text, it shall have the same meaning as accessory use. An accessory use includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Garages, storage sheds, radio/television antennae. 
(2)  Outdoor swimming pools, hot tubs and saunas for the use of the occupants of a residence, or their guests. 
(3)  Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, tool room or similar accessory building or other structure. 
(4)  Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in connection with a business or industrial use, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations. 
(5)  Storage of goods used in or produced by industrial uses or related activities, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations. 
(6)  Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, subject to the accessory off-street parking regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
(7)  Uses clearly incidental to a main use such as but not limited to: offices of an industrial or commercial complex located on the site of the commercial or industrial complex. 
(8)  Accessory off-street loading, subject to the off-street loading regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
(9)  Accessory signs, subject to the sign regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
(10)  Common household gardening in a residential district when located only in the rear yard and/or non-required side yard areas. For purposes of this chapter, common household gardening shall include the growing of fruits and vegetables for consumption solely by members of the family residing in the dwelling unit located on the same zoning lot. 
(11)  Solar panels, private wind energy conversion systems, television reception antennas and air conditioning units, and satellite dish antennas. 
    Adult foster care facility. A state-licensed establishment that provides foster care to adults. It includes facilities and foster care homes for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing basis but who do not require continuous nursing care. An adult foster care facility does not include convalescent or nursing homes, homes for the aged, hospitals, alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation center, residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities which have been exempted from the definition of adult foster care facility by the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, MCL 400.701, et. seq.; MSA 16.610 (61), et. seq., as amended. The following additional definitions shall apply in the application of this chapter: 
(1)  Adult foster care small group home: An owner-occupied facility with the approved capacity to receive 12 or fewer adults who are provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for 24 hours a day, five or more days a week, and for two or more consecutive weeks for compensation. 
(2)  Adult foster care large group home: A facility with approved capacity to receive at least 13 but not more than 20 adults to be provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, 24 hours a day, five or more days a week, and for two or more consecutive weeks for compensation. 
(3)  Adult foster care family home: A private residence with the approved capacity to receive six or fewer adults to be provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, 24 hours a day, five or more days a week and for two or more consecutive weeks for compensation. The adult foster care family home licensee must be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence. 
(4)  Adult foster care congregate facility: An adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive more than 20 adults to be provided with foster care. 
    Alley means any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alteration means any change, addition or modification in construction, type of occupancy or in the structural members of a building (such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders), the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed." 
    Apartment means a suite of rooms in a multiple-family building arranged and intended for a place of residence of a single-family or a group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Apartment, efficiency, is a dwelling unit consisting of not more than one room in addition to a kitchen and necessary sanitary facilities. 
    Apartment, one-bedroom unit, is a dwelling unit containing a minimum floor area of at least 450 square feet, consisting of not more than three rooms in addition to a kitchen and necessary sanitary facilities. 
    Apartment, two-bedroom unit, is a dwelling unit containing a minimum floor area of at least 600 square feet, consisting of not more than four rooms in addition to a kitchen and necessary sanitary facilities. 
    Apartment, three-or-more bedroom unit, is a dwelling unit wherein for each room in addition to the four rooms permitted in a two-bedroom unit, there shall be provided an additional area of 150 square feet to the minimum floor area of 600 square feet. 
    Arcade means a building or structure, or any part thereof, which is devoted to the commercial use of amusement devices, pinball machines, electronic tables featuring pool, billiards, bowling, basketball, football, or the like, or electronic games of skill or dexterity utilizing video tapes or video screen or T.V. adaptations, etc., automatic sport devices or tables or similar activities for hire, or for amusement. 
    Architectural features include,but shall not be limited to steps, window sills, belt courses, brick and/or wrought iron wing walls, chimneys, architraves, pediments, and other similar features. 
    Attic, finished means the area between the roof framing and the ceiling of the rooms below which has been made occupiable through the use of permanent stairs. No finished attics may exceed 1/3 of the floor area of the story below. 
    Automobile convenience mart. A place where gasoline, motor oil, lubricants, or other minor accessories are retailed directly to public on the premises or in combination with the retailing of items typically found in a convenience market, carry out restaurant or supermarket. 
    Automobile repair, major, means the general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair; and painting of automobiles. 
    Automobile repair, minor, means repairs other than major repair including engine tune-up, muffler shops, shock absorber replacement shops, undercoating shops and tire stores. 
    Average grade means the average elevation of the ground level measured within the front, side, or rear yard, within which a deck patio or terrace is located. 
    Basement means that portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 

    Bed and breakfast operations provide overnight accommodations and a morning meal in a dwelling unit provided to transient guests for compensation. The bed and breakfast operation shall be subordinate to the single-family use of the dwelling by the owner or primary renter of the premises. 
    Berm, obscuring, means an earthen mound of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring device in carrying out the requirements of this chapter. 
    Billboard shall mean: 
(1)  A poster panel or painted bulletin and includes any structure panel, board or object designed exclusively to support such poster, panel, or a painted bulletin. 
(2)  A surface whereon advertising matter is set in view conspicuously and which advertising does not apply to premises or any use or premises wherein it is displayed or posted. 
    Block means the property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, un-subdivided acreage, lake, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development, or corporate boundary lines of the city. 
    Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns or walls, and intended for the shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind, excluding play structures. 
    Building height means the vertical distance measured from the average grade plane (based on existing grades) to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roofs; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. Where a building is located on sloping terrain, the height shall be measured from the average ground level of the grade plane. 
Building Height 
    Building line means a line formed by the greatest projecting face of the building, and for the purposes of this chapter, a minimum building line is the same as a front setback line. 
Building Line 
    Building, main or principal, means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. 
    CBD means the central business district of the city. 
    Change of use means an alteration of a lot, parcel, or use which is an intensification of land use which requires additional parking or loading and the submittal of a site plan application. 
    Children's amusement park means an outdoor facility with devices for entertainment of small children including rides, games and items for sale. 
    Church, synagogue, temple, mosque, or similar religious facility: Any structure wherein persons regularly assemble for religious activity. 
    Club means an organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics, or the like, but not operated for profit. 
    Condominium is a building or group of buildings in which individual portions thereof are owned by or offered for sale to separate entities, with common elements owned jointly as prescribed by Act No. 229 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1963 (MCL 559.101 et seq., MSA 26.50(101) et seq.), as amended. 
    Convalescent or nursing home means a nursing care facility, including a county medical care facility, that provides organized nursing care and medical treatment to seven or more unrelated individuals suffering or recovering from illness, injury, or infirmity. Nursing home does not include a unit in a state correctional facility. Nursing home does not include one or more of the following: (a) A hospital; (b) A veteran's facility created under Act No. 152 of the Public Acts of 1885, being Sections 36.1 to 36.12 of the Michigan Compiled Laws; or (c) A hospice residence. 
    Convenience grocery store. A one-story, retail store primarily designed and stocked to sell food, beverages, and other household supplies to customers who purchase a relatively few items (in contrast to a "supermarket"). Convenience grocery stores are designed to attract a large volume of stop and go traffic. 
    Day care facilities. The following definitions shall apply in the application of this chapter: 
(1)  Family day care home: A state-licensed, owner-occupied private residence in which one but not more than six minor children are received for care and supervision for periods less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, excepting children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four weeks in a calendar year. 
(2)  Group day care home: A state-licensed, owner-occupied private residence in which seven but not more than 12 children are received for care and supervision for periods less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, excepting children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four weeks in a calendar year. 
    Child care center: A state-licensed facility, other than a private residence, receiving one or more children for care and supervision for periods less than 24 hours, and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child. 
    Deck means a structure for outdoor residential activities greater than 12 inches above the average grade, and constructed on an elevated foundation which may include joists, beams or posts. 
    Delicatessen means an establishment where food and beverage items are sold for both off-premises preparation consumption, carry-out and/or on-premises consumption. 
    Development means the construction of a new building or other structure on a zoning lot, the relocation of an existing building on another zoning lot, or the use of open land for a new use. 
    District means a portion of the incorporated area of the city within which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Drive-in means an establishment where food, frozen desserts or beverages are sold to the customers in a ready-to-consume state and where the customer consumes food, frozen desserts or beverages in an automobile parked upon the premises or at other facilities provided for customers which are located outside the building. 
    Drive-through means an establishment so developed that some portion of its retail or service character is dependent upon providing a driveway approach and staging area specifically designed for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in their motor vehicles, rather than within a building or structure, for carrying out and consumption or use after the vehicle is removed from the premises. 
    Dwelling unit means a building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by single-family for residential purposes and having cooking and sanitary facilities. 
    Dwelling, single-family, means a building designed exclusively for and occupied exclusively by one family. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a building designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family, means a building, or a portion thereof, designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other. 
    Erected means built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, or moved upon; any physical operations on the premises which are required for construction, excavation, fill, drainage and the like shall be considered a part of erection. 
    Essential services means the erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance of underground, surface, or overhead utilities (such as gas, electrical, steam, fuel, water, sewage, or communications) by public utilities or municipal departments. This shall include components of transmission, distribution, collection, supply, and disposal systems such as poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarms, police call boxes, traffic signals, and hydrants in connection herewith, but shall not include buildings which are not necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for the general health, safety, or welfare. Essential services shall not include wireless communication facilities. 
    Excavation means any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care. 
    Extended-stay motel. Any building containing six or more guest rooms intended or designed to be used, rented or hired out to be occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes for guests and contain kitchen facilities for food preparation including but not limited to such facilities as refrigerators, stoves and ovens. 
    Family means a single individual or a number of individuals domiciled together whose relationship is of a continuing domestic character and who are cooking and living together as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit. This shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie, organization, or group of students or other individuals whose relationship is of a transitory or seasonal nature or for the anticipated, limited duration of school terms or other similar determinable period. 
    Fence means a manmade structure constructed for the purpose of or to have the effect of enclosing the area it is constructed upon or as defined in the city Code. 
    Filling means the depositing or dumping of any matter onto or into the ground, except common household gardening and ground care. 
    Floor area, gross. (For purposes of computing parking only) Gross floor area shall be the total square footage, measured from the interior surfaces of the exterior walls. Gross floor area shall include all areas within the exterior walls. 
    Floor area ratio (FAR) means the ratio of the floor area of a building to its lot area. For example: when a floor area ratio of 0.4 is specified, the floor area of the building constructed on a lot of 6,000 square feet in area is limited to a maximum of 2,400 square feet (or 6,000 x 0.4 or 2,400). The purpose of this ratio is to control the bulk of buildings based on the size of the lot. FAR for residential buildings is calculated using "residential floor area," as defined in this chapter. 
    Floor area, residential, means the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two dwellings. The floor area measurement shall include any habitable space, bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces and similar areas, and attached garage. Examples of architectural features that are included or excluded in the FAR calculation are shown in the following table: 
Examples of Architectural Elements Included/Excluded from FAR Calculation 
Architectural Feature Conditions First Story Include 
in FAR: Upper Story  Connected by a fixed stairway to the first story, and 
  1. With headroom of five (5) feet or more (between top of floor and bottom of rafter), or 
  2. Which may be made usable for human habitation Attached Garages Enclosed Porches Accessory Structures (except Detached Garages) Car Ports Porte Cochere Architectural Projections with Floor Area (See Sec. 78-217(2)) Exclude from FAR: Basements Unfinished Attics  With headroom of less than five (5) feet (between top of floor and bottom of rafter), and 
 Which may NOT be made usable for human habitation Unenclosed Breezeways Unenclosed Porches Detached Garages  
    Floor area, usable, for the purposes of computing parking, means that area used for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients or customers. Such floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, hallways or for utilities or sanitary facilities, shall be excluded from the computation of usable floor area. Measurement of usable floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls. 
Floor Area 
    Garage, private, means an accessory building or portion of a main building designed or used solely for the storage of motor-driven vehicles, boats and similar vehicles owned and used by the occupant of the building to which it is accessory. 
    Garage sale means any sale of personal effects, jewelry, household items, furnishings and equipment belonging to the owner or occupant of the property held in any district by the owner, occupant or his personal representative and/or agent. 
    Garage, service, means any premises used for the storage or care of motor-driven vehicles, or where any such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for remuneration, hire or sale. 
    Gasoline service station means a place for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles, together with the sale of minor accessories and services for motor vehicles, but not including major automobile repair. 
    Grade means a reference plane representing the ground level adjoining a building or structure. 
    Grade, existing means the elevation or surface of the ground or pavement as it exists prior to disturbance. This includes both the "natural" grade, where no man-made disturbances have impacted a building site, as well as the existing grade as established by existing buildings, structures and/or pavement. 
    Grade, finished means the final elevation of the ground surface after development. 
    Grade plane means a reference plane representing the average of the existing grades or ground level adjoining the building at exterior walls. Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more than six feet from the building, between the building and a point six feet from the building. 
    Greenbelt means a planting of trees and shrubs to serve as a screening device between abutting land uses. 
    Guarantee means a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, surety bond or such other instrument acceptable to the city. 
    Habitable space means a space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating, or cooking. 
    Home occupation means an occupation or profession customarily carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a secondary use which is clearly subservient to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and in which no persons are employed at the dwelling other than the residents of the dwelling unit. 
    Home improvement center. A facility of more than 30,000 square feet of gross floor area, engaged in the retail sale of various basic hardware lines, such as tools, builders hardware, paint and glass, housewares and household appliances, garden supplies and cutlery. 
    Hotel, motel means a building containing primarily rooming units with the number of dwelling units being not greater than ten percent of the total number of rooming units, and, with the exception of the unit occupied by the management staff, used only for the accommodation of transients. 
    Housing, dependent, is a multiple-family housing form with central dining facilities provided as a basic service to each dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit shall not contain cooking facilities, but must contain sanitary facilities. 
    Housing, independent, is a multiple-family housing form with full facilities for self-sufficiency in each individual dwelling unit. 
    Improvements means those features and actions associated with a project which are considered necessary by the city to protect natural resources or the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city, and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including parking areas, landscaping, roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening and drainage. Improvements do not include the entire project which is the subject of zoning approval. 
    Junkyard means an area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including but not limited to: scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A junkyard includes automobile wrecking yards and any open area of more than 200 square feet for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk. 
    Kennel, commercial, means any lot or premises on which three or more dogs, cats or other household pets are either permanently or temporarily boarded or bred and raised for remuneration. 
    Large box retail. A singular retail or wholesale user, who occupies no less than 70,000 square feet of gross floor area, typically requires high parking to building area ratios and has a regional sales market. Regional retail/wholesale uses can include, but are not limited to, membership warehouse clubs that emphasize bulk sales, discount stores, and department stores. 
    Loading space means an off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Loft means the space between the roof and the floor of the uppermost story. The floor area of a loft is not more than 1/3 of the floor area of the story below. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions of this chapter. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. 
Interior, Through and Corner Lots 
    Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. 
Lots and Areas 
    Lot, corner, means a lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection of two streets is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this chapter if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot coverage means the part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings including accessory buildings and including but not limited to decks, terraces, pools, outdoor enclosures and similar structures. 
    Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines. 
    Lot, interior, means any lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot as follows: 
(1)  Front lot line, in the case of an interior lot, is that line separating the lot from the street. In the case of a through lot, is that line separating such lot from either street. 
(2)  Rear lot line means that lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. 
(3)  Side lot line means any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 
    Lot of record means a parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a document or map on file with the county register of deeds or in common use by municipal or county officials, and which actually exists as so shown, or any part of such parcel held in a record ownership separate from that of the remainder thereof. 
    Lot, through, means any interior lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, all yards of such lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yard setbacks shall be provided as required. 
    Lot width means the horizontal straight line distance between the side lot lines, measured between the two points where the front setback line intersects the side lot lines. 
Lot width and Setback 
    Lot, zoning, means a single tract of land, located within a single block which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. A zoning lot shall satisfy this chapter with respect to area, size, dimensions and frontage as required in the district in which the zoning lot is located. A zoning lot, therefore, may not coincide with a lot of record as filed with the county register of deeds, but may include one or more lots of record. 
    Main building means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated. 
    Main use is the principal use to which the premises are devoted. 
    Major thoroughfare means an arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume traffic way for both the immediate municipal area and the region beyond, and is designated as a major thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, expressway or equivalent term on the major thoroughfare plan as contained within the city master plan. These streets comprise the basic structure of the major thoroughfare plan. 
    Master plan means the comprehensive community plan including graphic and written proposals indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings and all physical development of the city, and includes any unit or part of such plan, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
    Mechanical amusement device means any machine or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, currency, slug, token, plate or disc, operates or may be operated as a game, of contest of skill or amusement when the element of skill in such operation predominates over chance or luck. It shall include mechanical, electrical, or electronic video games, mechanical grabbing devices, pinball games, mechanical, electrical, or electronic baseball, football, basketball, hockey and similar sports-type games, mechanical, electrical, or electronic card games, shooting games, laser tag, target games, or any other machine, device or apparatus which may be used as a game of skill and wherein the player initiates, employs or directs any force generated by such machine. 
    Mezzanine means an intermediate floor in any story occupying not less 1/3 of the floor area of such story. 
    Mini-storage units means storage buildings for lease to the general public for the storage of personal and household effects and for dry storage of office or business effects not including the warehousing of products or supplies. 
    Mobile home/manufactured home means any building or structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a chassis and designed to be sold as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained in the structure. Mobile home does not include recreational equipment. 
    Mobile home park/manufactured home community means any plot of ground upon which three or more mobile homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, are located. 
    Motel, see hotel, motel. 
    Nonconforming structure means a structure, or portion thereof, lawfully existing at the effective date of this chapter (February 11, 1992), or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter in the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use means a use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of this chapter (February 11, 1992), or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Nonconforming Use 
    Nursery, plant materials, means a space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail sale on the premises, including products used for gardening or landscaping. The definition of nursery within the meaning of this chapter does not include any space, building or structure used for the sale of fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees. 
    Nursery school means a facility which has as its main objective a development program for preschool children and whose staff meets the educational requirements established by the state. 
    Nursing home means a nursing care facility, including a county medical care facility, that provides organized nursing care and medical treatment to seven or more unrelated individuals suffering or recovering from illness, injury, or infirmity. Nursing home does not include a unit in a state correctional facility. Nursing home does not include one or more of the following: (a) A hospital; (b) A veteran's facility created under Act No. 152 of the Public Acts of 1885, being Sections 36.1 to 36.12 of the Michigan Compiled Laws; or (c) A hospice residence.. 
    Nuisance factors means an offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such as, but not limited to: 
(1)  Noise; 
(2)  Dust; 
(3)  Smoke; 
(4)  Odor; 
(5)  Glare; 
(6)  Fumes; 
(7)  Flashes; 
(8)  Vibration; 
(9)  Shock waves; 
(10)  Heat; 
(11)  Electronic or atomic radiation; 
(12)  Objectionable effluent; 
(13)  Noise of congregation of people; particularly at night; 
(14)  Passenger traffic; 
(15)  Invasion of non-abutting street frontage by traffic; 
(16)  A burned structure,; 
(17)  A condemned structure. 
    Obscuring screen means a barrier constructed for the purpose of controlling sound or view. Requirements for use of and permitted forms of obscuring screens are contained in Section 78-206. 
    Occupancy means any act by an owner or lessee to initiate or continue the proposed and intended use of a structure. 
    Occupiable space means a space within a structure used for bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces, and similar areas. 
    Off-street parking lot means a facility providing off-street vehicular parking spaces and drives or aisles for the parking of vehicles. 
    Open storage means the storage of any materials or objects outside the confines of a building. 
    Outdoor enclosure means a permanent covered structure used for outdoor activities, such as a gazebo, porch, or screened enclosure. 
    Parking space means an area of definite length and width, such area shall be exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be fully accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles. 
    Patio means a hard-surfaced area or structure not more than 12 inches above the average grade. 
    Porte cochere means an unenclosed, roofed structure located on the same lot, which extends from the principal dwelling over an adjacent driveway that is designed to let vehicles pass under and used for the shelter of those getting in and out of vehicles. 
    Principal use means the main use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist. 
    Private surface parking lot means private parking located at ground level. 
    Public utility means a person, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state or municipal regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water. 
    Recreation/utility vehicle: shall include the following: 
(1)  Boats and boat trailers: "boats" and "boat trailers" shall include boats, floats, rafts, canoes, plus the normal equipment to transport them on the highway. 
(2)  Folding tent trailer: A canvas folding structure mounted on wheels and designed for travel and vacation use. 
(3)  Motor home: A recreational vehicle intended for temporary human habitation, sleeping, and/or eating, mounted upon a chassis with wheels and capable of being moved from place to place under its own power. Motor homes generally contain sanitary, water, and electrical facilities. 
(4)  Other equipment: Other recreational equipment includes snowmobiles, all-terrain or special terrain vehicles, utility trailers, dump trailers plus the normal equipment to transport them on the highway. 
(5)  Pickup camper: A structure designed to be mounted on a pickup or truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling during the process of travel, recreational, and vacation uses. 
(6)  Travel trailer: A portable vehicle on a chassis, not exceeding 36 feet in length or nine feet in width, which is designed to be used as a temporary dwelling during travel, recreational, and vacation uses, and which may be identified as a "travel trailer" by the manufacturer. Travel trailers generally contain sanitary, water, and electrical facilities. 
    Restaurant. A restaurant is any establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state and whose method of operation is characteristic of a carry-out, drive-in, drive-through, fast food, standard restaurant, or bar/lounge, or combination thereof, as defined below. 
(1)  Restaurant, carry-out: A carry-out restaurant is a restaurant whose method of operation involves sale of food, beverages, and/or frozen desserts in disposable or edible containers or wrappers in a ready-to-consume state for consumption primarily off the premises. 
(2)  Restaurant, drive-in: A drive-in restaurant shall be deemed to be any restaurant designed to permit or facilitate the serving of meals, sandwiches, ice cream, beverages or other food served directly to or permitted to be consumed by patrons in cars or other vehicles parked on the premises, or permitted to be consumed by patrons elsewhere on the site outside the main building. 
(3)  Restaurant, fast-food: A fast-food restaurant is a restaurant whose method of operation involves minimum waiting for delivery of ready-to-consume food to the customer at a counter or cafeteria line for consumption at the counter where it is served, or at tables, booths, or stands inside or outside of the structure, or for consumption off the premises, but not in a motor vehicle at the site. 
(4)  Restaurant, standard: A standard restaurant is a restaurant whose method of operation involves either the delivery of prepared food by waiters and waitresses to customers seated at tables within a completely enclosed building, or the prepared food is acquired by customers at a cafeteria line and is subsequently consumed by the customers at tables within a completely enclosed building. 
(5)  Bar/lounge: A bar or lounge is a type of restaurant which is operated primarily for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages, although the sale of prepared food or snacks may also be permitted. If a bar or lounge is part of a larger dining facility, it shall be defined as that part of the structure so designated or operated. 
    Right-of-way. A legal right of passage over real property, typically associated with roads and railroads. 
    Room means, for the purpose of determining lot area requirements and density in a multiple-family district, a living room, dining room or bedroom, equal to minimum standards as required by the State of Michigan Building and Residential Codes. A room shall not include the area in kitchen, sanitary facilities, utility provisions, corridors, hallways and storage. Plans presented showing one-, two- or three-bedroom units and including a den, library or other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density. 
    Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit, used for living and sleeping, but which does not contain cooking or eating facilities. 
    Rooming-house means a building other than a hotel-motel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for a definite period, lodging and meals are provided for more than two persons. 
    Satellite dish means a structure designed, intended or used to receive communications or other signals from geostationary, communications satellites or other extraterrestrial sources. 
    Setback means the distance required to obtain the minimum front, side or rear yard open space provisions of this chapter. 
    Shopping center. More than one commercial establishment, planned, developed, owned, and managed as a unit, with off-street parking provided on the property. 
    Sign definitions: See section 78-221. 
    Single housekeeping unit means all of the associated rooms in a dwelling unit available to and occupied by all of the occupants with a single set of cooking facilities also available to and utilized by all of the occupants of the dwelling unit. 
    Site condominium. A condominium development containing residential, commercial, office, industrial, or other structures or improvements for uses permitted in the zoning district in which located, in which each co-owner owns exclusive rights to a volume of space within which a structure or structures may be constructed, herein defined as a condominium unit, as described in the master deed. The following additional definitions are provided: 
(1)  Condominium Act: Act 59, Public Acts of 1978, as amended. 
(2)  Condominium documents: The master deed, recorded pursuant to the Condominium Act, and any other instrument referred to in the master deed or bylaws which affects the rights and obligations of a co-owner in the condominium. 
(3)  Condominium lot: The condominium unit and the contiguous limited common element surrounding the condominium unit, which shall be the counterpart of "lot" as used in connection with a project developed under the Subdivision Control Act, Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended. 
(4)  Condominium unit: The portion of a condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed. 
(5)  General common elements: The common elements other than the limited common elements. 
(6)  Limited common elements: A portion of the common elements reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all of the co-owners. 
(7)  Master deed: The condominium document recording the condominium project to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the bylaws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan for the project, and all other information required by Section 8 of the Condominium Act. 
    Story means that part of a building, except a mezzanine as defined herein, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above. A basement shall not be counted as a story. (See illustration for "story" following the definition for "basement" in this Section.) 
    Story, half, means an uppermost story lying under a sloping roof having an area of at least 200 square feet in area with a clear ceiling height of seven feet, six inches. For the purposes of this chapter, the usable floor area is only that area having at least five feet clear height between floor and ceiling. 
    Street means a dedicated public right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground except play structures. 
    Temporary use or building means a use or building permitted by the zoning board of appeals to exist during a specified period of time. 
    Terrace means a hard surfaced area for outdoor residential activities raised over 12 inches or more above the average grade, and constructed with an earth embankment or a retaining wall. 
    Transition means a zoning district which may serve as a district of transition; i.e., a buffer zone between various land use districts or land use types. 
    Use means the principal purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied. 
    Wall, obscuring, means a structure of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this chapter. 
    Wind energy conversion system (WECS) shall mean any device such as a wind charger, windmill or wind turbine that converts wind energy to a form of usable energy. 
(1)  Private WECS shall mean any WECS that is accessory to a principal use located on the same lot and is designed and built to serve the needs of the principal use. 
(2)  Commercial WECS shall mean any WECS that is designed and built to provide electricity primarily to the electric utility's power grid. 
    Wireless communications facilities or facility shall mean all structures and accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals or other wireless communications services, and include wireless communications equipment, wireless communications support structures, and wireless communications equipment compounds, as defined herein. This may include, but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone devices and exchanges, micro-wave relay facilities, telephone transmission equipment building, and commercial mobile radio service facilities. Not included within this definition are: citizen band radio facilities, short wave receiving facilities, amateur (ham) radio facilities, private/stand-alone satellite dishes, and governmental facilities which are subject to state or federal law or regulations which preempt municipal regulatory authority. For purposes of this chapter, the following additional terms are defined: 
(1)  Attached wireless communications facilities shall mean wireless communications equipment attached to an existing wireless communications support structure or in an existing wireless communications equipment compound. 
(2)  Substantial change in physical dimensions means one or more modifications of the height, width, length, or area of a wireless communications facility at a location, the cumulative effect of which is to materially alter or change the appearance of the wireless communications facility. 
(3)  Wireless communications equipment means the equipment and components, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, base stations, equipment shelters or cabinets, emergency generators and power supply, coaxial and fiber optic cables used in the provision of wireless communications services, but excluding wireless communication support structures. 
(4)  Wireless communications equipment compound means a delineated area surrounding or adjacent to the base of a wireless communications support structure within which any wireless communications equipment related to that support structure is located. 
(5)  Wireless communications support structures or support structures shall mean structures designed to support or capable of supporting wireless communication equipment. Support structures within this definition include but shall not be limited to monopoles, lattice towers, utility poles, wood poles, and guyed towers, buildings, or other structures with such design or capability. 
(6)  Collocation shall mean the location by two (2) or more wireless communication providers of wireless communication equipment on a common wireless communication support structure. 
    Yards means the open spaces on the same lot with a main building unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and as follows: 
(1)  Front yard means an open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main building. 
(2)  Rear yard means an open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the main building. In the case of a corner lot, the rear yard may be opposite either street frontage. 
(3)  Side yard means an open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building. 

(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 06-03,  1, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 2007-01,  2, 5-21-07; Ord. No. 2010-02,  2, 3, 4-5-10; Ord. No. 2012-02,  2, 1-3-12; Ord. No. 2012-04,  4, 11-5-12; Ord. No. 2014-03,  2, 3, 2-17-14; Ord. No. 2014-05,  2, 6-2-14; Ord. No. 16-02,  2, 7-18-16 ; Ord. No. 16-06,  1, 10-17-16 ; Ord. No. 2017-01,  1, 1-3-17 ; Ord. No. 2017-01(A),  1, 8-21-17 ) 
Secs. 78-22-78-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 78-30. - Enumerated. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into the following zoning districts: 
(1)  Districts: 
R-1 Single-Family Residential District RT-1 Two-Family Residential District RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential District RM-2 Multiple-Family Residential District O-1 Office Service District O-2 Office-Research District B-1 Local Business District B-2 Central Business District B-3 General Business District I-1 Light Industrial District I-2 Heavy Industrial District P-1 Vehicular Parking District ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District MU Mixed Use Zoning District PUD Planned Unit Development  
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-31. - Zoning maps. 
    Each area shall be set forth on a map containing such information as may be acceptable to the city commission and showing by appropriate means the various districts into which the area is divided. These maps shall be entitled Zoning Maps of the City of Plymouth, and shall bear the date adopted or amended and it shall be the duty of the mayor and the clerk to authenticate such records by placing their official signatures thereon. All such maps with all explanatory matter thereon, are hereby made a part of this chapter and shall be as much a part of this chapter as if the matters and information set forth thereon were all fully described herein. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-32. - District boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the districts established in this chapter as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall be applied: 
(1)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines, such centerlines, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines shall be constructed to be such boundaries. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, or the centerlines of right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distances there from as indicated on the zoning map. If no such distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on such zoning map. 
(3)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(4)  Where the boundary of a district follows a stream, lake or other body of water, such boundary line shall be deemed to be located midway between opposite shores. 
(5)  Where the boundary of a district follows a subdivision boundary line, such boundary line shall be construed to be such district boundary line. 
(6)  Where un-zoned property may exist, or where, due to the scale, lack of detail or illegibility of the zoning map accompanying this chapter, there is any uncertainty, contradiction, or confliction as to the intended location of any district boundaries shown thereon, interpretation concerning the exact location of district boundary lines shall be determined, upon written application, or upon its own motion, by the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-33. - Zoning of vacated areas. 
    Whenever any street, alley or other public way, within the city shall be vacated, such street, alley or other public way or portion thereof, shall automatically be classified in the same zone district as the property to which it attaches. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-34. - Zoning of annexed areas. 
    Whenever any area is annexed to the city, the following condition will apply: territory which may hereinafter be annexed to the city shall remain as zoned previous to annexation until the required amendments to this chapter have been adopted. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-35. - District regulations. 
    Each district, as created in this article, shall be subject to the regulations contained in this ordinance. Uses not expressly permitted are prohibited. Uses for enterprises or purposes that are contrary to federal, state, or local laws or ordinances are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2010-03, 5-17-10) 
Secs. 78-36-78-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 78-40. - Intent. 
    The R-1 single-family residential district is designed to be the most restrictive of the residential districts. The intent is to provide for an environment of predominantly low-density, single-family detached dwellings along with other residentially related facilities which serve the residents in the district. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-41. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a single-family residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Single-family detached site condominiums subject to section 78-215. 
(3)  Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways and recreational facilities, arts, councils, museums. 
(4)  Planned unit development pursuant to article 24. 
(5)  Cemeteries. 
(6)  Family day care homes. 
(7)  Adult foster care family homes. 
(8)  Accessory uses, subject to the provisions of article 21. 
(9)  Home occupations subject to the provisions of section 78-212. 
(10)  Essential public services. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-42. - Special land uses permitted after review and approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted by the planning commission subject to article 23, the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission, and the imposition of special conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to ensure that the land use or activity authorized is compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use, and subject further to a public hearing held in accord with section 78-281: 
(1)  Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto subject to section 78-300. 
(2)  Parochial and private elementary, intermediate or secondary schools offering courses in general education, not operated for profit. 
(3)  Uses and buildings of the city (without storage yards). 
(4)  Group day care home for children subject to section 78-294. 
(5)  Adult foster care small group home subject to section 78-295. 
(6)  Private non-commercial recreational areas, institutional or community recreation centers or non-profit swimming pool clubs, all subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The proposed site, for any of the uses permitted herein, which would attract persons from or are intended to serve areas beyond the immediate neighborhood, shall have at least one property line abutting a major thoroughfare as designated on the major thoroughfare plan. 
b.  Front, side and rear yards shall be at least 80 feet wide, and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs and grass. All such landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition. 
c.  Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate not less than 1/2 of the member families and/or individual members. The planning commission may recommend the modification of the off-street parking requirements to the zoning board of appeals in those instances wherein it is specifically determined that the users will originate from the immediately adjacent areas, and will, therefore, be pedestrian. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or zoning compliance permit, bylaws of the organization and such other information of the organization as determined by the zoning board of appeals shall be provided in order to establish the membership involved for computing the off-street parking requirements. In those cases wherein the proposed use or organization does not have bylaws or formal membership, the off-street parking requirement shall be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. 
d.  Whenever a swimming pool is constructed under this chapter, such pool area shall be provided with a protective fence six feet in height and entry shall be provided by means of a controlled gate. All pools and accessory uses shall be constructed in accordance with the State Building Code. 
e.  Buildings erected on the premises shall not exceed one-story or 14 feet in height. 
f.  All lighting shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from all residential lands which adjoin the site. 
g.  All parking shall be surfaced as required in the general provisions for off-street parking requirements. 
h.  The off-street parking and general site layout and its relationship to all adjacent lot lines shall be reviewed by the planning commission, who may impose any reasonable restrictions or requirements so as to ensure that contiguous residential areas will be adequately protected. 
(7)  Colleges, universities and other such institutions of higher learning, public and private, offering courses in general, technical or religious education and not operated for profit, all subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Any use permitted herein shall be developed only on sites of at least 40 acres in area, and shall not be permitted on any portion of a recorded subdivision plat. 
b.  No building shall be closer than 80 feet to any property line. 
(8)  Bed and breakfast operations shall be located only on major or collector thoroughfares as designated in the city's master plan and shall further be subject to section 78-287. 
(9)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above special land uses. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-43. - Single family dwellings unit standards. 
    No residential structure, garage (attached or detached), mobile home, manufactured home, modular home or prefabricated home shall be built unless the dwelling unit has been reviewed by the building official subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Dwelling units shall conform to all applicable city codes and ordinances and state and federal requirements with respect to the construction of the dwelling. 
(2)  Dwelling unit shall be permanently attached to a perimeter foundation. In instances where the applicant elects to set the dwelling on piers or other acceptable foundations which are not at the perimeter of the dwelling, then a perimeter wall shall also be constructed. Any such perimeter wall shall be constructed of durable materials and shall also meet all local requirements with respect to materials, construction and necessary foundations below the frost line. Any such wall shall also provide an appearance which is compatible with the dwelling and other dwellings in the area. 
(3)  Dwelling unit shall be provided with exterior finish materials similar to the dwelling unit on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(4)  Dwelling unit shall be provided with roof designs and roofing materials similar to the dwelling unit on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(5)  Dwelling unit shall be provided with an exterior building wall configuration which represents an average width to depth or depth to width ratio which does not exceed three to one, or is in reasonable conformity with the configuration of dwelling unit on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(6)  The dwelling shall contain storage capability in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever is less. 
(7)  The building official may request a review by the planning commission of any dwelling unit with respect to subsections (3), (4), and (5) of this section. The building official or planning commission shall not seek to discourage architectural variation, but shall seek to promote the reasonable compatibility of the character of dwelling unit, thereby protecting the economic welfare and property value of surrounding residential uses and the city at large. In reviewing any such proposed dwelling unit, the building official may require the applicant to furnish such plans, elevations and similar documentation as is deemed necessary to permit a complete review and evaluation of the proposal. When comparing the proposed dwelling unit to similar types of dwelling areas, consideration shall be given to comparable types of dwellings within 300 feet. If the area within 300 feet does not contain any such dwellings, then the nearest 25 similar type dwellings shall be considered. 
(8)  Attached garages that face the street are allowed on lots that are 60 feet wide or greater. 
(9)  The total width of a garage attached to a single family dwelling shall: 
a.  Not exceed 50 percent of the width of the entire front faade of the residential dwelling; and 
b.  Is a minimum of 22 feet wide, measured from the exterior of the garage walls. 
(10)  Attached garages shall be located at least four feet behind the front faade of the front exterior wall of the residential dwelling, but in no case shall be closer than 30 feet from the front property line. 
(11)  Front porch exception for new single family dwellings: New single family dwellings are encouraged to positively contribute toward neighborhood enhancement and the walkability of the city. Walkability is the extent to which walking is readily available as a safe, connected, accessible and pleasant mode of transport. One way to accomplish walkability is to locate garages at the rear of a lot. Garages at the rear of a lot (whether attached to the dwelling or as a free-standing detached garage) help to support walkability by: 
  Minimizing the width of the driveway at the front of the dwelling, allowing more space in the front yard for trees and vegetation, and more space along the street for street trees; 
  Minimizing the potential of parked cars left in front of the garage door to block the sidewalk; 
  Allowing space on the dwelling's front faade for windows and other human-scaled architectural elements; and 
  Allowing space on the dwelling's front faade for a porch, where residents can interact with neighbors on the sidewalk and observe activities on the street. 
a.  To encourage locating garages at the rear of a lot, new single family residential projects that locate the garage in the rear, or retain an existing garage at the rear, may also locate a covered front porch in the front yard setback by up to four feet. In addition, the area that the covered front porch occupies in the front yard setback shall not be considered in calculating lot coverage. To be eligible for this exception, the proposed construction must meet all of the following standards: 
1.  The project includes construction of a new single family dwelling on the lot; and 
2.  The project includes construction of a new garage which is located either in the rear of the new dwelling (attached) or in the rear third of the lot (detached), or retains an existing detached garage for continued use as a garage which is located in the rear third of the lot; and 
3.  The front porch that is located in the front yard setback must be: 
i.  Single-story in height, no higher than 15 feet, and as measured per the procedures described in section 78-21 of the zoning ordinance for building height; and 
ii.  No more than eight and one-quarter inches from the elevation of the finished first floor (i.e., at-grade decks and patios are not eligible for the front yard porch exception); and 
iii.  A minimum of six feet in depth (distance between the front exterior wall of the residence and the edge of the porch deck); and 
iv.  Covered with a roof; and 
v.  Unenclosed by walls, windows or other enclosure at the time it is constructed or at any time in the future. This standard does not include open railings and balustrades; and 
4.  The front setback line used to determine where the front porch can be located on the lot shall equal the setback required by sections 78-190 and 78-191. 
5.  On corner lots, porches may be constructed on either or both front facades, or built as one wraparound porch as long as the porch(s) meets the requirements in "1" through "4" above. 
6.  The final Certificate of Occupancy for the residential dwelling shall not be issued until construction of the qualifying garage is complete. 
(12)  Front porch exception for existing single family dwellings. To support walkability throughout the city as described in (11) above, existing single family dwellings which construct a new garage in the rear, or have an existing garage in the rear, may also locate a covered front porch in the front yard setback by up to six feet. In addition, the area that the covered front porch occupies in the front yard setback shall not be considered in calculating lot coverage. To be eligible for this exception, the existing dwelling must be occupied as of January 1, 2016. Also, the proposed construction must meet all of the following standards: 
a.  The project includes construction of a new garage which is located either in the rear of the existing residential dwelling (attached) or in the rear third of the lot (detached), or retains an existing detached garage for continued use as a garage which is located in the rear third of the lot; and 
b.  The front porch that is located in the front yard setback shall be: 
1.  Single-story in height, no higher than fifteen (15) feet, and as measured per the procedures described in section 78-21 of the zoning ordinance for building height; and 
2.  No more than eight and one-quarter inches from the elevation of the finished first floor (i.e. at-grade decks and patios are not eligible for the front yard porch exception); and 
3.  A minimum of six feet in depth (distance between the front exterior wall of the residence and the edge of the porch deck); and 
4.  Covered with a roof; and 
5.  Unenclosed by walls, windows or other enclosure at the time it is constructed or at any time in the future. This standard does not include open railings and balustrades; and 
c.  The front setback line used to determine where the front porch can be located on the lot shall be established using all of the following standards: 
1.  The front setback line shall equal the setback required by sections 78-190 and 78-191; and 
2.  Front yard setback averaging, as described in section 78-191(o) shall not apply; and 
3.  For existing dwellings whose front exterior wall closest to the street is greater than the minimum front yard setback required in Section 78-190, then the distance between the front setback line and the exterior wall shall be subtracted from the width of porch allowed in the front setback. For example, if a residential dwelling is setback 27-feet (or two-feet more than the 25-foot minimum front yard setback), then two feet shall be subtracted from the porch width allowed within the front yard setback. This results in a maximum width porch in the front yard setback of four feet. 
d.  On corner lots, porches may be constructed on either or both front facades, or built as one wraparound porch as long as the porch(s) meets the requirements in "a" through "c" above. 
e.  The qualifying existing garage or new garage must be constructed before constructing the front porch. 
f.  Existing residential dwellings with an existing attached garage that faces the street are not eligible for this front porch exception. 
(13)  Porte-cocheres on single family dwellings. One porte cochere, as defined by this chapter, may be attached to a single family dwelling over a driveway to provide shelter for passengers entering and existing vehicles parked in the driveway. A porte cochere may only be attached to a residential dwelling if the residential dwelling is set back a minimum of 13 feet from the side property line. A porte cochere shall be included in the lot coverage calculation and shall be constructed to meet all of the following standards: 
a.  Only one porte cochere is allowed per lot. 
b.  The porte cochere shall not be greater than 250 square feet in area. 
c.  The porte cochere shall meet the front yard setback requirement. 
d.  The porte cochere may be located within a side yard setback if the following requirements are met: 
i.  The existing lot width is 60 feet wide or less; 
ii.  The porte cochere is placed over a driveway that has a minimum width of nine (9) feet; 
iii.  The minimum distance between the dwelling wall and the opposite porte-cochere columns shall be 9.5 feet; 
iv.  No element of the porte cochere is located closer than two feet from the side property line, including overhangs and similar elements, but excluding gutters; and 
v.  Columns located in the side yard setback shall not be greater than 18 inches square in size. 
e.  The clearance between the ground and the ceiling of the porte cochere shall be a minimum of eight feet. 
f.  The maximum height to the top of the roof shall be no taller than the finished floor elevation of the second floor. The roof structure shall not exceed a 3/12 pitch. 
g.  The porte cochere shall be entirely open and shall be supported only by the residential dwelling on one side and modest columns on the other. It shall be unenclosed by walls, windows or other enclosure at the time it is constructed or at any time in the future. 
h.  The roof of the porte cochere shall not be enclosed with railings, shall not be accessible from an opening in the residential dwelling, and shall not be used as a porch, balcony, or similar use. 
i.  The porte cochere shall be constructed of materials consistent with the main structure. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 06-03,  3, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 2015-04,  2, 7-6-15; Ord. No. 16-02,  2, 7-18-16 ) 
Sec. 78-44. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVII of this chapter for the schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, the maximum density permitted, and provides minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Secs. 78-45-78-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RT-1 TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 78-50. - Intent. 
    The RT-1, two-family residential district is designed to provide sites for two-family dwelling structures, and related uses, which will generally serve as zones of transition between the nonresidential districts and the lower density single-family residential districts. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-51. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a two-family residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Two-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family attached condominiums subject to section 78-215. 
(3)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(4)  Single-family detached site condominiums subject to section 78-215. 
(5)  Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways and recreational facilities. 
(6)  Planned unit development pursuant to article 24. 
(7)  Cemeteries. 
(8)  Family day care homes. 
(9)  Adult foster care family homes. 
(10)  Accessory uses, subject to the provisions of article 21. 
(11)  Home occupations subject to the provisions of section 78-212. 
(12)  Essential public services. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-52. - Special land uses permitted after review and approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted by the planning commission subject to section 23, the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission, and the imposition of special conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to ensure that the land use or activity authorized is compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use, and subject further to a public hearing held in accord with section 78-281: 
(1)  Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto subject to section 78-300. 
(2)  Parochial and private elementary, intermediate or secondary schools offering courses in general education, not operated for profit section. 
(3)  Uses and buildings of the city (without storage yards). 
(4)  Group day care home for children subject to section 78-294. 
(5)  Adult foster care small group home subject to section 78-295. 
(6)  Private non-commercial recreational areas, institutional or community recreation centers or non-profit swimming pool clubs, all subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The proposed site, for any of the uses permitted herein, which would attract persons from or are intended to serve areas beyond the immediate neighborhood, shall have at least one property line abutting a major thoroughfare as designated on the major thoroughfare plan. 
b.  Front, side and rear yards shall be at least 80 feet wide, and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs and grass. All such landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition. 
c.  Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate not less than 1/2 of the member families and/or individual members. The planning commission may recommend the modification of the off-street parking requirements to the zoning board of appeals in those instances wherein it is specifically determined that the users will originate from the immediately adjacent areas, and will, therefore, be pedestrian. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or zoning compliance permit, bylaws of the organization and such other information of the organization as determined by the zoning board of appeals shall be provided in order to establish the membership involved for computing the off-street parking requirements. In those cases wherein the proposed use or organization does not have bylaws or formal membership, the off-street parking requirement shall be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. 
d.  Whenever a swimming pool is constructed under this chapter, such pool area shall be provided with a protective fence six feet in height and entry shall be provided by means of a controlled gate and in accordance with the state building codes. 
e.  Buildings erected on the premises shall not exceed one-story or 14 feet in height. 
f.  All parking shall be surfaced as required in the general provisions for off-street parking requirements. 
g.  The off-street parking and general site layout and its relationship to all adjacent lot lines shall be reviewed by the planning commission, who may impose any reasonable restrictions or requirements so as to ensure that contiguous residential areas will be adequately protected. 
(7)  Colleges, universities and other such institutions of higher learning, public and private, offering courses in general, technical or religious education and not operated for profit, all subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Any use permitted herein shall be developed only on sites of at least 40 acres in area, and shall not be permitted on any portion of a recorded subdivision plat. 
b.  No building shall be closer than 80 feet to any property line. 
(8)  Bed and breakfast operations shall be located only on major or collector thoroughfares as designated in the city's master plan and shall further be subject to section 78-287. 
(9)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above special land uses. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2012-04,  5, 11-5-12) 
Sec. 78-53. - Single family dwelling unit standards. 
    No residential structure, garage (attached or detached), mobile home, manufactured home, modular home or prefabricated home shall be built unless the dwelling unit has been reviewed by the building official subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Dwelling unit shall conform to all applicable city codes and ordinances and state and federal requirements with respect to the construction of the dwelling. 
(2)  Dwelling unit shall be permanently attached to a perimeter foundation. In instances where the applicant elects to set the dwelling on piers or other acceptable foundations which are not at the perimeter of the dwelling, then a perimeter wall shall also be constructed. Any such perimeter wall shall be constructed of durable materials and shall also meet all local requirements with respect to materials, construction and necessary foundations below the frost line. Any such wall shall also provide an appearance which is compatible with the dwelling and other dwellings in the area. 
(3)  Dwelling unit shall be provided with exterior finish materials similar to the dwelling unit on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(4)  Dwelling unit shall be provided with roof designs and roofing materials similar to the dwelling unit on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(5)  Dwelling unit shall be provided with an exterior building wall configuration which represents an average width to depth or depth to width ratio which does not exceed three to one, or is in reasonable conformity with the configuration of dwelling unit on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(6)  The dwelling shall contain storage capability in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever is less. 
(7)  The building official may request a review by the planning commission of any dwelling unit with respect to subsections (3), (4), and (5) of this section. The building official or planning commission shall not seek to discourage architectural variation, but shall seek to promote the reasonable compatibility of the character of dwelling units, thereby protecting the economic welfare and property value of surrounding residential uses and the city at large. In reviewing any such proposed dwelling unit, the building official may require the applicant to furnish such plans, elevations and similar documentation as is deemed necessary to permit a complete review and evaluation of the proposal. When comparing the proposed dwelling unit to similar types of dwelling areas, consideration shall be given to comparable types of dwellings within 300 feet. If the area within 300 feet does not contain any such dwellings, then the nearest 25 similar type dwellings shall be considered. 
(8)  Attached garages that face the street are allowed on lots that are 60 feet wide or greater. 
(9)  The total width of a garage attached to a single family dwelling shall: 
a.  Not exceed 50 percent of the width of the entire front faade of the residential dwelling; and 
b.  Is a minimum of 22 feet wide, measured from the exterior of the garage walls. 
(10)  Attached garages shall be located at least four feet behind the front faade of the front exterior wall of the residential dwelling, but in no case shall be closer than thirty (30) feet from the front property line. 
(11)  Front porch exception for new single family dwellings. New single family dwellings are encouraged to positively contribute toward neighborhood enhancement and the walkability of the city. Walkability is the extent to which walking is readily available as a safe, connected, accessible and pleasant mode of transport. One way to accomplish walkability is to locate garages at the rear of a lot. Garages at the rear of a lot (whether attached to the dwelling or as a free-standing detached garage) help to support walkability by: 
  Minimizing the width of the driveway at the front of the dwelling, allowing more space in the front yard for trees and vegetation, and more space along the street for street trees; 
  Minimizing the potential of parked cars left in front of the garage door to block the sidewalk; 
  Allowing space on the dwelling's front faade for windows and other human-scaled architectural elements; and 
  Allowing space on the dwelling's front faade for a porch, where residents can interact with neighbors on the sidewalk and observe activities on the street. 
a.  To encourage locating garages at the rear of a lot, new single family residential projects that locate the garage in the rear, or retain an existing garage at the rear, may also locate a covered front porch in the front yard setback by up to four feet. In addition, the area that the covered front porch occupies in the front yard setback shall not be considered in calculating lot coverage. To be eligible for this exception, the proposed construction must meet all of the following standards: 
1.  The project includes construction of a new single family residence on the lot; and 
2.  The project includes construction of a new garage which is located either in the rear of the new dwelling (attached) or in the rear third of the lot (detached), or retains an existing detached garage for continued use as a garage which is located in the rear third of the lot; and 
3.  The front porch that is located in the front yard setback must be: 
i.  Single-story in height, no higher than 15 feet, and as measured per the procedures described in section 78-21 of the zoning ordinance for building height; and 
ii.  No more than eight and one-quarter inches from the elevation of the finished first floor (i.e., at-grade decks and patios are not eligible for the front yard porch exception); and 
iii.  A minimum of six feet in depth (distance between the front exterior wall of the residence and the edge of the porch deck); and 
iv.  Covered with a roof; and 
v.  Unenclosed by walls, windows or other enclosure at the time it is constructed or at any time in the future. This standard does not include open railings and balustrades; and 
4.  The front setback line used to determine where the front porch can be located on the lot shall equal the setback required by section 78-190 and 78-191. 
5.  On corner lots, porches may be constructed on either or both front facades, or built as one wraparound porch as long as the porch(s) meets the requirements in "1" through "4" above. 
6.  The final Certificate of Occupancy for the residential dwelling shall not be issued until construction of the qualifying garage is complete. 
(12)  Front porch exception for existing single family dwellings. To support walkability throughout the city as described in (11) above, existing single family dwellings which construct a new garage in the rear, or have an existing garage in the rear, may also locate a covered front porch in the front yard setback by up to six feet. In addition, the area that the covered front porch occupies in the front yard setback shall not be considered in calculating lot coverage. To be eligible for this exception, the existing dwelling must be occupied as of January 1, 2016. Also, the proposed construction must meet all of the following standards: 
a.  The project includes construction of a new garage which is located either in the rear of the existing residential dwelling (attached) or in the rear third of the lot (detached), or retains an existing detached garage for continued use as a garage which is located in the rear third of the lot; and 
b.  The front porch that is located in the front yard setback shall be: 
1.  Single-story in height, no higher than 15 feet, and as measured per the procedures described in section 78-21 of the zoning ordinance for building height; and 
2.  No less than four inches or more than eight and one-quarter inches from the elevation of the front door (i.e. at-grade decks and patios are not eligible for the front yard porch exception); and 
3.  A minimum of six feet in depth (distance between the front exterior wall of the residence and the edge of the porch deck); and 
4.  Covered with a roof; and 
5.  Unenclosed by walls, windows or other enclosure at the time it is constructed or at any time in the future. This standard does not include open railings and balustrades; and 
c.  The front setback line used to determine where the front porch can be located on the lot shall be established using all of the following standards: 
1.  The front setback line shall equal the setback required by sections 78-190 and 78-191; and 
2.  Front yard setback averaging, as described in section 78-191(o) shall not apply; and 
3.  For existing dwellings whose front exterior wall closest to the street is greater than the minimum front yard setback required in section 78-190, then the distance between the front setback line and the exterior wall shall be subtracted from the width of porch allowed in the front setback. For example, if a residential dwelling is setback 27-feet (or two-feet more than the 25-foot minimum front yard setback), then two feet shall be subtracted from the porch width allowed within the front yard setback. This results in a maximum width porch in the front yard setback of four feet. 
d.  On corner lots, porches may be constructed on either or both front facades, or built as one wraparound porch as long as the porch(s) meets the requirements in "a" through "c" above. 
e.  The qualifying existing garage or new garage must be constructed before constructing the front porch. 
f.  Existing residential dwellings with an existing attached garage that faces the street are not eligible for this front porch exception. 
(13)  Porte-cocheres on single family dwellings. One porte cochere, as defined by this chapter, may be attached to a single family dwelling over a driveway to provide shelter for passengers entering and existing vehicles parked in the driveway. A porte cochere may only be attached to a residential dwelling if the residential dwelling is set back a minimum of 13 feet from the side property line. A porte cochere shall be included in the lot coverage calculation and shall be constructed to meet all of the following standards: 
a.  Only one porte cochere is allowed per lot. 
b.  The porte cochere shall not be greater than 250 square feet in area. 
c.  The porte cochere shall meet the front yard setback requirement. 
d.  The porte cochere may be located within a side yard setback if the following requirements are met: 
i.  The existing lot width is 60 feet wide or less; and 
ii.  The porte cochere is placed over a driveway that has a minimum width of nine (9) feet; and 
iii.  The minimum distance between the dwelling wall and the opposite porte-cochere columns shall be 9.5 feet; and 
iv.  No element of the porte cochere is located closer than two feet from the side property line, including overhangs and similar elements, but excluding gutters; and 
v.  Columns located in the side yard setback shall not be greater than 18 inches square in size. 
e.  The clearance between the ground and the ceiling of the porte cochere shall be a minimum of eight feet. 
f.  The maximum height to the top of the roof shall be no taller than the finished floor elevation of the second floor. The roof structure shall not exceed a 3/12 pitch. 
g.  The porte cochere shall be entirely open and shall be supported only by the residential dwelling on one side and modest columns on the other. It shall be unenclosed by walls, windows or other enclosure at the time it is constructed or at any time in the future. 
h.  The roof of the porte cochere shall not be enclosed with railings, shall not be accessible from an opening in the residential dwelling, and shall not be used as a porch, balcony, or similar use. 
i.  The porte cochere shall be constructed of materials consistent with the main structure. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2015-04,  3, 7-6-15 ; Ord. No. 16-02,  2, 7-18-16 ) 
Sec. 78-54. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVII of this chapter for the schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, and maximum density permitted. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Secs. 78-55-78-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RM-1, RM-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 78-60. - Intent. 
    The RM-1 and RM-2 multiple-family residential districts are designed to provide sites for multiple-family dwelling structures, and related uses, which will generally serve as zones of transition between the nonresidential districts and the lower density single-family residential districts. The multiple-family districts are further provided to serve the limited needs for the apartment type of unit in an otherwise low density, single-family community. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-61. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a multiple-family district no building or land, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be erected or used except for one or more of the following specified purposes and shall be permitted subject to the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission. Such review of the site plan is required to find proper relationships between development features as they relate to traffic safety and appropriate design of service roads, driveways, parking areas; accessory buildings, and open space. 
(1)  Multiple-family dwellings and attached condominium units. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings and two-family attached condominium units. 
(3)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(4)  Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways and recreational facilities. 
(5)  Planned unit development pursuant to article 24. 
(6)  Cemeteries. 
(7)  Family day care homes. 
(8)  Group day care home subject to section 78-297. 
(9)  Adult foster care family homes. 
(10)  Adult foster care small group home subject to section 78-298. 
(11)  Accessory uses, subject to provisions of article 21. 
(12)  Home occupations subject to provisions of section 78-212. 
(13)  Essential pubic services. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-62. - Special land uses permitted after review and approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted by the planning commission subject to article 23, the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission, and the imposition of special conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to ensure that the land use or activity authorized is compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use, and subject further to a public hearing held in accord with section 78-281: 
(1)  General hospitals, except those for criminals and those solely for the treatment of persons who are mentally ill or have contagious disease, not to exceed four stories when the following conditions are met: 
a.  All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of at least five acres in area, and shall not be permitted on a lot or lots of record. 
b.  The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a major thoroughfare. 
c.  The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from bounding lot lines or streets shall be at least 100 feet for front, rear and side yards for all two-story structures. For every story above two, the minimum yard distance shall be increased by at least 20 feet. 
d.  Ambulance ..... and delivery areas shall be provided with an obscuring screen in accordance with the provisions of section 78-206. Ingress and egress to the site shall be directly from a major thoroughfare. 
e.  All ingress and egress to the off-street parking area, for guests, employees, staff, as well as any other uses of the facilities, shall be directly from a major thoroughfare. 
(2)  Convalescent or nursing homes, not to exceed a height of two-stories, when the following conditions are met: 
a.  The site shall be so developed as to create a land to building ratio on the lot or parcel whereby for each one bed in the convalescent home there shall be provided not less than 800 square feet of open space. The 800 square feet of land area per bed shall provide for landscape setting, off-street parking, service drives, loading space, yard requirements, employee facilities, and any space required for accessory uses. The 800 square-foot requirement is over and above the building coverage area. 
b.  No building shall be closer than 40 feet from any property line. 
(3)  Adult dependent housing or assisted living facilities when the following conditions are met: 
a.  Adult dependent housing provided for in a multiple-family housing form with central dining facilities provided as a basic service to each unit. A community center for the overall development shall be provided to support recreational and social activities. 
b.  The following minimum requirements shall be provided for the elderly unit types permitted in subsection (3)a of this section: 
1. Density Same as RM-1 2. Minimum usable floor area, one- 
and two-bedroom 200 sq. ft. per person occupying each unit 3. Building and height setbacks and 
percent coverage of site Same as RM-1 4. Off-street parking: Residents 0.5 space/unit Guests 0.25 space/unit 5. Maximum coverage: Building 35% Parking 15% Open space (min.) 15%  
6.  Proposed housing developments will also be evaluated in terms of their convenience and/or accessibility by residents to various commercial, office and service facilities. Consideration shall be given to the type of facilities proposed, resident needs, effective proximity to service facilities and transportation services to these facilities. 
7.  All spacing shall meet the requirements of section 78-191, footnote (d). 
(4)  Churches and other facilities subject to section 78-300. 
(5)  Parochial and private elementary, intermediate, or secondary schools offering courses in general education, not operated for profit. 
(6)  Uses and buildings of the city or government. 
(7)  Bed and breakfast operations subject to section 78-287. 
(8)  Adult foster care large group home. 
(9)  Adult foster care congregate facility. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2012-04,  6, 11-5-12) 
Sec. 78-63. - Required conditions. 
(a)  In the case of multiple dwelling developments, all site plans shall be submitted to the planning commission for its review and approval prior to issuance of a building permit. Approval shall be contingent upon a finding that: 
(1)  The site plan shows that a proper relationship exists between local streets and any proposed service roads, driveways, and parking areas to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety; and 
(2)  All the development features including the principal building or buildings and any accessory buildings, or uses, open spaces, and any service roads, driveways and parking areas are so located and related to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent property, such as but not limited to, channeling excessive traffic onto local residential streets, lack of adequate screening or buffering of parking or service areas, or building groupings and circulation routes located as to interfere with police or fire equipment access. 
(b)  All dwelling units shall be reviewed by the building official and shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Dwelling units shall conform to all applicable city codes and ordinances and state or federal requirements with respect to the construction of the dwelling. 
(2)  Dwelling units shall be permanently attached to a perimeter foundation. In instances where the applicant elects to set the dwelling on piers or other acceptable foundations which are not at the perimeter of the dwelling, then a perimeter wall shall also be constructed. Any such perimeter wall shall be constructed of durable materials and shall also meet all local requirements with respect to materials, construction and necessary foundations below the frost line. Any such wall shall also provide an appearance which is compatible with the dwelling and other homes in the area. 
(3)  Dwelling units shall be provided with exterior finish materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(4)  Dwelling units shall be provided with roof designs and roofing materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(5)  Dwelling units shall be provided with an exterior building wall configuration which represents an average width to depth or depth to width ratio which does not exceed three to one, or is in reasonable conformity with the configuration of dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(6)  The dwelling shall contain storage capability in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever shall be less. 
(7)  Any such dwelling unit shall be anchored by an anchoring system approved by the city. 
(8)  The building official may request a review by the planning commission of any dwelling unit with respect to subsections (1), (2), and (3) of this subsection. The building official or planning commission shall not seek to discourage architectural variation, but shall seek to promote the reasonable compatibility of the character of dwelling units, thereby protecting the economic welfare and property value of surrounding residential uses and the city at large. In reviewing any such proposed dwelling unit, the building official may require the applicant to furnish such plans, elevations and similar documentation as is deemed necessary to permit a complete review and evaluation of the proposal. When comparing the proposed dwelling unit to similar types of dwelling areas, consideration shall be given to comparable types of homes within 300 feet. If the area within 300 feet does not contain any such homes, then the nearest 25 similar type dwellings shall be considered. 
Sec. 78-64. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVII of this chapter for the schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot permitted by land use, and the maximum density permitted. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Secs. 78-65-78-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - O-1 OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICTS 

Sec. 78-70. - Intent. 
    The O-1, office service district is designed to accommodate uses such as offices, banks and personal services which can serve as transitional areas between residential and commercial districts and to provide a transition between major thoroughfares and residential districts. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-71. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an O-1, office service district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
Permitted uses: 
(1)  Office buildings for any of the following occupations: governmental, executive, administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic, drafting, sales, post offices and public utility offices. 
(2)  Medical office and dental office, including clinics. 
(3)  Facilities for human care such as convalescent homes. 
(4)  Churches. 
(5)  Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and other financial institutions including drive-through facilities, drive-through branches, and/or 24-hour automatic tellers. 
(6)  Private clubs and lodge halls. 
(7)  Off-street parking lots. 
(8)  Business schools or private schools operated for profit. 
(9)  Clinics and veterinary facilities provided there are no outdoor animal runs or other outdoor facilities for animals. 
(10)  Meeting halls and related services. 
(11)  Other uses similar to the above uses. 
(12)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses. 
(13)  Residential uses shall be permitted provided such living units are located on the second floor or above. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2013-06,  4, 10-21-13) 
Sec. 78-72. - Special land uses permitted after review and approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted by the planning commission subject to article XXIII, the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission, and the imposition of special conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to ensure that the land use or activity authorized is compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use, and subject further to a public hearing held in accord with section 78-281: 
(1)  An accessory use customarily related to a principal use authorized by this section, such as but not limited to: a pharmacy, medical supply stores, or optical service, may be permitted. 
(2)  Mortuary establishments and funeral homes, subject to section 78-293. 
(3)  Public utility and service buildings and uses including telephone exchange buildings (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate the locating of such building within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity. 
(4)  Child care centers and nursery schools, subject to section 78-297. 
(5)  Adult foster care large group homes. 
(6)  Adult foster care congregate facility. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-73. - Required conditions of the O-1, office service district. 
(a)  No interior display shall be visible from the exterior of the building, and the total area devoted to display, including both the objects displayed and the floor space set aside for persons observing the displayed objects, shall not exceed 25 percent of the usable floor area of either the first or second story, or in the basement. 
(b)  The outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be prohibited irrespective of whether or not they are for sale. 
(c)  Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or materials, beyond that normally incident to the above permitted uses, shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-74. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVII of this chapter for the schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Secs. 78-75-78-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - O-2 OFFICE-RESEARCH DISTRICTS 

Sec. 78-80. - Intent. 
    The O-2, office-research district is designed to accommodate uses such as offices and research facilities. The uses would be related to office, medical, corporate management, testing, research, applied technology and prototype planning. The O-2, office-research district is also intended for spacious sites with adequate setbacks to allow higher building heights and on-site parking. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-81. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an O-2, office-research district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
Permitted uses: 
(1)  Office buildings for any of the following occupations: computer science, governmental, executive, administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic, drafting, sales, data processing, post offices and public utility offices. 
(2)  Research, computer, and design centers, where such centers are intended for the development of pilot or experimental products. 
(3)  Medical office and dental office, including clinics. 
(4)  Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations and other financial institutions, including drive-through facilities, drive-through branches, and/or 24 automatic tellers. 
(5)  Off-street parking lots. 
(6)  Training centers, business schools or private schools operated for profit. 
(7)  Clinics and veterinary facilities provided there are no outdoor animal runs or other outdoor facilities for animals. 
(8)  Meeting halls and related services. 
(9)  Other uses similar to the above uses. 
(10)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-82. - Special land uses permitted after review and approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted by the planning commission subject to article 23, the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission, and the imposition of special conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to ensure that the land use or activity authorized is compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use, and subject further to a public hearing held in accord with section 78-281: 
(1)  Public utility and service buildings and uses including telephone exchange buildings (without storage yards), when operating requirements necessitate the locating of such building within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity. 
(2)  Light assembly operations limited to those involving pre-manufactured finished objects, instruments and components provided there is no outdoor storage, exterior noise, glare or dust. 
(3)  Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or materials, beyond that normally incidental to the above permitted uses, shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-83. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVII of this chapter for the schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-84-78-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - B-1 LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 78-90. - Intent. 
    The B-1, local business district is designed primarily for the convenience shopping of persons residing in adjacent residential areas, to permit only such uses as are necessary to satisfy those limited basic shopping and/or service needs which by their very nature are not related to the shopping pattern of the central business district or general business district and, where appropriate, allow residential uses as a mixed use. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2012-04,  7, 11-5-12) 
Sec. 78-91. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a B-1, local business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
Permitted uses: 
(1)  Office buildings for any of the following occupations: governmental, executive, administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic, drafting, sales, post offices and public utility offices. 
(2)  Medical office and dental office, including clinics. 
(3)  Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and other financial institutions including drive-through facilities, drive-through branches, and/or 24-hour automatic tellers. 
(4)  Private clubs and lodge halls. 
(5)  Off-street parking lots. 
(6)  Meeting halls and related services. 
(7)  Any generally recognized retail business which supplies commodities on the premises, for persons residing in adjacent residential areas such as: convenience grocery stores, groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods and notions or hardware. 
(8)  Any personal service establishment which performs services on the premises for persons residing in adjacent residential areas, such as: shoe repair, dry cleaning shops, tailor shops, beauty parlors, barbershops. Any service establishment of an office-showroom or workshop nature of an electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, shoemaker, baker, commercial printing/copying, upholsterer, or an establishment doing radio, television or home appliance repair, photographic reproduction, and similar establishments that require a retail adjunct and of no more objectionable character than the aforementioned subject to the following provision: No more than five (5) persons shall be employed at any time in the fabrication, repair and other processing of goods. 
(9)  Restaurants not serving alcoholic beverages, sit-down restaurants, carry-out restaurants or other places serving food except those having the character of a drive-in, or having a drive-through component. 
(10)  Video rental establishments. 
(11)  Veterinary clinic. 
(12)  Neighborhood retail plaza containing multi-tenant spaces totaling less than 50,000 square feet. 
(13)  Professional offices of physicians, lawyers, dentists, chiropractors, architects, engineers, and similar or allied professions. 
(14)  Other uses similar to the above and subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. 
b.  All business, servicing, or processing, except off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(15)  Accessory structures, uses and signs customarily incident to the above permitted uses and subject to all requirements of this chapter. 
(16)  Residential uses shall be permitted provided such living units are located on the second floor or above. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2013-04,  2, 10-7-13; Ord. No. 2013-06,  2, 10-21-13) 
Sec. 78-92. - Special uses permitted after review and approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted by the planning commission subject to article XXIII, the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission, and the imposition of special conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to ensure that the land use or activity authorized is compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use, and subject further to a public hearing held in accord with section 78-281: 
(1)  Publicly-owned buildings, public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations (excluding outdoor storage yards). 
(2)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above uses. 
(3)  One-family detached dwellings, two-family dwellings, multi-family dwellings. 
(4)  Bars and lounges or restaurants serving alcohol subject to the following: 
a.  The bar, lounge, or restaurant serving alcohol shall be restricted to a specific size and square footage. Any increase in square footage or expansion of restaurant operations which serve alcoholic beverages shall be subject to a new or amended special use permit. 
b.  The community development director shall request a report from the city's director of public safety regarding the possible impacts of the establishment serving alcoholic beverages. The planning commission shall consider this report in their evaluation of the request for special land use approval. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2012-04,  7, 11-5-12; Ord. No. 2013-04,  2, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 78-93. - Required conditions of the B-1, local business district. 
    Since this local business district is primarily for the convenience shopping of persons residing in adjacent residential areas as well as residential mixed uses, permitted uses shall not include business in the character of a drive-in or open-front store. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2012-04,  , 11-5-12) 
Sec. 78-94. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVII of this chapter for the schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, and the minimum size of lot by permitted land use. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Secs. 78-95-78-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - B-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 78-100. - Intent. 
    The B-2, central business district is designed to provide for office buildings and the great variety of large retail stores and related activities which occupy the prime retail frontage by serving the comparison, convenience and service needs of the entire municipal area as well as a substantial area of the adjacent and surrounding residential developments beyond the municipal limits. The district regulations are designed to promote convenient pedestrian shopping and the stability of retail development by encouraging a continuous retail frontage and by prohibiting automotive related services and non-retail uses which tend to break up such continuity. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-101. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a B-2, central business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
Permitted uses: 
(1)  Any generally recognized retail business which supplies commodities on the premises within a completely enclosed building, such as, but not limited to: foods, drugs, liquor, furniture, clothing, dry goods, notions, or hardware. 
(2)  Any personal service establishment which performs services on the premises within a completely enclosed building, such as, but not limited to: repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe repair, and etc.), tailor shops, beauty parlors, barbershops, interior decorators, photographers, and dry cleaners. 
(3)  Restaurants not serving alcoholic beverages including carry-out restaurants where the patrons are served while seated within a building occupied by such establishment, and wherein such establishment does not extend as an integral part of, or accessory thereto, any service of a drive-in, drive-through, or open-front store. 
(4)  Hotels and motels. 
(5)  Theaters or assembly halls when completely enclosed. 
(6)  Offices and office buildings of an executive, administrative or professional nature. 
(7)  Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and other financial institutions including drive-through facilities, drive-through branches, and/or 24-hour automatic tellers. 
(8)  Child care centers and nursery schools. 
(9)  Municipal buildings and governmental offices. 
(10)  Offices and showrooms of plumbers, electricians, decorator or similar trades, in connection with which not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the building or part of the building occupied by the establishment is used for making, assembling, remodeling, repairing, altering, finishing, or refinishing its products or merchandise; and provide that the ground floor premises facing upon, and visible from any abutting street shall be used only for entrances, offices, or display. All storage of material on any land shall be within the confines of the building or part thereof occupied by the establishment. 
(11)  Business schools or private schools operated for profit. Examples of private schools permitted herein include, but are not limited to, dance schools, music and voice schools, and art studios. 
(12)  Newspaper offices and printing shops. 
(13)  Funeral homes. 
(14)  Storage facilities, when incidental to and physically connected with any principal use permitted, provided that such facility is within the confines of the building or part thereof occupied by such establishment. 
(15)  Parking facilities except private surface parking lots. 
(16)  Other uses which are similar to the above and subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  All businesses establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail from the premises where produced. 
b.  All business, servicing, or processing except for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
c.  Outdoor storage of commodities shall be expressly prohibited. 
(17)  Residential uses shall be permitted provided such living units are located 8on the second floor or above. 
(18)  Accessory structures customarily incident to the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2007-01,  2, 5-21-07; Ord. No. 2011-04,  1, 5-2-11; Ord. No. 2013-04,  3, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 78-102. - Special land uses permitted after review and approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted by the planning commission subject to article XXIII, the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission, and the imposition of special conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to ensure that the land use or activity authorized is compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use, and subject further to a public hearing held in accord with section 78-281: 
(1)  Public utility and service buildings and uses including telephone exchange buildings (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate the locating of such building within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity. 
(2)  Bars and lounges or restaurants serving alcohol subject to the following: 
a.  No more than ten seats shall be allowed at the bar. 
b.  Alcohol shall be served only to seated patrons or persons standing in the designated standing area as outlined in subsection 78-101(4)c [subsection 78-102(2)c]. 
c.  The standing area adjacent to the bar shall not exceed 150 square feet. 
d.  No dance floor or dancing area, allowed. 
e.  The bar, lounge, or restaurant serving alcohol shall be restricted to a specific size and square footage. Any increase in square footage or expansion of restaurant operations which serve alcoholic beverages shall be subject to a new or amended special use permit. 
f.  The community development director shall request a report from the city's director of public safety regarding the possible impacts of the establishment serving alcoholic beverages. The planning commission shall consider this report in their evaluation of the request for special land use approval. 
(3)  Sale and service of food and drink out of doors provided such use is incidental to a similar principal use indoors and conducted adjacent to the principal use and subject further to street occupancy permits and all rules and regulations to control such street occupancy, provided the use does not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2013-04,  3, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 78-103. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVII of this chapter for the schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, and the minimum size of lot permitted. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-104. - Private surface parking. 
(a)  Private surface parking shall be prohibited within the B-2 zoning district except in accordance with this section. Enclosed sub-surface parking or enclosed private parking structures at least one story above ground level shall however be permitted. 
(b)  Private parking or loading areas may be allowed along the rear of a building and adjoining a public alley. The parking or loading area shall be limited to the width of the building and a maximum depth of 19 feet. The private parking area shall not exceed six spaces and/or oneloading zone. Screening of the parking or loading zone area shall be provided along adjacent streets if viewed from the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2007-01, , 5-21-07; Ord. No. 2007-3,  2, 7-16-07) 
Sec. 78-105. - Premiums, pedestrian amenities, design standards. 
(a)  Premiums; intent. A premium is a legal authorization to reduce the normal parking requirements established by Article XXII for development in the B-2 zoning district. 
(1)  Intent. The purpose of incorporating premiums into the zoning ordinance is listed as follows: 
a.  To provide an incentive for residential development in and in close proximity to the city's central business core to encourage housing opportunities in situations where such opportunities might not otherwise be provided. 
b.  To encourage development which reinforces pedestrian activity along streets within the central business core and to provide appropriate setbacks at corners to enhance public spaces and provide adequate sight visibility. 
c.  To provide an incentive for the development of public spaces and pedestrian amenities and to encourage excellence in urban design through the provision of open space and landscaped approaches to buildings at appropriate corners. 
(b)  Parking premium options. In the B-2 zoning district, the normal parking requirements as required in section 78-270(10) and 78-271, may be reduced by up to 15 percent subject to the following regulations: 
General regulations. 
(1)  Where seating is provided in an open space area available to the public and used to acquire a premium, it shall be available for use by the general public at all times the space is open. Tables and/or umbrellas may be placed in usable open space. 
(2)  A public open space used to acquire a premium shall be designed to avoid creation of isolated areas, to maintain lines of sight into the space from streets and major pedestrian walkways, and to provide a secure environment. Lighting shall be provided for public open space premiums which are open at night. 
(3)  All amenities or land uses used to acquire a premium shall remain for the life of the structure. The feature(s) shall only be diminished or discontinued if the additional gross floor area is permanently removed or if it is replaced with another approved premium feature of at least equivalent floor area value. The property owner or applicant may also consider payments in lieu of parking for a reduction in previously approved amenities. 
(c)  Pedestrian amenities for a parking premium may include: 
(1)  Arcade. A non-public owned, continuous covered open space along the facade of a building, which either: 
a.  Adjoins the front line and is not less than ten feet or more than 15 feet deep, and extends the full length of, or at least 50 feet along, the front lot line, whichever is less; or 
b.  Is at a corner lot bounded on two sides by two intersecting streets, has an area of not less than 500 square feet, and has a minimum dimension of ten feet perpendicular to the sidewalk. 
(2)  Inner arcade. A non-public owned, continuous covered space which runs through a building and connects public streets, arcades, open space, or sidewalks and is readily visible and identifiable from the public street, arcade, or sidewalk. An inner arcade shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Connect and be accessible from at least two public streets or alleys, or a public street or alley and a public or non-public arcade fronting on another public street, or a public street or alley and a public or non-public arcade and another public or non-public arcade fronting on another public street; or a public or private parking garage and a public street; and 
b.  Measure not less than 12 feet wide; and 
c.  Have an open and unobstructed headroom of at least 12 feet in height; and 
d.  Remain open for use by the general public during all business hours common in the area. 
e.  Art works may occupy up to five percent of the total arcade area if a minimum clearance of eight feet for circulation is provided. 
(3)  Gallery: A frontage wherein the facade of the building is aligned with an attached cantilevered enclosure or light weight colonnade and provides covered protection for pedestrians. 
(4)  Plaza. A non-publicly owned continuous space, open to the sky for its entire width and length which fronts on a public street or public sidewalk, which is directly and conveniently accessible to the public at all times for passive recreational activities. Up to two-thirds of the surface area of the plaza may be occupied by features such as seating, permanent planting areas, water features, or works of art. When landscaping is provided for a plaza amenity premium, a variety of living trees, shrubs, ground covers, and seasonal plantings shall be used and shall be located in permanently installed beds or planters serviced by automatic irrigation systems or in large containers, provided they cannot be readily removed. A plaza shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Be located at a corner lot bounded on two sides by two intersecting public streets, be located at the corner closest to the street intersection, have a minimum dimension of ten feet. 
b.  Be the same grade as the adjacent public sidewalk or not more than 24 inches above or below the grade of the adjoining public sidewalk for no more than 50 percent of either length of the sides adjoining and measured at the property line and shall be barrier free accessible. 
(5)  Graphic examples illustrating an arcade, inner arcade, gallery, plaza, and shopfront awning are shown on the diagram in section 78-105 below. 
DIAGRAM OF PEDESTRIAN AMENITIES 
Arcade: A non-public owned, continuous covered open space along the facade of the building. 
Arcade 
Inner Arcade: A non-public owned, continuous covered space which runs through a building and connects public streets, arcades, open space, or sidewalks. 
Inner Arcade 
Gallery: A frontage wherein the facade of the building is aligned to the frontage line with an attached cantilevered shed or a lightweight colonnade. 
Gallery 
Plaza: A non-public owned, pedestrian space which adjoins and connects to public streets or sidewalks and contains pedestrian amenities such as benches, planters, kiosk, etc. 
Plaza 
(6)  Procedures for requests of parking premiums. The planning commission shall review requests of parking premiums for development projects in conjunction with site plan review and shall approve or deny such requests. For PUD projects, the planning commission shall make a recommendation regarding parking premiums to the city commission. 
(e)  PUD/B-2 pedestrian amenities. In addition to parking premiums, planned unit development (PUD) projects proposed within the B-2 zoning district may be considered for modified standards pertaining to height, setback, density parking or other zoning requirements, if the PUD incorporates design features such as arcades, inner arcades, plazas or other pedestrian amenities as described in this section. 
(f)  B-2 design standards. 
(1)  The planning commission and/or city commission may require that PUD projects and other projects considered for site plan review (Article XX) within the B-2 zoning district adhere to the design standards of this section. 
(2)  Building siting. 
a.  A minimum of 90 percent of the length of the front lot line shall be occupied by building. 
b.  All buildings shall adhere to the schedule of regulations for setbacks and height (section 78-190). A building shall not be setback greater than 12 feet from the right-of-way unless the setback provides space for outdoor cafes or other public open space. 
Building Siting: the building location shall be established at the right-of-way, lot line, or no more than 12' from the right-of-way or lot line. 
Building Siting 
(3)  Sidewalk/architecture interface. 
a.  First floor architecture shall be compatible with sidewalk areas and shall provide an attractive interface between buildings and pedestrians. This shall be accomplished with generous window areas, recesses, and architectural detail. 
b.  Where possible, there shall be a minimal grade differential between the elevation of the sidewalk and the first floor elevation of the adjoining building. 
(4)  Building facade regulations. 
a.  Building entries shall be readily identifiable and accessible, with at least one main entrance and shall open directly onto the public sidewalk. 
b.  Architecture will be evaluated based upon its compatibility and relationship to the adjacent buildings and uses, and vice versa. 
c.  Architectural interest shall be provided through the use of repetitious patterns of color, texture, and material, modules, at least one of which shall repeat horizontally. Each module should repeat horizontally. Each module should repeat at intervals of no more than fifty feet. 
d.  Building facades shall incorporate recesses or projections along at least 20 percent for the length of the facade. 
e.  At least 60 percent of the ground floor of a building facing a public street, courtyard or public square shall consist of clear glazed windows or glazed doors. At least 40 percent of the upper floor of a building facing a public street, courtyard or public square shall consist of clear windows. 
f.  Primary building entrances shall be clearly defined and recessed or framed by a sheltering element such as an awning, arcade, or portico in order to provide shelter from the summer sun and winter weather. 
g.  Flat roofs shall be enclosed by parapets to conceal mechanical equipment in accordance with section 78-213. 
(5)  Building entrance standards. 
a.  There shall be openings every 50 feet, at a minimum, into buildings, open spaces (plaza), or pedestrian linkages. Residential entrances should be designed at a human size scale. Commercial entryways should be differentiated by design, color, and material from other entryways. Primary building entrances must face upon the frontage line. Every building shall comply with barrier free access requirements of the State of Michigan Construction Code. 
b.  The following types of entryways shall be encouraged within the B-2 district: Recessed, projected and porches. 
1.  Recessed entrances. A recessed entryway places the doorway into the building. There is a clear distinction between the entrance and the windows that flank the door. 
2.  Projected entrances. Projected entryways, opposite of recessed entryways, shall bring the entrance closer to the sidewalk and will also differentiate the ground floor windows. This design should be compatible and appropriately sized in consideration of the sidewalk width that it fronts upon. 
3.  Porches. Porches are encouraged for residential uses. However, businesses have designed porches for their primary entrances. This type of raised entryways may also be prohibitive if barrier free access is not provided. 
(6)  Corner buildings standards. 
a.  Standards. Corner buildings and structures shall incorporate distinctive features, materials, designs, height levels, and colors that are sensitive to the flanking buildings. Encouraging wider sidewalks and/or further setback from the corner's edge shall retain a line-of-sight through the corner. Walls, screening elements (including foliage) and other visual obstructions at a height above 30 inches from the average gutter grade of the area shall not be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way line by a straight line drawn between such right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection. 
b.  Form and function. Use of ground level open-aired areas at the intersection of the sidewalks is encouraged. The design and strong appeal of balconies adds aesthetic distinction to the facade and compliments the pedestrian atmosphere of the Downtown. Integrating covered/uncovered seating and resting areas are highly encouraged: 
(7)  The planning commission and/or city commission may waive or modify the design standards of section 78-105(f) where one or more of the following factors are demonstrated: 
a.  Architectural constraints and unique building characteristics. 
b.  Compatibility with surrounding architecture and site design. 
c.  Site constraints regarding size of parcel, circulation, limited right of way, etc. 
d.  Other factors as identified by the planning commission and/or city commission. 
(Ord. No. 2007-01,  4, 5-21-07; Ord. No. 2007-3,  3, 7-16-07) 
Secs. 78-106-78-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 78-110. - Intent. 
    The B-3, general business districts are designed to furnish areas for services and goods incompatible with the pedestrian movement in the central business district. The general business districts are characterized by more diversified business types and are often located so as to serve the passerby traffic. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-111. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a B-3, general business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
Permitted uses: 
(1)  Office buildings for any of the following occupations: governmental, executive, administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic, drafting, sales, post offices and public utility offices. 
(2)  Medical office, dental office, physical therapy and chiropractic office; including clinics. Professional offices of lawyers, architects, engineers, and similar or allied professions. 
(3)  Child care centers and nursery schools. 
(4)  Private clubs and lodge halls. 
(5)  Off-street parking lots and parking facilities. 
(6)  Meeting halls and related services. 
(7)  Any generally recognized retail business which supplies commodities on the premises, for persons residing in adjacent residential areas such as: groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods and notions or hardware. 
(8)  Restaurants not serving alcoholic beverages, including carry-out restaurants and sit-down restaurants. 
(9)  Any personal service establishment which performs services on the premises for persons residing in adjacent residential areas, such as: shoe repair, dry cleaning shops, tailor shops, beauty parlors, barbershops. Any service establishment of an office-showroom or workshop nature of an electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, shoemaker, baker, commercial printing/copying, upholsterer, or an establishment doing radio, television or home appliance repair, photographic reproduction, and similar establishments that require a retail adjunct and of no more objectionable character than the aforementioned subject to the following provision: No more than five persons shall be employed at any time in the fabrication, repair and other processing of goods. 
(10)  Large box retail uses (over 70,000 square feet). 
(11)  Home improvement centers. 
(12)  Restaurants and taverns where the patrons are served while seated within a building occupied by such establishment, and wherein such establishment does not extend as an integral part of, or accessory thereto, any service of a drive-in, or open-front store. 
(13)  Regional shopping centers containing multi-tenant spaces totaling greater than 50,000 square feet. 
(14)  Theaters or assembly halls when completely enclosed. 
(15)  Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and other financial institutions including drive-through facilities, drive-through branches, 24-hour automatic tellers. 
(16)  Municipal buildings and governmental offices. 
(17)  Offices and showrooms of plumbers, electricians, decorator or similar trades, in connection with which not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the building or part of the building occupied by the establishment is used for making, assembling, remodeling, repairing, altering, finishing, or refinishing its products or merchandise; and provided that the ground floor premises facing upon, and visible from any abutting street shall be used only for entrances, offices, or display. All storage of material on any land shall be within the confines of the building or part thereof occupied by the establishment. 
(18)  Newspaper offices and printing shops. 
(19)  Funeral homes. 
(20)  Storage facilities when incident to and physically connected with any principal use permitted, provided that such facility is within the confines of the building or part thereof occupied by such establishment. 
(21)  Bus passenger stations. 
(22)  Governmental offices or other governmental uses; public utility offices, exchanges, transformer stations, pump stations, and service yards, but not including outdoor storage. 
(23)  Self-service laundry and dry cleaning establishments. 
(24)  Bowling alleys, indoor archery range, indoor tennis courts or similar forms of indoor commercial recreation. 
(25)  Pool or billiard parlor or club. 
(26)  Video rental establishments. 
(27)  Storage of materials or goods to be sold at retail provided such storage is within a building or is enclosed as not to be visible to the public from any abutting non-industrial district or public street. 
(28)  Other uses which are similar to the above uses. 
(29)  Accessory structures customarily incident to the above permitted uses. 
(30)  Residential uses shall be permitted provided such living units are located on the second floor or above. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2013-04,  4, 10-7-13; Ord. No. 2013-06,  3, 10-21-13) 
Sec. 78-112. - Special land uses permitted after review and approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted by the planning commission subject to article XXIII, the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission, and the imposition of special conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to ensure that the land use or activity authorized is compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use, and subject further to a public hearing held in accord with section 78-281: 
(1)  New and used automobile sales including outdoor auto sales, paint and bump shops, and auto service subject to the provisions of sections78-288 and 78-290. 
(2)  Motels, and extended stay motels subject to the provisions of section 78-291. 
(3)  Drive-in restaurants, or drive-through restaurant or open front restaurants subject to section 78-286. 
(4)  Commercial outdoor recreation for children's amusement parks, miniature golf courses, and other similar uses. 
(5)  Nursery for the retail sale of plant materials not grown on the site, and sales of lawn furniture, playground equipment and garden supplies subject to the provisions of section 78-289. 
(6)  Building and lumber supply stores having outdoor storage and sales. 
(7)  Automobile car wash establishments subject to the provisions of section 78-294. 
(8)  Gasoline service station and associated sale of convenience goods, subject to the provisions of section 78-288. 
(9)  Automobile convenience mart, subject to the provisions of section 78-288. 
(10)  Auto repair (minor and major) and servicing and auto body repair. 
(11)  Adult-oriented commercial enterprises and specific services subject to section 78-282. 
(12)  Bars and lounges or restaurants serving alcohol subject to the following: 
a.  The bar, lounge, or restaurant serving alcohol shall be restricted to a specific size and square footage. Any increase in square footage or expansion of restaurant operations which serve alcoholic beverages shall be subject to a new or amended special use permit. 
b.  The community development director shall request a report from the city's director of public safety regarding the possible impacts of the establishment serving alcoholic beverages. The planning commission shall consider their report in their evaluation of the request for special land use approval. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2013-04,  4, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 78-113. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVII of this chapter for the schedule of regulations limiting height and bulk of buildings and minimum size of lot by permitted land use. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Secs. 78-114-78-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 78-120. - Intent. 
    The I-1, light industrial district is designed so as to accommodate employment centers related to light industrial uses as well as research and development, engineering and testing, office uses, medical facilities, wholesale activities, warehouses, limited manufacturing and industrial operations. The district is intended to permit only those uses whose external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and only exert minimal detrimental effects to the surrounding districts. This district is further designed to recognize the growing convergence of office, industrial, and research in terms of functions, location, appearance and activities. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2010-02,  6, 4-5-10; Ord. No. 2013-05,  3, 10-21-13; Ord. No. 2014-03,  4, 2-17-14) 
Sec. 78-121. - Purposes. 
    The general goals of the light industrial district include, among others, the following specific purposes: 
(1)  To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the city's expected economy for light manufacturing and industrial activities, research and development, office, medical, engineering and testing, and related uses. 
(2)  To protect abutting residential districts by separating them from heavy manufacturing activities, and by prohibiting the use of such industrial areas for new residential development. 
(3)  To promote light manufacturing development which minimizes the danger of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation and other hazards, and from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor and other objectionable influences. 
(4)  To protect the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well-considered plan. To protect the character and established pattern of adjacent development, and in each area, to conserve the value of land and buildings and other structures, and to protect the city's tax revenue base. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2010-01,  6, 4-5-10; Ord. No. 2013-05,  2, 10-21-13; Ord. No. 2014-03,  4, 2-17-14) 
Sec. 78-122. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a light industrial district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
    Permitted uses: 
(1)  Any of the following uses shall be permitted when the manufacturing, compounding or processing is conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. That portion of land used for open storage facilities for materials or equipment, shall be screened from view of public roadways and any adjoining residential uses. 
a.  The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of such products as, but not limited to: bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceutical, toiletries, food products, hardware and cutlery, tool, die, wood, glass, metal, gauge and machine shops, breweries, wineries and distilleries. 
b.  Warehousing and wholesale establishments. 
c.  The manufacture, compounding, assembling, reassembly, packaging or treatment of articles or merchandise from previously prepared materials. 
d.  The manufacture of textiles, ceramics, glass, clay or stone product. 
e.  Manufacture of instruments, plastics or plastic molded products. 
f.  Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, related electronic instruments and devices, including but not limited to computers, cellular phones and tablets. 
g.  Manufacturing and fabrication of metal products. 
h.  Central dry cleaning plants or laundries provided that such plants shall not deal directly with the consumer as retail. 
i.  Manufacture and repair of professional, scientific and precision equipment: laboratory apparatus and analytical, optical, measuring and controlling instruments. 
j.  Manufacture of material science products, including but not limited to plastics, polymers, laser technology and robotics, 
k.  Professional offices for any of the following uses: medical offices and labs, administrative, accounting, clerical, education, executive, sales, technical or other similar professional offices. 
(2)  Any of the following uses charged with the principal function of basic research, design pilot or experimental product development, and medical facilities when conducted within a completely enclosed building: 
a.  Life science technology and medical laboratories, including but not limited to medical support facilities, biomedical engineering, biotechnology, genomics, proteomics, molecular and chemical ecology. 
b.  Material science products, including but not limited to plastics, polymers, laser technology and robotics. 
c.  Information technology, including but not limited to electronics, data processing and computer hardware and software. 
d.  Automotive. 
e.  Alternative energy. 
f.  Food products and beverages. 
(3)  Public utility buildings and storage yards, telephone exchange buildings, electrical transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations. Water supply and municipal sewage disposal plants. Water and gas tank holders. Railroad transfer and storage tracks railroad rights-of-way and freight terminals. 
(4)  Trucking facilities. 
(5)  Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone and lumber, and storage of contractor's equipment and supplies, provided such is enclosed within a building or within an obscuring wall, fence or berm on those sides abutting all residential, office or business districts, and on any yard abutting a public thoroughfare. Open storage shall be screened from view of public roadways and any adjoining residential uses. 
(6)  Mini warehouses and storage buildings for lease to the public including the dwelling and office of a caretaker. Buildings shall be spaced not less than thirty (30) feet apart on those sides having entrance doors. 
(7)  Municipal uses such as water treatment plants and reservoirs, sewage treatment plants, and all other municipal buildings and uses, including outdoor storage. 
(8)  Greenhouses. 
(9)  Trade or industrial schools. 
(10)  Business service establishments including, but not limited to printing and photocopying services, publishing, mail and packaging services, typing and secretarial services, and related activities. 
(11)  Package delivery distribution centers. 
(12)  Photographic studio and equipment sales and service. 
(13)  Other uses of a similar, and no more objectionable, character to the above uses as determined by the planning commission. 
(14)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
(15)  Film, TV or radio production studios and similar uses. 
(16)  Wireless communication facilities as permitted in accordance with section 78-216. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2010-01,  6, 4-5-10; Ord. No. 2013-05,  3, 10-21-13; Ord. No. 2014-03,  4, 2-17-14) 
Sec. 78-123. - Special land uses permitted after review and approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted by the planning commission subject to Article XXIII, the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission, and the imposition of special conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to ensure that the land use or activity authorized is compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use, and subject further to a public hearing held in accord with section 78-281: 
(1)  Major automotive repair facilities when completely enclosed, subject to section 78-285. 
(2)  Lumber and planing mills when completely enclosed and when located in the interior of the district so that no property line shall form the exterior boundary of the I-1 district. 
(3)  Metal plating, buffing and polishing, subject to appropriate measures to control the type of process to prevent noxious results and/or nuisances. 
(4)  Banks, credit unions and other similar financial services (with or without drive-thru facilities) 
(5)  Indoor recreational uses such as indoor soccer, racquet sports, volleyball, hockey, climbing walls, fitness centers, health clubs, dance studios, material arts and other similar recreation uses. 
(6)  Commercial kennels when within a completely enclosed building and when located in the interior of the I-1 district so that no property line shall form the exterior boundary of the I-1 district. 
(7)  Commercial wind energy systems, subject to section 78-261. 
(8)  Other uses, which in the determination of the planning commission, are of a similar character to the above uses. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2010-01,  6, 4-5-10; Ord. No. 2013-05,  2, 10-21-13) 
Sec. 78-124. - Required conditions of the I-1, limited industrial district. 
    A review of the use proposed and its suitability to the district shall be determined by the planning commission prior to issuance of a building permit. The commission shall make findings that the following conditions will be met by the proposed use in addition to all other requirements of this and other ordinances of the city: 
(1)  The use shall not, by reason of creation of noise, vibration, odor, smoke or other outside effects, cause a nuisance to abutting districts. 
(2)  The use shall be compatible with the intent of the district and shall not be out of character with the established character of the district. 
(3)  All buildings shall be constructed of finished materials where visible from public streets. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-125. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVII of this chapter for the schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Secs. 78-126-78-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - I-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 78-130. - Intent. 
    The I-2, heavy industrial district is designed primarily for manufacturing, assembling and fabrication activities including large scale or specialized industrial operations, whose external physical effects will be felt to some degree by surrounding districts. The I-2 district is also designed to accommodate research, development, engineering, testing, and office uses. The I-2 district is so structured as to permit the manufacturing, processing and compounding of semi-finished or finished products from raw materials as well as from previously prepared material. Land uses in this district should generally be separated from residential districts by land uses permitted in the I-1 zoning district. 
    The purpose of this district shall include the following: 
(1)  To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations to meet the city's expected economy for heavy manufacturing and industrial activities. 
(2)  To protect abutting residential districts with appropriate buffers and screening. 
(3)  To promote industrial uses which minimize the dangers of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation and other hazards from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor and other objectionable influences. 
(4)  To protect the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well-considered plan, to protect the character and established pattern of adjacent development, and in each area, to conserve the value of land and buildings and other structures, and to protect the city's tax revenue base. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2010-01,  6, 4-5-10; Ord. No. 2013-05,  3, 10-21-13; Ord. No. 2014-03,  5, 2-17-14) 
Sec. 78-131. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a heavy industrial district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
    Permitted uses: 
(1)  All permitted principal uses in the I-1 district. 
(2)  Major automotive repair facilities when completely enclosed. 
(3)  Lumber and planing mills when completely enclosed and when located in the interior of the district so that no property line shall form the exterior boundary of the I-2 district. 
(4)  Metal plating, buffing and polishing, subject to appropriate measures to control the type of process to prevent noxious results and/or nuisances. 
(5)  Wireless communication facilities as permitted in accordance with section 78-216. 
(6)  Commercial kennels when within a completely enclosed building and when located in the interior of the I-2 district so that no property line shall form the exterior boundary of the I-2 district. 
(7)  Heating and electric power generating plants. 
(8)  Tool and die shops, job shops, and machine shops. 
(9)  Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repairing, or storing of materials, goods, or products which shall conform with the performance standards set forth in section 78-202 and which shall not be injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, toxic and noxious materials, odors, fire or explosive hazards, glare or heat. 
(10)  Other uses, which in the determination of the planning commission are of a similar character to the above uses. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2010-01,  6, 4-5-10; Ord. No. 2013-05,  3, 10-21-13; Ord. No. 2014-03,  5, 2-17-14) 
Sec. 78-132. - Special land uses permitted after review and approval. 
    The following uses may be permitted by the planning commission subject to Article XXIII, the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission, and the imposition of special conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to ensure that the land use or activity authorized is compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use, and subject further to a public hearing held in accord with section 78-281: 
(1)  Any of the following uses provided that they shall be located not less than 800 feet distant from any residential district, and 300 feet distant from any other district, and when authorized by the planning commission. 
a.  Blast furnaces, foundaries, steel furnaces and blooming or rolling mills. 
b.  Manufacture of corrosive acid or alkali, cement, lime, gypsum or toxic chemicals. 
c.  Smelting of copper, iron or zinc ore. 
d.  Incineration of garbage or refuse. 
e.  Recycling centers. 
f.  Composting waste disposal operations. 
g.  Crematoriums. 
h.  Concrete or asphalt plants. 
(2)  Junkyards and places so called for the dismantling, wrecking and disposing of junk and/or refuse material of agricultural and automotive vehicles may be granted permits or licenses for one-year periods upon authorized inspection and approval of the building official, whose approval shall be based on the performance standards set forth in section 78-202, provided such use is not closer than 300 feet from the border of any I-2 district. 
(3)  Banks, credit unions and other similar financial services (with or without drive-thru facilities) 
(4)  Indoor recreational uses such as indoor soccer, racquet sports, volleyball, hockey, climbing walls, fitness centers, health clubs, dance studios, martial arts and other similar recreation uses. 
(5)  Temporary buildings and uses for construction purposes for a period of one year or less. 
(6)  Accessory uses. 
(7)  Commercial wind energy conversion systems, subject to section 78-261 
(8)  Any other use which shall be determined by planning commission, to be of the same general character as the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2010-01,  6, 4-5-10; Ord. No. 2013-05,  3, 10-21-13) 
Sec. 78-133. - Uses prohibited. 
    No activities involving the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted within the city except such as are approved by the fire department and are so licensed. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2010-01,  6, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 78-134. - Required conditions of the I-2, heavy industrial district. 
    Any use established in the I-2 district after the effective date of this chapter [February 11, 1992] shall be operated so as to comply with the performance standards set forth in section 78-202 and shall comply with the following: 
(1)  The use shall not, by reason of creation of noise, vibration, odor, smoke or other outside effects, cause a nuisance to abutting districts. 
(2)  The use shall be compatible with the intent of the district and shall not be out of character with the established character of the district. 
(3)  All buildings shall be constructed of finished materials where visible from public streets. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; 2013-05,  3, 10-21-13) 
Sec. 78-135. - Area and bulk requirements. 
    See article XVII of this chapter for the schedule of regulations limiting the height and bulk of buildings, and the minimum size of lot by permitted land use. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Secs. 78-136-78-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - P-1 VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 78-140. - Intent. 
    The P-1, vehicular parking district is intended to permit the establishment of areas to be used solely for off-street parking of private passenger vehicles as a use incidental to a principal use. This district will generally be provided by petition or request to serve a use district which has developed without adequate off-street parking facilities. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-141. - Uses permitted. 
    Premises in the vehicular parking district shall be used only for an off-street vehicular parking area and shall be developed and maintained subject to such regulations as are hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-142. - Limitations of use. 
    The following use limitations are applicable in the vehicular parking districts: 
(1)  The parking areas shall be accessory to, and for the use in connection with one or more business or industrial establishments, or in connection with one or more existing professional or institutional office buildings or institutions. 
(2)  The parking area shall be used solely for parking of private passenger vehicles, for periods of less than one day. 
(3)  No commercial repair work or service of any kind, or sale or display thereof, shall be conducted in such parking area. 
(4)  No signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits and conditions of use, shall be maintained on such parking areas. 
(5)  No building other than those for shelter of attendants shall be erected upon premises and they shall not exceed 14 feet in height. 
(6)  Such parking lots shall be contiguous to an O-1, O-2, B-1, B-2, I-1, or I-2 district. Parking areas may be approved when adjacent to such districts, or on the end of a block where such areas front on a street which is perpendicular to that street servicing the district. There may be a private driveway or public street or public alley between such P-1 district and such O-1, O-2, B-1, B-2, B-3, I-1 or I-2 district. 
(7)  Applications for P-1 district rezoning shall be made to the planning commission by submitting a layout of the area requested showing the intended parking plan. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-143. - Parking layout, entrance and exit. 
    Off-street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the standards and regulations as noted in section 78-272. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-144. - Side yards. 
    Where the P-1 district is contiguous to side lot lines of premises within a residentially zoned district, the required wall shall be located on the property line. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-145. - Front yards. 
    Where the P-1 district is contiguous to a residentially zoned district which has a common frontage on the same block with residential structures, or wherein no residential structures have been yet erected, there shall be a setback equal to the required residential setback for the residential district, or a minimum of 25 feet, or whichever is greater. The required wall shall be located on this minimum setback line. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-146. - Screening and landscaping. 
(a)  The parking area shall be provided with an obscuring screen in accordance with the provisions of sections 78-272 and 78-203. Whenever such obscuring screen is required, and where land exists between such screen and boundaries of the P-1 district it shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be landscaped with deciduous shrubs, evergreen material and ornamental trees. Ornamental trees shall be planted at 30-foot intervals, six feet from the screen. The ground area shall be planted and kept in lawn. 
(b)  All such landscaping and planting shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
(c)  All planting plans shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section and in accordance with sections 78-203. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-147. - Surfacing of parking area. 
    The entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuvering lanes, required under this section, shall have asphaltic or concrete surfacing in accordance with specifications approved by the city engineer. Such facilities shall be so provided with underground drains so as to dispose of all surface water in the parking area. The parking area shall be surfaced within six months of the date of rezoning for P-1 vehicular parking use if the parking area is to serve an existing use or uses. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-148. - Lighting. 
    All lighting used to illuminate a P-1 district off-street parking area shall not exceed 20 feet in overall height above ground level and shall be so installed as to be confined within and directed on the parking area only. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-149. - Approval and modifications. 
(a)  The planning commission may modify the yard and obscuring screen requirement where, in unusual circumstances, no good purpose would be served by compliance with the requirements of the article. 
(b)  In all cases where an obscuring screen extends to an alley which is a means of ingress and egress to a parking area, it shall be permissible to end the obscuring screen not more than ten feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking area. 
(c)  In addition to the above requirements, such parking area shall comply with such further requirements or conditions as may be prescribed by the planning commission for the protection of the residential district abutting such parcel or parcels in which the parking area is to be located. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Secs. 78-150-78-159. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - ARC ANN ARBOR ROAD CORRIDOR DISTRICT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An Ord. of June 7, 2004 amended former Art. XV,  78-160-78-170, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. XV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Zoning Ordinance of Oct. 6, 2003. 

Sec. 78-160. - Preamble. 
(a)  District established. Recognizing the importance of a viable Ann Arbor Road Corridor with well-planned, quality development, and further recognizing that a unified approach is the most effective, the city and the charter township have jointly established the ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District. This zoning district is based upon careful evaluation, study and plans completed by the two (2) communities with considerable input from the corridor businesses. 
It has been agreed by both the city and the township, as the foundation for this zoning district, that creation of a common ARC zoning district presents opportunities for intergovernmental coordination, cost savings, consistent land use regulation, sound planning and reflects the traditional spirit of cooperation in the Plymouth community. 
It is further acknowledged that creation of the ARC district does not change the independent authorities and powers of each unit of government to adopt, enforce and amend its zoning ordinance; however it is the intent of both bodies in creating this district that the regulations and effect of the ARC remain the same in both the city and the township. Therefore, by mutual agreement, variations which are not approved by both the township and the city are contrary to the intent of this district. 
(b)  Boundaries defined. The boundaries of the ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District shall be as shown on the zoning map which accompanies this ordinance with all notations, references and other information shown there on and as prescribed on the official zoning maps of the City of Plymouth and Plymouth Charter Township, Wayne County, Michigan. 
(Ord. of 6-7-04) 
Sec. 78-161. - ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District. 
(a)  Purpose. The Ann Arbor Road Corridor Zoning District is intended to establish uniform regulations applicable to the use of land, dimensions for building and site development, parking, landscaping and signage which accommodate and promote land uses which are compatible with the desired character of the corridor, and which conserve property values and long term stability of office, commercial and limited light industrial uses along the Ann Arbor Road Corridor. The Ann Arbor Road Corridor District is intended to accommodate a mixture of office, business and limited light industrial uses designed to serve the commercial needs of the general community in an attractive, well designed and functional environment. 
(b)  Principal uses permitted. No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this article: 
(1)  Medical and dental offices and clinics and other professional offices. 
(2)  Administrative, executive and editorial offices. 
(3)  Real estate and other general business offices. 
(4)  Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and similar financial institutions. 
(5)  Schools for arts and crafts, photography and studios for music or dancing; training centers, business schools or private schools operated for profit. 
(6)  Private clubs and lodge halls. 
(7)  Mortuaries. 
(8)  Churches, temples, and similar places of worship, and other facilities incidental thereto. 
(9)  Personal service establishments which perform services on the premises such as: shoe repair, dry cleaning shops (without on-site processing), tailors and dressmakers shops, beauty parlors and barbershops, or any service establishment of an office-showroom or workshop nature of an electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, shoemaker, baker, printer, upholsterer, or an establishment doing radio, television or home appliance repair, photographic reproduction, and similar establishments that require a retail adjunct and are of no more objectionable character than the aforementioned subject to the following provision: No more than five (5) persons shall be employed at any time in the fabrication, repair and other processing of goods. 
(10)  Retail establishments whose principal activity is the sale of merchandise in an enclosed building, including sales of groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods and notions or hardware. 
(11)  Business services such as mailing, copying and data processing. 
(12)  Restaurants not serving alcoholic beverages where patrons are served while seated within a building occupied by such establishments. 
(13)  Reserved. 
(14)  Bus stations. 
(15)  Commercial parking garages. 
(16)  Public schools. 
(17)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses. 
(c)  Special land uses. The following uses may be permitted by the planning commission, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use, including the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission; and the imposition of special conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to fulfill the purposes of this article; and the procedures and requirements set forth in this article for special land use approval, including a public hearing. 
(1)  Any other use not specified as a principal permitted use which the planning commission finds to not be inconsistent with the purposes of this article and which will not impair the present or potential use of adjacent properties. 
(2)  Child care centers not including overnight sleeping facilities, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  For each child permitted at the maximum licensed capacity of the facility, there shall be provided and maintained a minimum of 500 square feet of outdoor play area. Such play space shall have a total minimum area of not less than 3,000 square feet and shall be fenced and screened from any adjoining lot in any residential district. 
b.  All child care facilities shall be registered with or licensed by the State of Michigan where required, and shall comply with the minimum state standards for such facilities, in addition to those standards specified in this article. Proof of compliance shall be provided to the city upon request. 
c.  Adequate ingress, egress and circulation shall be provided. Vehicles must be able to easily circulate within and through the site to a designated pick-up/drop-off area without impeding circulation on the site or traffic on nearby roads. Adequate stacking space for the pick-up/drop-off area shall be provided. 
(3)  Commercial, medical and dental laboratories, not including the manufacturing of pharmaceutical or other products for general sale or distribution. 
(4)  Parochial and private schools. 
(5)  Municipal facilities, including municipal or other governmental offices, fire stations, post offices, community buildings, libraries, parks, playgrounds and park-n-ride lots. 
(6)  Hospitals and convalescent homes. 
(7)  Communication facilities, public utility transformer stations, sub-stations and gas regulator stations without outdoor service or storage yards subject to the following: 
a.  A front yard setback of not less than 50 feet shall be provided and two side yards and a rear yard shall be provided, each shall not be less than 25 feet in width. 
b.  When a transmission or relay tower, etc. is proposed as part of the facility, the tower shall be so located that it does not present a nuisance to abutting residential properties. The tower shall be so located on the subject property that the distance from the base of the tower to all points on each property line shall be not less than one and one-half (11/2) times the height of the tower. 
c.  Such use shall be screened and buffered from nearby public rights-of-way and property in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(8)  Large scale institutional uses, subject to the following: 
a.  The site shall have at least 150 feet of frontage on a major thoroughfare with an existing or planned right-of-way of not less than 120 feet. All ingress and egress to the site shall be directly onto such major thoroughfares. 
b.  The site shall be located within one half mile of interchange access to I-275, as measured along major thoroughfares. 
c.  All buildings, structures, and parking and loading areas shall be setback a minimum of 100 feet from any abutting residential zoning district. Such setback area shall be heavily landscaped so as to create a complete visual and physical separation between the two unlike land uses, forming an effective screen in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
d.  Traffic from events (including church worship services), and other large assemblies shall be controlled by the institution or by its agents so as to not create congestion or unreasonable delays on the public street. A schedule of expected frequency of events (including church worship services) and assemblies, a description of the method(s) of traffic control, and a traffic impact study and shall be presented to the planning commission for approval after review and comment on the plan by the police department. 
e.  Associated uses on the site such as schools, (if not the primary use) recreation centers, retreat facilities, conference centers, convents, and others shall meet all requirements of this chapter for such uses. 
f.  All parking spaces and aisles shall be screened from off-site view by any one or a combination of the following: 
1.  Screening mound or berm. 
2.  Dense landscaping. 
3.  Solid wall with planting strip. 
4.  Changes in grade through the use of retaining walls, or topographic features. 
Screening shall be in accordance with the requirements of section 78-167. 
g.  There shall be no outside loudspeakers or amplified sound outside of a totally enclosed building. 
h.  Storage of buses, trucks, and maintenance equipment shall be entirely within a totally enclosed building. 
(9)  Hotels and motels subject to the following: 
a.  Each hotel or motel shall provide minimum side yards of not less than 25 feet each; minimum rear yard of not less than 35 feet; minimum front yard of 25 feet except that when parking is provided between the building and a street, the minimum front yard and/or side yard shall be not less than 75 feet. 
b.  When the front yard and/or side yard abuts a street and is used to provide an access road and/or off-street parking, the area shall be screened in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
c.  Each motel or hotel unit shall contain not less than 250 square feet of floor area. 
d.  Kitchen or cooking facilities may be provided in new motels or hotels upon demonstration by the applicant that the provisions of all applicable fire prevention and building codes have been met. No existing motel units shall be converted for use of cooking and/or kitchen facilities unless the applicant can demonstrate compliance with all applicable fire prevention and building codes and obtains a certificate of occupancy for each unit being converted. 
e.  Where a unit is provided as a residence for the owner or the manager, the following minimum floor area requirements shall be provided: one bedroom unit, 600 square feet; two bedroom unit, 800 square feet; three bedroom unit, 1,000 square feet; four bedroom unit, 1,200 square feet. 
(10)  Sales rooms, and/or sales lots for new and/or used automobiles, recreation vehicles or trucks, subject to the following: 
a.  Outdoor lighting shall be provided in an amount which shall be sufficient to permit safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. This lighting shall be high pressure sodium, metal halide or other type of lighting approved by the commission which exhibits the same characteristics and qualities of high pressure sodium or metal halide. Outdoor lighting shall be so located and designated as to reflect light away from adjacent single family residential areas and shall comply with the requirements of section 78-204, exterior lighting. 
b.  All service and repair facilities shall be contained within an enclosed building except for the storage of repaired and wrecked cars. All areas used to store repaired or wrecked cars shall be located behind the building and screened in compliance with the requirements of section 78-167 of this chapter. 
c.  An obscuring wall must be provided when abutting or adjacent districts are zoned for residential use, in accordance with section 78-206 of this article. 
d.  No major repair or major refinishing shall be done on the lot. 
e.  Where a sales lot for new and/or used automobiles, or trucks, abuts a street, a planting strip shall be established in accordance with section 78-167, specific landscaping, screening and buffering requirements. The planting strip shall comply with the standards for Ann Arbor Road streetscape or parking area buffering based upon the street fronted upon, and shall provide a proper buffer in the determination of planning commission. The required shrubbery plantings may be modified at the discretion of the planning commission, to break up the areas without circumventing the total view of the product. 
f.  No loudspeakers for outdoor broadcasting shall be permitted. 
g.  Rental facilities for vehicles shall be permitted only as an accessory use to a permitted vehicle sales use under this section. 
h.  All outdoor sales or display areas shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete or other similar dust-proof surface. 
(11)  Motorcycle, motorbike, personal watercraft, snow mobile and all-terrain vehicle sales, service, clubs and rental facilities subject to the following: 
a.  No motorcycle or motorbike rental, sales, service or motorcycle or motorbike clubs shall be permitted on a parcel of land which is located within 200 feet of a residential district. 
b.  Motorcycle or motorbike clubs may be operated only between the hours of 6 a.m. and 12 midnight. 
c.  Outdoor storage and/or testing areas shall not be permitted. 
d.  All service and repair facilities shall be contained within an enclosed building. 
e.  Where a sales lot and/or outdoor display area abuts a street, a planting strip shall be established in accordance with section 78-167, specific landscaping, screening and buffering requirements. The planting strip shall comply with the standards for Ann Arbor Road streetscape or parking are buffering based upon the street the sales lot or display area abuts, and shall provide a proper buffer in the determination of the planning commission. The required shrubbery plantings may be modified at the discretion of the planning commission, to break up the areas without circumventing the total view of the product. 
f.  All outdoor sales or display areas shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete or other similar dust-proof surface. 
(12)  Indoor recreation uses such as bowling establishments, court sport facilities, tennis clubs, pool and billiard halls, roller and ice skating rinks, and other general indoor recreation facilities, subject to the following: 
a.  The structure housing such facilities shall be located at least fifty (50) feet from any front, rear, or side yard of any residential lot in an adjacent residential district. 
b.  Any vehicles or equipment used for servicing the facilities, such as court cleaners or zambonis, shall be stored only inside a totally enclosed building. 
c.  The use of any electronic or enhanced sound system shall be contained so as to not present an unreasonable disturbance to the neighborhood in which it is located. 
(13)  Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls or similar uses, subject to the following: 
a.  All operations shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
b.  All buildings shall be set back at least one hundred (100) feet from any residential district. 
(14)  Drive-in restaurants and other drive-in establishments excluding outdoor theaters, subject to the following: 
a.  Outdoor lighting shall be provided in an amount which shall be sufficient to permit safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. This lighting shall be high pressure sodium, metal halide or other type of lighting approved by the commission which exhibits the same characteristics and qualities of high pressure sodium or metal halide. Outdoor lighting shall be so located and designated as to reflect light away from adjacent single family residential areas and shall comply with the requirements of section 78-204 exterior lighting. 
b.  A setback of at least 60 feet from the future right-of-way or street setback line of any street must be maintained. 
(15)  Outdoor cafes and eating areas accessory to a permitted restaurant use, subject to the following: 
a.  Pedestrian circulation and access to building entrances (both on and off site) shall not be impaired. A minimum of six (6) feet of sidewalk leading to the entrance to the establishment shall be maintained free of tables and other encumbrances. Planters, posts with ropes or other enclosures shall be used to define the area occupied by the outdoor cafe. 
b.  The outdoor cafe shall be kept clean, litter-free, and with a well-kept appearance within and immediately adjacent to the area of the tables and chairs. Additional outdoor waste receptacles may be required. Written procedures for cleaning and waste containment and removal responsibilities shall be included with all applications and approved by the planning commission. Preparation of food and beverages is prohibited in the outdoor cafe area. 
c.  Tables, chairs, planters, waste receptacles, and other elements of street furniture shall be compatible with the architectural character of the adjacent buildings, subject to planning commission approval. 
(16)  Veterinary clinics, animal clinics and animal hospitals subject to the following: 
a.  Any building designed or constructed for such uses shall be used for the sole purpose of providing medical care for household pets and shall not be constructed or used as a boarding establishment for household pets. 
b.  If animals eligible for treatment at such establishments are kept overnight on the premises or for a period longer than regular professional business hours, then a full-time, duly qualified attendant shall be stationed in charge of said premises. 
c.  Open or outdoor runs, kennels or pens shall be prohibited. 
d.  In no case shall the disposal of rubbish and litter be conducted in such a manner as to be obnoxious or offensive. 
e.  In no case shall there be any harboring of vermin or decaying matter on the premises, and effective provisions shall be made to confine all noise, confusion and odor, if any, to the premises. 
f.  The building and ventilation system shall be constructed to prevent any noise and odors emanating from the area used for the treatment and temporary keeping of household pets from reaching the building exterior. 
(17)  A storage garage for commercial vehicles used by a business or other activity when located on the same contiguous site therewith and not occupying more than 25 percent of the area of such contiguous site. 
(18)  Commercial (major repair or body shop) garages subject to the following: 
a.  All operations of the commercial garage shall be conducted entirely within the building except for the storage of repaired and wrecked cars. All areas used to store repaired or wrecked cars shall be screened from view off site in compliance with section 78-296. 
b.  All outdoor sales or display areas shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete or other similar dust-proof surface. 
(19)  Commercially used outdoor recreational space for children's amusement parks, miniature golf courses, subject to the following: 
a.  The children's amusement park must be fenced on all sides with a four-foot, six-inch wall or fence. 
b.  Adequate parking shall be provided off the road right-of-way and shall be fenced with a four-foot, six-inch high wall or fence where adjacent to the use. 
(20)  Open air display and sales areas, including nursery plants and materials; lawn furniture; playground equipment and swimming pools; garden supplies and similar open-air displays, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The storage and/or display of any materials and/or products shall meet all setback requirements applicable to a building, and shall be screened from view off-site. 
b.  All loading and parking shall be provided off-street. 
c.  The storage of any soil, fertilizer, or other loose, unpackaged materials shall be contained so as to prevent any affects on adjacent uses. 
d.  Outdoor display and sales of lumber and coal yards, building material sales establishments, junk yards, used auto parts or wrecking establishments shall not be permitted. 
e.  All outdoor sales or display areas shall be surfaced with asphalt or concrete or other similar dust-proof surface. 
(21)  Auto wash facilities subject to the following: 
a.  In the case that an auto wash facility includes the storage and/or sale of gasoline as part of the operation, the requirements of subsection (c)(23) of this section shall also apply. 
b.  All washing facilities shall be completely within an enclosed building. 
c.  Vacuuming facilities may be outside the building, but shall not be in the front yard and shall not be closer than 100 feet from any residential district. Where such facilities are located in a side or rear yard abutting a street, such use shall be screened from the street by one or a combination of the following: 
1.  A solid wall of at least four feet in height and six to eight-foot wide planting strip on the street side. Such planting strip shall contain as a minimum, one deciduous small ornamental tree for every twenty lineal feet of planting strip required. 
2.  Mounding or berming of not less than four feet in height with side slopes no steeper than 3:1 (three feet horizontal to one foot vertical). A minimum of one (1) deciduous small ornamental tree shall be planted for every 20 lineal feet of berm or mound. 
d.  Driveway entrances into the auto wash structure shall be from within the lot and no entrance into the building shall be directly from a street or alley. No alley shall be used as a means of serving an auto wash facility. Drains shall be provided at all entrances and exits at the street setback line. Auto wash facilities shall not, in general, be located within 200 feet of an intersection of any two roads when either of the two roads is considered to carry moderate to heavy traffic levels. 
e.  A hard surfaced driveway of either one or more lanes shall be constructed on the site in such a manner as to provide a continuous movement of cars into the wash rack. 
f.  The driveways, so provided, shall be not less than 12 feet wide for a single lane and not less than 12 additional feet, in width, from each additional lane. 
g.  The use of steam in the cleaning process shall be permitted when confined within an enclosed building. 
h.  Outdoor lighting shall be provided in an amount which shall be sufficient to permit safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. This lighting shall be high pressure sodium, metal halide or other type of lighting approved by the commission which exhibits the same characteristics and qualities of high pressure sodium or metal halide. Outdoor lighting shall be so located and designated as to reflect light away from adjacent single family residential areas and shall comply with the requirements of section 78-204, exterior lighting. 
i.  All cars required to wait for access to the facilities shall be provided space off the street right-of-way in accordance with the provisions of section 78-163. 
(22)  Minor automotive repair, such as muffler shops, shock absorber replacement shops, tire stores, undercoating shops, minor engine repair and small engine repair, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Access to such use shall be directly to a major or collector street. 
b.  Outdoor storage of parts or materials shall be prohibited. 
c.  Vehicles shall not be allowed to be stored outside the building for more than 24 hours unless awaiting repair for which a work order, authorized by the owner of the vehicle, is posted in the vehicle so as to be visible from outside the vehicle and not to exceed seven days. Space for vehicles awaiting repair shall be designated on the site plan and shall be screened as determined necessary by the planning commission. 
d.  Areas for off-street parking required for customer use shall not be utilized for the storage of vehicles awaiting repair. 
e.  All vehicle servicing or repair, except minor repairs such as, but not limited to, tire changing and headlight changing shall be conducted within a building. 
f.  Suitable containers shall be provided and utilized for the disposal of used parts and such containers shall be screened from public view. 
(23)  Gasoline service stations subject to the following: 
a.  Gasoline service stations shall provide a front yard and side yards of not less than 20 feet each. No part of a service station canopy shall extend into a required yard. 
b.  Gasoline service stations, including any part of the facade, and other structure or part of any other structures on the same lot, shall not exceed 25 feet in height. 
c.  Open space on the gasoline service station site may be used for parking or maneuvering of vehicles being serviced, waiting to be serviced or serviced vehicles waiting to be picked up. The use of the open space for parking of vehicles for storage, sale or rental or for any other use other than that defined in the definition of gasoline service station under this chapter is prohibited. 
d.  Hoists or other equipment used in servicing of motor vehicles shall be located within an enclosed building. 
e.  Pump islands shall be setback not less than 25 feet from the street setback line of any street to which the pump island is perpendicular and 19 feet from the street setback line of any street to which the pump island is parallel and not less than 19 feet from any residential boundary line. Additional setback may be required if determined necessary by the planning commission to provide for adequate site circulation and maneuvering. The setback areas shall include a minimum ten-foot planting strip located along and between the street setback line and the pump islands. No servicing shall be permitted on any vehicle while said vehicle is resting wholly or partly on a sidewalk or on a public street or highway right-of-way. 
f.  No gasoline service station, service garage, auto wash facility, or other establishment where gasoline is stored and sold, which because of their nature unavoidably invite vehicle traffic, depend on standing vehicles while awaiting service and route such traffic across curb lines and sidewalks, shall be located-and no property shall be used as such-nearer than 100 feet in any direction as measured from any point on the property line of any church, school (public or parochial), police station, fire station or buildings used for public assembly and 500 feet from any hospital. 
g.  Gasoline service stations shall be located on a plot of ground having frontage of not less than 150 feet as measured from the street setback line. When the gasoline service station is located on a corner lot the minimum frontage of 150 feet shall apply to frontage on both streets as measured from the street setback line. Each gasoline service station shall, in addition to the minimum frontage requirement, provide a minimum area of not less than 15,000 square feet. Such station shall be composed of the building housing the office and the facilities for servicing, greasing and/or washing and the pumps for dispensing gasoline. Such facilities shall contain not more than five units (as defined below). Any station designed for more than five units shall provide an additional area of 3,000 square feet for each additional unit. For the purpose of this section, a unit shall mean (a) a set of pumps or (b) a stall for one vehicle within the building for servicing, greasing or washing. 
h.  All gasoline and other combustible fuels used to propel internal combustion motors shall be stored in compliance with the all applicable state, federal and municipal codes. 
i.  There shall be provided, on those sides abutting or adjacent to a residential district, a six-foot completely obscuring wall, consistent with the requirements of section 78-167. 
j.  Outdoor lighting shall be provided in an amount which shall be sufficient to permit safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. This lighting shall be high pressure sodium metal halide or other type of lighting approved by the commission which exhibits the same characteristics and qualities of high pressure sodium or metal halide. Outdoor lighting shall be so located and designated as to reflect light away from adjacent single family residential areas and shall comply with the requirements of section 78-204, exterior lighting. 
k.  All restroom doors shall be shielded from adjacent streets and residential districts. 
l.  Gasoline service stations with restaurant or "fast food" facilities (with or without drive-through) and/or convenience store and/or car wash facilities shall meet all separate chapter standards for these individual uses. Additionally, stacking, service and circulation lanes, and parking for the individual uses shall be designed and laid-out so as to minimize the potential for traffic circulation and vehicle-pedestrian conflicts. Landscaped islands and buffer strips shall be used to separate and screen stacking and service lanes. 
m.  Outside storage and display shall be limited to small quantities of oil and other supplies needed for servicing at the pumps. No retail sale items such as soda pop, windshield solvent, landscape mulch or other merchandise shall be displayed or sold outside. All outdoor storage and display areas must be identified on the site plan and approved by the planning commission. 
(24)  Arcades and any commercial establishment in which the primary purpose of such establishment is the operation of mechanical or electrical amusement devices subject to the following: 
a.  All activities shall be conducted entirely within a building. 
b.  No such business shall be open for business between the hours of 12 midnight and 9:00 a.m. 
c.  The building housing such use shall be so constructed and maintained as to insure that all interior noises shall be kept from reaching the building exterior. 
d.  The planning commission shall review the proposed use to determine the need for bicycle parking spaces. Said spaces shall be designed to permit the orderly parking of said bicycles and permit them to be secured. These parking areas shall be so located as to prevent the disruption of on-site and off-site pedestrian and automobile traffic flow. 
e.  Any part of the lot occupied by such use shall not be located within 300 feet of any residential district or within 500 feet of the property line of any public, parochial or private school. 
f.  Locations for any such establishment shall be confined to major thoroughfares as defined in the future land use plan. Access from a street other than a major thoroughfare shall be prohibited. 
(25)  Drive-through restaurants or drive-through facilities, accessory to any principal permitted use in the ARC District, subject to the provision of a separate stacking lane designed to accommodate the minimum number of stacking spaces required under section 78-163(a)(11) Table of Parking Requirements. Required stacking shall be positioned in such a manner that stacking will not interfere with vehicular traffic on site, on the adjacent roadway, or entering or leaving the site and the stacking lane shall be striped or otherwise delineated on site. Adequate maneuvering room shall be provided to allow vehicles to by-pass or leave the stacking lane as determined by the planning commission. No eating shall be permitted while on site and in a parked vehicle. A sufficient number of outdoor litter receptacles shall be provided to prevent blowing paper and other material moving off site onto surrounding properties. The drive-through service speaker location and/or amplification shall not cause noise that is audible from adjacent residences. 
(26)  Limited uses of a wholesale, warehousing or light industrial nature, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  General conditions: 
1.  External physical effects shall be restricted, so as to protect nearby uses from hazards, noise, and other radiated disturbances. 
2.  Such uses shall be located only in the general vicinity of the railroad tracks, described as east of the Plymouth City Hall site to the westerly boundary of the railroad right-of-way on the north side of Ann Arbor Road, and east of General Drive to the westerly boundary of Arbor Village Subdivision on the south side of Ann Arbor Road. 
3.  Each use shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
b.  Uses permitted under this classification shall be as follows, and shall be further subject to the specific standards listed: 
1.  Wholesale and warehousing businesses, storage buildings, resale shops, commercial laundries, cleaning establishments and frozen food lockers. 
2.  The manufacture, assembly, compounding, processing, packaging, treatment or testing of such products as bakery goods, candy, soap (cold mix only), cosmetics, pharmaceutical, toiletries, dairy and food products, hardware and cutlery; tool, die, gauge and machine shops. The manufacturing, processing and assembling from basic raw materials shall be prohibited. 
3.  The manufacture, assembly, compounding, processing, packaging, treatment or testing of articles of merchandise form the following previously prepared materials which have been manufactured elsewhere: bone, cellophane, canvas, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastic, precious or semi-precious metals, or stones, sheet metal (excluding large stampings such as automobile body panels), ferrous and non-ferrous metals (excluding large casting and fabrications), shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, yarn, wood (excluding saw and planting mills) and paint (not employing boiling process). 
4.  Research, testing, laboratory and office uses related to permitted industrial operations. 
5.  The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas. 
6.  Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties and metal or rubber or other small molded rubber products (not including pneumatic tires). 
7.  Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios and phonographs. 
8.  Laboratories-Experimental, film, or testing. 
9.  Communication facilities with buildings, public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and substations and gas regulator stations, communication and relay stations without outdoor storage subject to the following: 
A front yard setback of not less than fifty (50) feet shall be provided (irrespective of the yard requirements of the district) and two side yards and a rear yard shall be provided; each of which shall not be less than twenty-five (25) feet in width. 
10.  Research and industrial parks subject to the following: 
(i)  The research and industrial park shall be platted as an industrial subdivision. 
(ii)  All permitted uses allowed under subsection 78-161(c)(26)b.1.-9. shall be allowed in an approved research and industrial park without separate special land use approval. 
(iii)  The industrial park shall meet the following area, lot and yard requirements: 
Minimum Lot Area 20,000 sq. ft. Minimum Lot Frontage 100 ft. Front Yard Depth 40 ft. Side Yard Width, Each 25 ft. Side Yard Adjacent to Residential 50 ft. Side Yard Adjacent to a Street 40 ft. Rear Yard 40 ft. Rear Yard Adjacent to Residential 50 ft. Maximum Height 35 ft.* Maximum Percent Lot Coverage 50%  
* The height of a building may be increased one (1) foot for each one (1) foot by which its setback is in excess of the required yard setbacks, up to a maximum height of forty-five (45) feet. 
(iv)  All setback areas shall be landscaped with lawns, trees, shrubs, and/or other plantings, and may include reflecting pools, retaining walls and other landscape construction harmonious with the overall landscape scheme. Parking and loading areas may be located in side and rear setback areas but shall be prohibited from the front yard setback. Parking and loading areas shall be screened in compliance with this article. 
11.  Accessory structures and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses, excluding outdoor storage. 
(27)  Bars and lounges or restaurants serving alcohol subject to the following: 
a.  The bar, lounge, or restaurant serving alcohol shall be restricted to a specific size and square footage. Any increase in square footage or expansion of restaurant operations which serve alcoholic beverages shall be subject to a new or amended special use permit. 
b.  The community development director shall request a report from the city's director of public safety regarding the possible impacts of the establishment serving alcoholic beverages. The planning commission shall consider this report in their evaluation of the request for special land use approval. 
(d)  Development requirements. 
(1)  Required conditions. Unless otherwise noted, buildings and uses in the ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor District shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  The following requirements shall apply to all businesses and uses except for permitted limited wholesale, warehouse and light industrial uses: 
1.  All such businesses shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. Manufacturing of products for wholesale distribution off of the premises is not permitted. 
2.  All goods produced and services performed on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. 
b.  All business, servicing, or processing, shall be conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building except where specifically permitted by this article. 
c.  There shall be no outside storage of goods, inventory, or equipment unless otherwise permitted by this article. 
d.  Commercially used or licensed vehicles used in the normal operation of a permitted retail or service use on the site shall be parked in non-required parking spaces and the rear only. Such vehicles shall not be parked in a manner to be used as an advertisement and shall be screened from view off-site. This provision shall also apply to operable vehicles that are moved on and off of the site on a regular basis. 
e.  Development in the ARC District shall comply with the access and service road requirements in section 78-164. 
f.  All exterior walls of every building hereafter erected, extended or whose exterior is structurally altered, which faces a street or which is adjacent to property zoned or used as residential shall be designed, treated and finished in a uniform manner consistent with the exterior of the front of the building. Such buildings which are erected, extended or structurally altered, shall be designed to compliment the Ann Arbor Road streetscape through means which include but are not limited to use of brick, stone, black wrought iron accents, peaked roof elements, building architectural detail to enhance door and window openings, and other elements approved by the planning commission. 
g.  Compliance with the environmental performance standards of this chapter is required for all uses. 
h.  All yard and open space areas in the ARC District shall be graded in a manner which shall avoid the ponding of stormwater unless said conditions have been designed to occur as part of a storm detention plan which has been approved by the municipality and such grading shall comply with the engineering design standards for the municipality prior to issuance of a permit. 
i.  All structures shall be readily accessible by fire and emergency vehicles and shall comply with the city's fire prevention ordinance. 
j.  Sidewalks shall be provided along all public street frontage and within the interior of the project boundaries. Interior walks shall be a minimum four feet in width except where such walk directly abuts a parking area. In cases where sidewalks abut a parking area, the minimum width required shall be six feet. Sidewalks located along public streets shall be five feet in width. All sidewalks both exterior and interior shall conform to the standards as established by the city. 
k.  The method of trash pick up shall be presented to the planning commission for approval. If dumpsters are proposed they shall be screened in a manner acceptable to the planning commission. 
l.  All fencing and/or screening walls required and approved by the planning commission as part of special land use approval and/or site plan approval shall be permitted. 
m.  Protective or security fencing shall be considered a structure enclosing a piece of land or separating contiguous land either in whole or part, serving the purpose of preventing intrusion onto or across a lot of record or any parcel or tract of unplatted land from without or straying from within. The following shall govern the height, location and placement of protective or security fencing: 
1.  Permit required. In the ARC District, it shall be unlawful for any person to build, repair or relocate a protective or security fence without first having secured a fence permit therefore from the building department. 
2.  Maximum height. The maximum height of a protective or security fence shall be four (4) feet, except as otherwise provided herein. For uses subject to special approval, the planning commission may permit protective or security fencing not to exceed six (6) feet in height. 
3.  Material. Fences shall not be constructed of old or used material unless such material shall be reasonably sound in the judgment of the building department. Fences shall not be made of or contain barbed wire, electric current or charges of electricity or sharp or pointed projections of any kind; provided if such fence is constructed of pickets, the pickets shall be made of not less than one-inch by three-inch material and shall have an angle at the top of not less than 90 degrees. The fence shall comply with the requirements of the building code. Cyclone fencing or cyclone fencing with plastic or other types of strips intertwined or otherwise attached to the fence shall be prohibited. 
4.  Placement. No fence shall be built closer to the street than the front setback line applicable to the premises pursuant to Section 78-162, provided however, that no fence shall be built closer to the street than the established front building line along said street or in front of the building closest to the street on the fenced premise. 
n.  Exterior lighting shall be subject to the requirements of section 78-204, exterior lighting. 
(2)  Site plan review. Site plan review and approval is required for all uses in accordance with the requirements of Article XX, Site Plan Review. 
(3)  Other development requirements. 
a.  Unless specifically modified by this article, all uses shall comply with all standards and requirements of this chapter. 
b.  Off-street parking for all uses shall be as specified in section 78-163. 
c.  Off-street loading and unloading shall be as specified in section 78-163. 
d.  Screening and land use buffers for all uses shall be as specified in section 78-206. 
e.  Signs for all uses shall be as specified in section 78-206. 
(Ord. of 6-7-04; Ord. No. 2013-04,  5, 10-7-13) 
Sec. 78-162. - Schedule of regulations. 
(a)  Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. 
(1)  All buildings and uses in the Ann Arbor Road Corridor District are subject to the area, height, bulk, and placement requirements as follows: 
a.  For all buildings and uses, except those uses permitted by special approval under section 78-161(c)(26) (light industrial uses, warehouse and limited wholesale) the following shall be required: 
Minimum Lot Area: None Minimum Lot Width: None Maximum Lot Coverage: None Maximum Height: 2 stories, 30 feet (6) Minimum Yard Requirements: Front: 10 feet (1) Side, Minimum: Minimum 10 feet, total of two is 20 feet (2)(3)(4) Sides, Total of Two: 20 feet (3) Rear: 20 feet  
b.  For uses permitted by special approval under section 78-161(c)(26) (limited wholesale, warehouse and light industrial uses) of the Ann Arbor Road Corridor District, the following shall be required: 
Minimum Lot Area: None Minimum Lot Width: None Maximum Lot Coverage: None Maximum Height: 35 feet (6) Minimum Yard Requirements: Front: 50 feet Side, Minimum: 20 feet (5) Sides, Total of Two: 40 feet Rear: 20 feet  
(b)  Notes to schedule. 
(1)  When parking is furnished between the building and the street, a front yard of not less than (75) feet shall be provided. 
(2)  When a side yard is adjacent to a residential use, a side yard of not less than twenty (20) feet shall be provided. 
(3)  Side yards are not required along an interior side parcel line, where all walls of buildings abutting such interior side parcel line are wholly without windows or other openings and are of fireproof construction, but if the side wall is not of fireproof construction, a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet shall be provided. When an interior business parcel abuts a residential parcel, a side yard of not less than twenty (20) feet shall be required in addition to the required screening and land use buffer. The planning commission may require additional setbacks based on its review. The planning commission shall review the aesthetic impact of such walls and may require visual enhancement. 
(4)  When parking is furnished in the side yard on the street side of a corner parcel, a side yard of not less than 75 feet shall be provided. 
(5)  When such a use is adjacent to a residential district and not separated there from by a street, a side yard and/or a rear yard of not less than 75 feet shall be provided. 
(6)  The commission shall have the authority to approve an increase in building height up to a maximum of 38 feet, provided the building does not exceed two stories and conforms with one of the following criteria: 
a.  The additional height is necessary to achieve two stories due to the particular nature and functions of the approved use. 
b.  The additional height is necessary to accommodate architectural features that enhance the character of the building and the district. 
(Ord. of 6-7-04) 
Sec. 78-163. - Parking requirements, layout, standards, and off-street loading and unloading. 
(a)  Off-street parking requirements. Within the Ann Arbor Road Corridor zoning district, off-street parking facilities for the storage or parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for the use of occupants, employees and patrons of the buildings hereafter erected, altered or extended after the effective date of this Article, shall be provided and maintained as provided herein and in accordance with subsections (b) and (c). Such space shall be maintained and shall not be encroached upon so long as said main building structure remains, unless an equivalent number of such spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with this article. 
(1)  Parking space versus loading space and stacking space. Loading space as required in subsection (c) of this section, stacking spaces as required per this article and parking spaces as required in subsection (a) of this section shall be considered separate and distinct requirements and as such shall be considered as separate components on the proposed site plan. In no case shall facilities provided to satisfy the requirements of this article or chapter for one component to be construed as meeting the requirements for another required component. 
(2)  Fractional requirements. When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in a requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to one-half shall be disregarded and fractions including one-half and over shall require one (1) parking space. 
(3)  Barrier free parking spaces. Barrier free parking spaces shall be required and included as part of the total parking space requirement of subsection (a)(11) of this section. A barrier free space shall mean a parking space eight feet wide with a five-foot aisle and shall be marked off in blue handicapper paint. A sign located approximately six feet above grade inscribed with the international wheelchair symbol or a reasonable facsimile thereof shall identify the handicapper space. 
Barrier free parking space requirements shall be in accordance with the Michigan Department of Labor, Construction Code Commission, Barrier Free Design Division. A summary of parking space requirements is listed below: 
Total Parking Spaces Provided Required Number of Barrier Free Spaces 
(include barrier free spaces within total required parking) Up to 25 1 26 to 50 2 51 to 75 3 76 to 100 4 101 to 150 5 151 to 200 6 201 to 300 7 301 to 400 8 401 to 500 9 501 to 1,000 2% of total Over 1,000 20, plus 1 per each 100 total spaces over 1,000  
Barrier free spaces shall be located as close as possible to elevators, ramps, walkways and entry areas. Where a curb exists between a parking lot surface and a sidewalk surface, an inclined curb approach or a curb cut with a gradient of not more than one (1) foot in twelve (12) feet and a width of not less than four (4) feet shall be provided for wheelchair access. 
(4)  Existing use-Increase in floor area. When a use requiring off-street parking is increased in floor area and such use is located in a building existing on or before the effective date of this ordinance, additional parking space for the additional floor area shall be provided and maintained in amounts hereinafter specified for that use. 
(5)  Usable floor area. For the purpose of applying the requirements of subsection (a)(11) of this section, "usable floor area" shall be as follows: 
a.  In the case of office, merchandising or service types of uses excluding shopping centers, usable floor area, shall equal the sum of the gross horizontal floor area of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior walls used or intended to be used by tenants, or for service to the public or customers, patrons, clients or patients. This shall include-areas occupied by fixtures and equipment used for display or sales of merchandise. 
b.  Usable floor area shall not include area used principally for non-public purposes, such as storage, incidental repairs, processing or packaging of merchandise, shop windows, offices incidental to the management or maintenance of stores or buildings toilets or restrooms, utilities or areas for dressing, fitting or alterations. 
c.  Applications for approval of required parking shall clearly indicate through the use of floor plans and calculations the area designated as "usable area" above and the use of areas not considered as "usable floor area". If such information is not submitted, parking requirements shall be based on eighty (80) percent of the sum of the gross horizontal floor area of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls. 
d.  In the case of shopping centers, usable floor area shall be based on eighty (80) percent of the sum of the gross horizontal floor area of the several floors of the buildings occupied by the shopping center measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls. However, if floor plans and calculations of usable floor area are submitted which demonstrate otherwise, usable floor area may be adjusted accordingly. 
(6)  Parking location. 
a.  One and two family dwellings. Parking facilities for one (1) and two (2) family dwellings shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the dwelling they are intended to serve. Said facilities shall consist of a driveway, parking strip, parking space and/or private garage. No parking shall be permitted elsewhere on the lot or abutting public right-of-way except upon a paved street where such parking is otherwise permitted. 
b.  Other residential uses including multiple family. The off-street parking facilities for other residential uses including multiple family shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the building they are intended to serve. In the case of multiple family residential and similar uses where there are several buildings on one parcel, the required parking shall generally be located within three hundred (300) feet of the building that it is intended to serve. 
c.  All other uses. 
1.  Off-street parking for other than residential use shall be either on the same lot or within three hundred (300) feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured by public right-of-way from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot. When any required off-street parking is provided, not upon the same lot, but on a lot within three hundred (300) feet of the building it is intended to serve, documentation meeting the requirements for recording at the Register of Deeds, shall be provided reflecting that the ownership of the parcel (upon which parking is located) has given to the owner of the parcel (upon which the building requiring the parking is located), a permanent right of use for the required number of parking spaces. 
2.  Whenever the township board or city commission shall establish off-street parking facilities by means of a special assessment district or other means, or the board or city commission approves, after recommendation by the planning commission, of a joint off-street parking facility cooperatively developed by a number of property owners, the board or city commission may determine upon completion of said facility that all buildings erected or uses established thereafter within the special assessment district or districts or on properties owned by the cooperating property owners at the time of completion of the facility, shall be exempt from the requirements of this section for supplying off-street parking facilities on their individual lot, parcel or site. 
(7)  Use not mentioned. In case of any building, structure or premises, the use of which is not specifically mentioned herein, the provisions for a use which is so mentioned and to which said use is similar, as determined by the planning commission, shall apply. 
(8)  Collective parking facilities. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent collective provisions of off-street parking or loading facilities for two (2) or more buildings or uses, provided collectively, such facilities shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the various individual uses computed separately in accordance with the table. 
(9)  Extension of building into existing parking lot. Nothing in this section shall prevent the extension of, or an addition to, a building into an existing parking area, which is required or the original building, when the same amount of space taken by the extension or addition is provided by an enlargement of the existing parking lot, or an additional area located on the same lot or parcel as the building said facility is intended to serve. 
(10)  Continuing character of parking obligation. The requirements for off-street parking applicable to newly erected or substantially altered structures, shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of the parcel on which any such structure is located so long as the structure is in existence. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for an owner of any building affected by this article to discontinue, change or dispense with, or to cause the discontinuance, sale or transfer of such structure, without establishing alternate parking space which meets with the requirements of and is in compliance with this article and chapter. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to use such building without acquiring such land for vehicle parking which meets the requirements of and is in compliance with this article and chapter. 
(11)  Table of parking requirements. The amount of required off-street parking space for new uses or buildings, and additions or alterations to existing buildings, as specified in preceding paragraphs, shall be determined in accordance with the following table. The space so required shall be stated in the application for a building permit and certificate of occupancy and shall be a continuing obligation of the owner, except as provided in subsection (a)(9) of this section. 
Use Required Number of Parking Spaces per Unit of Measure Residential One-family dwelling, two-family dwelling Two (2) per dwelling unit Multiple dwelling, terrace apartment dwellings and efficiency apartments, townhouses and stacked flats Two (2) per dwelling unit Elderly housing-Assisted living One per four units 
plus 
One per employee based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift. Elderly housing-Congregate care One per two units 
plus 
One per employee based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift. Elderly housing-Independent living One per unit 
plus 
One per employee based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift. Institutional Churches, temples or auditoriums incidental to schools One per three seats 
or 
One per six feet of bench in main assembly unit based on maximum seating capacity Convent, nurses' home or other dormitory One per two bedrooms 
plus 
Two for manager Libraries, museums One per 500 square feet of gross floor space 
plus 
One per employee based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift. Post office One per 200 square feet of usable floor area 
plus 
One space per employee based upon the greatest number of employees in any one shift. Public utility One per employee based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift. Child care centers, day care centers, nursery schools One per 400 square feet of usable floor area 
plus 
One per employee based upon the greatest number of employees in any one shift. Municipal offices One per four seats based on the maximum seating capacity of the main meeting room 
plus 
One per two employees based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift. Commercial Beauty parlor and barber shops Two per chair or station 
plus 
One per each employee based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift. Bowling alleys Seven (7) per alley 
plus 
Requirements for accessory uses Dance halls, pool or billiard parlors, roller and skating rinks, exhibition halls, and assembly halls without fixed seats One per three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes Establishments for sale and consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages, food or refreshments One per two persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load and/or maximum seating capacity as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes 
-or- 
One per two seats 
plus 
One per each employee based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift, whichever is greater Furniture and appliance, household equipment repair shops, showroom of plumber, decorator, electrician or similar trade, clothing and shoe repair, wholesale stores and machinery sales One per 800 square feet usable floor area 
plus 
One per each employee based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift. Gasoline filling stations One for each vehicle fueling position, 
plus 
One per lubrication, stall, rack or pit, 
plus 
One per 350 square feet of usable floor area in any convenience store area. Requirements for fast food shall be calculated separately. 
plus 
One per employee based upon the greatest number of employees in any one shift. Laundromats and coin operated dry cleaners One per each washing and/or dry cleaning machines Miniature golf courses Two (2) for each one hole 
plus 
One for each employee based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift. Mini storage rental units One for each employee 
plus 
One for each 50 storage units to be located at the office Hospitals One per 2 beds 
plus 
One (1) per employee including staff doctors and nurses based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift. Sanitariums, extended care facilities, nursing and convalescent homes or similar uses One per 4 beds 
plus 
One per employee including staff doctors and nurses based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift. Elementary and junior high schools 11/2 per teacher, employee and administrator 
plus 
Requirements for an assembly hall, stadium or sports arena. If no auditorium or assembly hall is provided, two spaces per classroom shall be provided in addition to the above High schools, trade schools, commercial or vocational schools or colleges 11/2) per teacher, employee and administrator 
plus 
One per ten students 
plus 
Requirements for an assembly hall, stadium or sports arena Private clubs and lodge halls One per three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes Private golf clubs, swimming pool clubs, tennis clubs or other similar uses One per two member families or individual members Stadiums, sport arenas or similar place of outdoor assembly One per three seats 
or 
One per 6 feet of bench Theaters and auditoriums (other than incidental to schools) One per three seats based on maximum seating capacity 
plus 
One per two employees based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift. Mortuaries or funeral homes One per 50 square feet of floor space in the parlors or individual funeral service rooms Motel, hotel, or other commercial lodging establishments One per unit 
plus 
One per each employee based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift 
plus 
Parking required for accessory uses such as restaurant or bar Motor vehicle sales and service establishment One per 200 square feet of sales room floor space, 
plus 
One per one (1) automobile service stall, 
plus 
One per employee based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift. Quick oil change facility One per employee based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift 
plus 
Four stacking spaces per service stall or lane. Service garages, auto salesrooms, auto repair, collision or bumping shops One per employee based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift 
plus 
Two spaces for each grease rack or stall for servicing automobiles Shopping centers-For the purpose of this Section shopping centers shall be defined as a structure or group of structures located on the same zoning lot or parcels which provide a variety of commercial uses and also provide common off-street parking facilities, pedestrian areas, and vehicular movement areas One per 200 square feet of usable floor area Retail stores except as otherwise specified herein One per 200 square feet of usable floor area Drive-in restaurants and roadside stands One per 15 square feet of usable floor area 
plus 
One per each employee based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift. Drive-through restaurant facilities; i.e. establishments with service windows or similar arrangements for the purpose of serving customers in their vehicles Five stacking spaces per window 
plus 
Required off-street parking space per designated use Drive through facilities, other than for restaurants or "fast food," such as pharmacies Five stacking spaces per window 
plus 
Required off-street parking per designated use Automobile wash One per employee based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift 
plus 
Off-street stacking spaces at the rate of 12 spaces per bay for a fully automatic car wash; 15 for a semi-automatic (motorist must leave auto); three spaces per bay for a self-serve car wash. Office Banks, business or professional offices of lawyers, landscape architects, architects, engineers, or similar or allied professions One per 200 square feet of usable floor area Professional office of doctors and dentists One per twenty (20) square feet of floor space in waiting room 
plus 
One per examining room, patient treatment station dental chair or similar use 
plus 
One per each employee based on the greatest number of employees in any one shift. Medical clinics, outpatient care centers, 24 hour medical stations, urgent care centers and similar facilities Two per exam, procedure or operating room 
plus 
One per laboratory or recovery room Drive-through facilities; i.e. establishments with service windows or similar arrangements for the purpose of serving customers in their vehicles, such as banks Five stacking spaces per window 
plus 
Required off-street parking space per designated use Industrial Industrial establishments including manufacturing research and testing etc. 400 square feet of usable floor area. Warehouse and storage buildings One per 400 square feet of usable floor space area Recreation Facilities Indoor tennis or racquetball facility Six for each court 
plus 
Spaces as required for each accessory use such as a full service bar or restaurant Amusement arcade One for each game table 
plus 
One for each amusement device Municipal recreation centers Five per 1,000 square feet of usable floor area, 
plus 
Any required spaces for outdoor courts, fields and facilities, 
-or- 
One per three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county, state fire, building or health codes, whichever is greater Athletic clubs, exercise establishments, health studios, sauna baths, judo clubs and other similar uses One for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county, or state fire, building or health codes 
plus 
One space per employee, or one space for each 11/2 clothing lockers, whichever is greater Batting Cage Three per cage  
(b)  Requirements for the development, maintenance and layout of parking facilities. In all instances, except private residences, where off-street parking facilities are required or where vehicular parking is provided as an accessory to the lawful use of property, such off-street parking facilities shall be designed, constructed and maintained subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  An application for site plan approval to construct a parking lot shall be submitted to the municipality, in compliance with Article XX, which shall issue a permit for said lot after necessary reviews and the following mandatory provisions have been provided for: 
a.  Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided to meet approval of the planning commission and the agency having jurisdiction of the road right-of-way. Additionally, driveway location, spacing and design shall meet the standards of section 78-164, access management and driveway standards, and this chapter. 
b.  The lots shall be graded and proper drainage facilities provided to dispose of all surface water to meet the approval of the building department or municipal engineer. 
c.  Such parking lot, including areas for ingress and egress, shall be constructed in compliance with the standards as adopted by the building department. This minimum specification shall not be construed as a substitute for sufficient pavement thickness where traffic conditions and/or soil conditions require more substantial pavement designs. 
(2)  Screening and land use buffers are provided as specified in sections 78-165, 78-166 and 78-167. 
(3)  Such parking lots shall be used solely for parking private passenger vehicles for periods of less then one (1) day and no commercial activity, such as washing, greasing, sale or merchandise, repair work or servicing or any kind, shall be done thereon. 
(4)  Lighting shall be provided and so arranged and designed as to reflect light away from any residential use adjacent to the area and in an amount which shall be sufficient to permit safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. Lighting shall further comply with the standards of the municipality and this chapter for exterior lighting. Parking lot lighting shall be extinguished no later than one-half hour after the closing of business transacting hours. This shall exclude minimum lighting levels required for parking lot security. When such property is closed at night so that no vehicles may enter or leave, then no lighting need be provided. Lighting fixtures shall use high pressure sodium lamps or other lighting methods approved by the planning commission. Where the proposed project is part of a larger project, the type of lighting (high-pressure sodium, metal halide or approved equivalent) should be consistent throughout the project. 
(5)  Concrete curbs or other features as approved by the planning commission shall be provided and maintained to protect against damage to adjoining properties and planting areas. 
(6)  All parking spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes. Maneuvering directly onto a street shall be prohibited. 
(7)  Ingress and egress to a parking lot located in an area zoned for nonresidential uses shall not be across land zoned for single family residential uses. 
(8)  Plans for the development of any such parking lot must be approved by the building department before construction is started. 
(9)  All parking areas shall be maintained so that the surface of the lot shall be safe and clean. Cracks, pot holes or litter found on the lot shall be repaired and/or removed after notification by the building inspector. 
(10)  All parking facilities and business establishments shall keep the exterior lot and grounds free of debris and flying paper. 
(11)  No land shall be used for parking purposes until approved by the building department; provided whenever the lot does not meet the specifications and/or regulations set forth in this article, the building department shall give notice to the property owner to correct the same within a specified time, and if such corrections are not made in accordance with such notice, he shall order the lot closed forthwith; and such land or lot shall not be used for parking until corrections have been made and approved by the building department. 
(12)  All parking lots shall be striped and maintained showing the individual parking bays. Said stripes shall conform with the minimum layout requirement as found in subsection (b)(13) of this section and the approved layout plan. 
(13)  Plans for the layout and striping of off-street parking lots shall comply with the following minimum requirements: 
Parking Lot Dimension Regulations 
Parking Pattern 
in degrees Maneuvering Lane Width Parking Space Width Parking Space Length Total Width of 1 Tier of Parking Spaces Plus Maneuvering Lane Total Width of 2 Tiers of Parking Spaces Plus Maneuvering Lane 0 (parallel parking) 12 ft. 9 ft. 23 ft. 21 ft. 30 ft.*  
38 ft.** 30 to 53 12 ft. 9 ft. 20 ft. 33 ft. 54 ft.   54 to 74 15 ft. 9 ft. 20 ft. 35 ft. 6 in. 58 ft.   75 to 90 20 ft. 9 ft. 20 ft. 40 ft. 60 ft.**  
Footnotes: *One way aisle **Two-way aisle  
(14)  Stacking spaces shall be ten feet wide by 20 feet long. 

Parking Layouts 
(c)  Off-street loading and unloading. On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, goods, display, department store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry cleaning or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the same lot adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading services in order to avoid undue interferences with public use of the streets or alleys and parking areas. Such space, unless otherwise adequately provided for in the determination of the planning commission as provided below, shall include a ten (10) foot by fifty (50) foot loading space, with a fourteen (14) foot height clearance and shall be provided according to the following table: 
Required Loading Spaces 
Ground Floor Area 
Square Feet Loading and Unloading Spaces 1-2,000 None required 2,000-20,000 One space 20,000-100,000 One space plus one space for each 20,000 square feet in excess of 20,000 square feet 100,000-500,000 Five spaces plus one space for each 40,000 square feet in excess of 100,000 square feet Over 500,000 Fifteen spaces plus one space for each 80,000 square feet in excess of 500,000  
The planning commission may modify the above dimensions and requirements upon making the determination that another standard would be more appropriate because of the number or type of deliveries experienced by a particular business or use as demonstrated on the site plan. 
The location of loading and unloading areas shall be reviewed at the time of site plan submission to ensure that adequate protection is afforded to adjacent districts, in particular, residential districts from noise and other disruptive elements normally associated with such facilities. 
(Ord. of 6-7-04) 
Sec. 78-164. - Access management and drive-way standards. 
(a)  Statement of purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide access standards which will facilitate through traffic operations, ensure public safety along roadways, and protect the public investment in the street system; while providing property owners with reasonable, through not always direct, access. The standards are specifically designed for streets whose primary function is the movement of through traffic, as opposed to local streets whose primary function is access to adjacent properties. 
(b)  Application of standards. 
(1)  The standards of this section shall be applied to the Ann Arbor Road Corridor Zoning District. 
(2)  The access standards contained herein shall be required in addition to, and where permissible shall supersede, the requirements of the Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT). 
(3)  The standards contained in this section 78-164 shall apply to all uses, except permitted single-family and two-family dwelling units. 
(4)  For expansion and/or redevelopment of existing sites where the planning commission determines that compliance with all standards of this section is unreasonable, the standards shall be applied to the maximum extent possible. In such situation, suitable alternatives which substantially achieve the purpose of this section may be accepted by the planning commission, provided that the applicant demonstrates all of the following apply: 
a.  Size of the parcel is insufficient to meet the dimensional standards. 
b.  The spacing of existing, adjacent driveways or environmental constraints prohibit adherence to the access standards at a reasonable cost. 
c.  The use will generate less than five-hundred (500) total vehicle trips per day or less than seventy-five (75) total vehicle trips in the peak hour of travel on the adjacent street, based on rates developed by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
d.  There is no other reasonable means of access. 
(c)  General standards for driveway location. 
(1)  Driveways shall be located so as to minimize interference with the free movement of traffic, to provide adequate sight distance, and to provide the most favorable driveway grade. 
(2)  Driveways, including the radii but not including right turn lanes, passing lanes and tapers, shall be located entirely within the right-of-way frontage, unless otherwise approved by the Michigan Department of Transportation and upon written certification from the adjacent property owner agreeing to such encroachment. 
(d)  Standards for the number of commercial driveways. The number of commercial driveways shall be the minimum necessary to provide reasonable access for regular traffic and emergency vehicles, while preserving traffic operations and safety along the public roadway. A single means of direct or indirect access shall be provided for each separately owned parcel. Where possible, this access shall be via a shared driveway or a service drive. Where it is not possible to provide shared access, this access may be by a single driveway. Additional driveways may be permitted for a property only under one of the following: 
(1)  One (1) additional driveway may be allowed for properties with a continuous frontage of over 500 feet, and one additional driveway for each additional 500 feet of frontage, if the planning commission determines there are no other reasonable access opportunities. 
(2)  Two one-way driveways may be permitted along a frontage of at least 125 feet, provided the driveways do not interfere with operations at other driveways or along the street. 
(3)  The planning commission may determine addition driveways are justified due to the amount of traffic generated by the use without compromising traffic operations along the public street, based upon a traffic impact study submitted by the applicant. 
(e)  Driveway spacing standards. 
(1)  Between driveways: The minimum spacing between two (2) commercial driveways on the same side of the road shall be based upon posted speed limits along the parcel frontage. The minimum spacing indicated below are measured from centerline to centerline. 
Driveway Spacing Standards 
Posted Speed 
Limit 
(MPH) Minimum Driveway 
Spacing 
(In Feet) 30  155 35  185 40  225 45+ 300  
(2)  Insufficient street frontage: For sites with insufficient street frontage to meet the above criterion, the planning commission may require construction of the driveway along a side street, a shared driveway with an adjacent property, construction of a driveway along the property line farthest from the intersection or require a service/frontage road. 
(3)  Offsets: To reduce left-turn conflicts, new commercial driveways should be aligned with driveways or streets on the opposite side of the roadway where possible. If alignment is not possible, driveways should be offset a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) feet along an arterial roadway and one hundred fifty (150) feet along other roadways. Longer offsets may be required depending on the expected inbound left-turn volumes of the driveways, or sight distance limitations. 
(4)  Spacing from intersections: Minimum spacing requirements between a proposed commercial driveway and an intersection either adjacent or on the opposite side of the street may be set on a case-by-case basis by the planning commission during site plan review but in no instance shall be less than the distances listed below. The following measurements are from the near edge of the proposed driveway, measured at the throat perpendicular to the street, to the near lane edge of the intersecting street or pavement edge for uncurbed sections. 
Minimum Commercial Driveway 
Spacing From Street Intersections 
Location of Driveway Minimum Spacing for a Full Movement Driveway Minimum Spacing for a Channelized Driveway 
Restricting Left Turns Along Ann Arbor Road from intersection with another Arterial (Sheldon, Main, Lilley or Haggerty) 250 feet 250 feet Along Ann Arbor Road from intersection with a local street 175 feet 175 feet  
For sites with insufficient street frontage to meet the above criteria, the planning commission may require construction of the driveway along a side street, a shared driveway with an adjacent property, construction of a driveway along the property line farthest from the intersection or require a service/frontage road. 
(f)  Standards for shared driveways and service/frontage roads. The use of service roads, in conjunction with driveway spacing, is intended to preserve traffic flow along major thoroughfares and minimize traffic conflicts, while retaining reasonable access to the property. Where noted above, or where the planning commission determines that reducing the number of access points may have a beneficial impact on traffic operations and safety while preserving the property owner's right to reasonable access, access from a side street, a shared driveway or service road connecting two or more properties or uses may be required. In particular, service drives, frontage roads or parking lot maneuvering lane connection between lots or uses may be required in the following cases: 
(1)  Where the driveway spacing standards of this section can not be met. 
(2)  When the driveway could potentially interfere with traffic operations at an existing or potential traffic signal location. 
(3)  The site is along a portion of Ann Arbor Road where there is congestion or a relatively high number of accidents. 
(4)  The property frontage has limited sight distance. 
(5)  The fire department recommends a second means of emergency access. 
(g)  Commercial driveway design. Commercial driveways shall be designed according to the standards of the MDOT and in accordance with the following: 
(1)  For high traffic generators, or for commercial driveways along roadways experiencing or expected to experience congestion, all as determined by the planning commission, two (2) egress lanes may be required (one (1) being a separate left turn lane). 
(2)  Where a boulevard entrance is designed by the applicant or planning commission, a fully curbed island shall separate the ingress and egress lanes. The radii forming the edges on this island shall be designed to accommodate the largest vehicle that will normally use the driveway. The minimum area of the island shall be one hundred eighty (180) square feet and the minimum width ten (10) feet. The planning commission may require landscaping on the section outside the public right-of-way. Such landscaping shall be tolerant of roadway conditions. Direct alignment of boulevard entrances is discouraged. 
(3)  All commercial driveways shall provide an unobstructed clear vision between a height of three (3) feet and ten (10) feet in a triangular area measured ten (10) feet back from the point of intersection of the driveway and the street right-of-way. 
(h)  Modification of standards for special situations. During site plan review the planning commission shall have the authority to modify the standards of this section 78-164 upon consideration of the following: 
(1)  The standards of this section would prevent reasonable access to the site. 
(2)  Access via a shared driveway or service/frontage road is not possible due to the presence of existing buildings or topographic conditions. 
(3)  Roadway improvements (such as the addition of a traffic signal, a center turn lane or bypass lane) will be made to improve overall traffic operations prior to project completion, or occupancy of the building. 
(4)  The use involves the redesign of an existing development or a new use which will generate less traffic than the previous use. 
(5)  The proposed location and design is supported by the MDOT as an acceptable design under the existing site conditions. The planning commission may also request the applicant provide a traffic impact study to support the requested access design. 
(6)  The modification shall be of the minimum amount necessary, but in no case shall spacing of a full-access driveway be less than sixty (60) feet, measured centerline to centerline. 
(7)  Where there is a change in use or expansion at a site that does not comply with standards herein, the planning commission shall determine the amount of upgrade needed in consideration of the existing and expected traffic pattern and the capability to meet the standards herein to the extent practical. 
(Ord. of 6-7-04) 
Sec. 78-165. - Landscaping standards. 
(a)  Installation. 
(1)  All landscaping shall be installed in a manner consistent with accepted planting procedures and the approved landscape development plan. This shall include the quantity, size, type and location of plantings proposed. 
a.  Major deviations as to quality, type, size and location of plant materials from the original approved landscape development plan shall require submission and approval in the same manner as provided in this article for the original submission. 
b.  Minor revisions or deviations from the approved landscape development plan may be permitted if approved by the chief building official or municipality's designated expert. In reviewing such changes, the chief building official shall ensure that the changes do not constitute a whole-sale change of the landscape development plan and are consistent with the spirit and intent of this article and the previously approved development plan or site plan. 
c.  The planting operations and installation shall conform to the standards and details adopted by the municipality. 
(2)  Installation of all landscaping, screen walls, etc. shown on the approved landscape plan shall be made prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the proposed development; subject to the following: 
a.  If it is determined that the installation of the landscape materials, screen walls, etc., would be jeopardized by weather conditions, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued provided that the developer submits to the building department a cost estimate for the completion of the landscape plan and provides to the municipality a cash deposit, certified check or irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of the approved cost estimate. 
b.  In no case shall a certificate of occupancy or a temporary certificate of occupancy be issued without the aforementioned submission or completion of the installation. It shall be the responsibility of the chief building official to see that this policy is carried out. At the time of submission of the cash deposit, certified check or irrevocable letter of credit, the chief building official shall indicate the completion date for the installation of all landscaping, screen walls, etc. 
c.  Failure to comply with the completion date shall result in forfeiture of the deposit to the municipality and shall not release the developer from the obligation for installation and completion of the landscaping consistent with the approved plan. The chief building official may, however, grant one extension for 60 days after the written request from the developer, provided circumstances warrant such an extension. 
(b)  Materials. 
(1)  All plant material shall: 
a.  Conform to size and description set forth in the current edition of "American Standard for Nursery Stock" sponsored by the American Association of Nurseryman, Inc. and approved by the American National Standards Institute, Inc. (ANSI). 
b.  Be true to name in conformance to "Standardized Plant Names", established by the American Joint Committee on Horticultural Nomenclature, or other source accepted by the city. 
c.  Be typical of its species or variety, have normal habit of growth, well-branched and densely foliated when in leaf. 
d.  Be of sound health, vigorous and uniform in appearance with a well developed root system and free from disease, insect pests, eggs or larvae. 
e.  Be freshly dug and nursery grown. 
f.  Be chosen according to soil, climatic conditions and environmental factors for the proposed development. 
(2)  Trees shall have straight trunks with leaders intact, undamaged and uncut. 
(3)  The following trees, because of various problems, shall not be considered as being of a desirable quality, and therefore shall, in most cases, not be permitted. This does not preclude the use of existing trees if it can be shown that the removal of the tree would result in a substantial loss of screening and/or buffering of adjacent lands, uses or public rights-of-way. 
a.  Acer negundo - Box Elder 
b.  Ulmus varieties - Elm varieties 
c.  Aesculus varieties - Horse Chestnut 
d.  Populus varieties - Poplar varieties 
e.  Salix varieties - Willow varieties 
f.  Catalpa varieties - Catalpa varieties 
g.  Ailanthus altissima - Tree of Heaven 
h.  Elaeagnus varieties - Olive varieties 
i.  Ginkgo biloba - Ginkgo (female only) 
j.  Fraxinus varieties - Ash varieties 
(4)  Lawn areas shall be planted in species of grass normally grown as permanent lawns in southeast Michigan. Grass may be sodded or hydro-seeded and mulched, except that solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion. Sod or seed shall be clean, free of weeds and noxious pests or disease. 
(5)  Ground covers used in lieu of grass in whole or part shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete after one complete growing season. 
(6)  Stone and synthetic materials shall not be used as a groundcover. 
(7)  Mulch: Planting beds shall present a finished appearance, with shredded hardwood bark mulch or similar natural material at a minimum depth of three (3) inches. Mulch used around trees and shrubs shall be a minimum of four (4) inches deep, and shall be pulled one (1) inch away from three trunks. 
Pine bark mulch shall be prohibited. An effective edge treatment must be provided to minimize the migration of mulch. 
(8)  Hedges, where provided, shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, solid, visual screen within one full planting season. Where plants are to be used as a hedge for screening purposes, the maximum spacing will have to be determined by the plant proposed. 
(9)  Topsoil: A minimum four (4) inches of topsoil shall be provided for all lawn areas, ground covers and planting beds. 
(10)  Artificial plant material shall be prohibited. 
(11)  Landscaping shall be located and maintained in a manner that minimizes conflicts with overhead or underground utilities. 
(12)  Existing vegetation to be preserved shall be protected during construction through the use of temporary fencing around the drip line. 
(13)  Where pavement and landscape areas interface, adequate measures shall be taken to protect plants from vehicle encroachment. 
(14)  Tree sizes are determined using the following two definitions: Caliper shall be defined as the diameter of the trunk of a tree at eighteen (18) inches above the ground. Diameter breast height (D.B.H.) is the diameter in inches of a tree measured at 41/2 feet above the existing grade. 
(15)  Minimum sizes of plant material: 
a.  Deciduous shade trees: Shall be species having a trunk which can be maintained with over seven foot clear stem. Deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of three (3) to three and one-half at the time of planting. 
b.  Deciduous small ornamental trees : Small ornamental trees shall be a minimum caliper of two inches at time of planting, or six feet in height in clump form. 
c.  Evergreen trees: Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of eight feet in height at time of planting. 
d.  Deciduous shrubs and upright evergreen shrubs: Shall be a minimum of thirty inches in height at the time of planting. 
e.  Spreading evergreen shrubs and dwarf species shrubs : Shall be a minimum of eighteen (18) to twenty-four (24) inches in height or five (5) gallon container size at time of planting. 
f.  Vines: Vines shall be a minimum of thirty (30) inches in length after one (1) growing season and may be used in conjunction with fences, screens, or walls to meet buffer requirements. 
(c)  Variety of plant material sizes at installation. 
(1)  To ensure adequate variety, and to avoid monotony and uniformity within the site, the overall landscape plan shall comply with the following: 
Landscaping Materials Percentage of Total Minimum Size at 
Installation Deciduous shade trees 50% 3.0-3.5 inches caliper 30% 3.5-4.0 inches caliper 20% 4.0 inches caliper Evergreen trees 50% 8.0 feet high 30% 10.0 feet high 20% 12.0 feet high Deciduous ornamental trees (clump form) 50% 6.0 feet high 50% 8.0 feet high Deciduous ornamental trees 50% 2.0 inches caliper 30% 2.5 inches caliper 20% 3.0 inches caliper Deciduous shrubs 50% 30.0 inches high 50% 36.0 inches high Upright evergreen shrubs 50% 30.0 inches high 50% 36.0 inches high  
(2)  Modifications : For specific landscape installations that require uniformity of plant size, such as hedges, mass plantings of shrubs as ground cover, and plants used as ornamental design accents, the planning commission may approve variations in the above percentages. Also, for reforestation, wooded area infill, and other applications determined appropriate by the planning commission, small caliper, park-grade trees may be approved. 
(d)  Maintenance. 
(1)  The owner of the property shall be responsible for all maintenance of site landscaping as follows: 
a.  Landscape maintenance procedures and frequencies to be followed shall be specified on the landscape plan, along with the manner in which the effectiveness, health and intended functions of the various landscape areas on the site will be ensured. 
b.  Landscaping shall be kept in neat, orderly and healthy growing condition, free from debris and refuse. 
c.  Pruning shall be minimal at the time of installation, only to remove dead or diseased branches. Subsequent pruning shall assure proper maturation of plants to achieve their approved purpose. 
d.  All dead plant material shall be removed and replaced within six (6) months after it dies or in the next planting season, whichever occurs first. For purposes of this section the planting season for deciduous plants shall be between March 1 and June 1 and from October 1 until the prepared soil becomes frozen. The planting season for evergreen plants shall be between March 1 and June 1. Plant material installed to replace dead or diseased material shall be as close as practical to the size of the material it is intended to replace. 
(2)  The approved landscape plan shall be considered a permanent record and integral part of the site plan approval. Unless otherwise approved in accordance with the aforementioned procedures, any revisions to, or removal of, plant materials will place the parcel in non-conformity with the originally approved landscape plan and shall be viewed as a violation of this chapter and the agreed upon terms of the final site plan approval. 
(3)  The developer, at the time of submission of the final site plan approval, shall demonstrate to the planning commission that adequate provisions have been made to supply water to all landscape areas, including right-of-way. This shall be accomplished by installation of an in-ground irrigation system to provide water for the landscape areas where specified. The commission shall have the authority to waive or modify this requirement where it determines that such action would be in accordance with the purpose and objectives of this article. 
A contract for maintenance of all landscape areas may be required by the building department. 
(Ord. of 6-7-04) 
Sec. 78-166. - Character of landscaping, screening or buffering areas. 
(a)  The selection and placement of plant materials shall be such that the general maintenance and upkeep of the areas shall be low so that the success of the planting area can be anticipated without placing undue hardship on the landowner or leasee. 
(b)  Where landscape treatment is required for screening purposes, the planning commission shall insure that the plan proposed meets the following objectives. 
(1)  The proposed plan effectively forms a complete visual and physical separation between the two (2) unlike land uses. 
(2)  The proposed plan forms a transition zone between the unlike uses and affords sufficient protection and is compatible with the character of the adjacent residential area. 
(3)  The proposed plan effectively reduces the adverse effects of the proposed use, in particular, glare of headlights, lighting from parking areas, noise, unsightly areas such as trash pickup points and contrasting views such as parking areas and access drives. 
(c)  When the landscape treatment is required as a buffer or green area, the planning commission shall insure that the plan proposed meets the following objectives: 
(1)  The proposed plan breaks up the area and the proposed plant material creates a partial visual separation. 
(2)  The proposed plan forms a transition zone which helps break up the visual pattern of paving areas. 
(3)  The proposed plan, through the use of plant material, creates a ground and overhead area which consists of plant material which is more compatible with the general character of the community and the residential districts. 
(Ord. of 6-7-04) 
Sec. 78-167. - Specific landscaping, screening and buffering requirements. 
(a)  Intent. The ARC, Ann Arbor Road Corridor District was established for the express purpose of facilitating implementation of the Ann Arbor Road Corridor Design Plan. The Ann Arbor Road Corridor Design Plan proposes the installation of specific landscaping and design elements along the sides of Ann Arbor Road to act as a unifying streetscape. Consistency in these streetscape features, materials and colors is essential to achieving the community's desired aesthetic character, economic enhancement and revitalization, and to support the public health, safety and welfare. 
Therefore, compliance with the following specific standards shall be required in conjunction with any site development, redevelopment, alteration or expansion or re-occupancy of a vacant building on an ARC site. 
(b)  Ann Arbor Road streetscape. 
(1)  Ann Arbor Road streetscape as required herein shall be provided: 
a.  Along all Ann Arbor Road frontage; and 
b.  Along other streets within the boundaries of the ARC District, where such streets have a street setback of fifty (50) feet or greater. 
(2)  Compliance with prototype: Landscaping and streetscape improvements, shall be provided including but not limited to the colored stamped concrete verge, street trees, perennials, decorative fencing and brick piers, sidewalk and shrubs, and shall be consistent with the standards and requirements of the Ann Arbor Road Streetscape Prototype, "Ann Arbor Road Standard Design Details," dated October 16, 2003 (see Section 78-171), and as may be modified from time to time. 
(3)  Tree and shrub quantities: Deciduous shade trees shall be planted along the length of the site frontage, in an amount equal to minimum of one (1) street tree per forty (40) feet or fraction thereof of site frontage. 
(4)  Design flexibility: Within the intent of this article, the planning commission may approve alternatives it determines to be necessary to accommodate peculiar circumstances or unforeseen problems, or to carry out the spirit, intent and purposes of this article. Further, where streetscape elements have been accomplished along Ann Arbor Road by means of earlier development which substantially accomplish the overall design objectives, the planning commission may modify the requirements to reflect those earlier improvements. 
(c)  Interface with residential use or district. 
(1)  Where the Ann Arbor Road Corridor District, is adjacent to any single family, two family, or multi-family residential use or district. 
Screening shall be provided consistent with the objectives of this article and shall be accomplished by-a solid wall with planting strip. 
a.  The solid wall shall be consistent with the standards and requirements of the Ann Arbor Road Streetscape Prototype, "Ann Arbor Road Standard Design Details," dated October 16, 2003 (see Section 78-171), and as may be modified from time to time. The solid wall shall be located at the property line with a planting strip six (6) to eight (8) feet wide abutting the base and on the interior side of the wall. The planting strip shall be planted with deciduous shade trees planted thirty-five (35) feet on center. 
b.  In general, to achieve the appropriate master planned interface, the solid wall must be provided consistent with the above standards. Within the context of these standards and the ARC District, the planning commission may approve modifications it determines necessary to address unusual circumstances. 
(d)  Other areas requiring screening and/or buffering. 
(1)  General standards. Other site uses and functions which require screening and/or buffering shall provide that screening and/or buffering based on the general standards below. All screening or buffering provided shall be related, consistent and compatible with the overall Ann Arbor Road design. 
a.  Solid wall with planting strip. A solid wall shall be at least six feet in height, constructed of brick with a pre-cast concrete cap. The solid wall shall be located at the property line with a planting strip six to eight feet wide abutting the base and on the interior side of the wall. The planting strip shall be planted with deciduous shade trees with a minimum caliper of three to three and one-half inches, and planted 35 feet on center. 
b.  Screening mound or berm. A screening mound or berm shall have a minimum height of five to six feet with side slopes no steeper than 3:1 (three feet horizontal to one foot vertical). The top of all berms shall have a level horizontal area of at least three feet in width. 
The mound or berm shall be designed and graded in a manner which will blend with existing topography, shall be graded smooth, and shall be appropriately sodded, hydro-seeded, and mulched, or planted. Included as part of the mound or berm shall be deciduous shade trees, small deciduous ornamental trees, evergreen trees and/or shrubs planted along the berm area. 
c.  Evergreen screen. Evergreen screens shall consist of evergreen trees with year-round screening characteristics. Such trees shall be planted ten to 15 feet on center in two staggered rows ten feet apart. 
d.  Other screening may be considered if it will provide, in the opinion of the planning commission, the same screening effect and the objectives specified in section 78-165, character of landscaping, screening or buffering areas. 
(2)  Public utilities. 
a.  Communication facilities (not including buildings), public utility transformer stations, sub-stations, and gas regulator stations shall be screened. 
The screen shall be reviewed by the planning commission to insure that it accomplishes the following objectives: 
1.  The proposed screen effectively separates the proposed facility from the public right-of-way and the view of the general public. 
2.  The proposed screen effectively establishes some form of separation and human scale between the proposed facility and abutting public walks. 
b.  Screening shall meet the aforementioned objectives and shall be accomplished by any one or a combination of the following: 
1.  Screening mound or berm. 
2.  Solid wall with planting strip. 
3.  Fence with evergreen screen. 
(3)  Service areas screening. 
a.  For purposes of this section, service areas are outdoor areas intended to be accessed by vehicles for purposes of supporting the principal use, including loading/unloading, deliveries, waste disposal and utility services. 
b.  All service areas shall be screened or buffered in a manner as determined necessary by the planning commission to meet the aforementioned objectives of this article and shall meet the following specific objectives: 
1.  Service areas shall be completely screened from adjacent residential areas and screened as determined necessary by the planning commission from view of the public right-of-way. 
2.  All screening shall be contained within the subject property. 
3.  Service areas shall be screened by appropriate plant materials, and/or architectural materials, such as a decorative wall, or a combination of both, to meet the screening objectives of this section. 
(e)  Parking area screening. 
(1)  All off-street parking areas and vehicular use areas shall be screened or buffered in a manner which meets the following specific objective: 
a.  Off-street parking and vehicular use areas shall be buffered in a manner that separates the proposed facility from views as seen from the public right-of-way and creates a scale more appropriate to the individual and pedestrian. 
b.  All screening or buffer areas shall be contained within the subject property. 
(2)  Screening or buffering shall meet the aforementioned objectives of this section and article and shall be accomplished by the following options: 
a.  A minimum ten-foot buffer area between the off-street parking and/or vehicular use area and the street setback line to include one tree per 40 feet or fraction thereof of street frontage of the parking lot and plantings of at least ten shrubs for every (30) feet or fraction thereof of street frontage of parking lot. 

10-foot buffer 
b.  A minimum 20 foot buffer area between the parking lot and the street setback line to include a three-foot high berm not exceeding 33 percent slope and a minimum of one tree for every 40 feet and five shrubs for every 30 feet or fraction thereof of street frontage of the parking lot. 

20-foot buffer 
c.  A minimum six-foot buffer area between the parking lot and the street setback line to include a 36-inch high decorative metal fence. The fencing shall contain four-inch spacing between metal pickets with masonry pilasters spaced 24 feet apart, capped, and at least 16 inches to 21 wide. The minimum landscaping required in conjunction with the metal fence is one tree for every 40 feet and five shrubs for every 30 feet or fraction thereof of street frontage of parking lot. 

six-foot buffer 
d.  A minimum four-foot buffer area between the parking lot and the street setback line to include a thirty-six-inch high masonry screening wall in conjunction with the minimum landscaping requirement of one tree for every 40 feet or fraction thereof of street frontage of the parking lot. The wall shall be constructed of brick or masonry block and shall also include a concrete stone or masonry cap providing one-half-inch reveal on both sides. 

four-foot buffer 
(3)  Screening and buffering options are summarized in the following chart: 
Parking Area Screening 
Parking Area Screening 
Options Minimum Buffer 
Dimensions (in feet) Minimum Landscaping 
Requirements (a) Landscape strip 10 One tree per 40 feet 
Ten shrubs per 30 feet (b) Three-foot high berm 20 One tree per 40 feet 
Five shrubs per 30 feet (c) Three-foot high decorative metal fence 6 One tree per 40 feet 
Five shrubs per 30 feet (d) Three-foot high wall 4 One tree per 40 feet  
(4)  If the off-street parking and/or vehicle use area is located such that it requires Ann Arbor Road streetscape in accordance with section 78-167(b)1. then section 78-167(d)4.b., above, shall not apply. 
(Ord. of 6-7-04) 
Sec. 78-168. - Interior parking lot landscaping. 
(a)  Parking lot landscaping. 
(1)  Off-street parking areas containing twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces shall provide internal landscaping, other than that required in a buffer zone or along the street frontage, protected by a raised standard or rolled concrete curb, in accordance with the following: 
a.  25 through 100 spaces: One canopy/deciduous tree and 100 sq. ft. of landscaped area per ten spaces, rounded upward. 
b.  101 through 200 spaces: One canopy/deciduous tree and 100 sq. ft. of landscaped area per 12 spaces, rounded upward. 
c.  201 spaces or more: One canopy/deciduous tree and 100 sq. ft. of landscaped area per 15 spaces, rounded upward. 
(2)  The minimum size of a landscaped area shall be 60 sq. ft. and at least six feet in width. 
(3)  Landscaped areas shall be covered by grass or other living ground cover. 
(4)  Required trees shall be located to minimize potential damage by vehicles. 
(5)  The internal landscaping shall be located and designed to direct traffic flow, particularly near site entrances. Additional landscaping shall be dispersed through the lot to define vehicular circulation, improve site aesthetics, provide shade, and installed such that, when mature, it does not obscure traffic signs, fire hydrants, lighting, drainage patterns on site or adjacent properties, or obstruct vision for safety of ingress or egress. 
(Ord. of 6-7-04) 
Sec. 78-169. - Signs. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of these sign regulations is to provide for a unified approach to managing the size, placement, number and appearance of signs within the Ann Arbor Road Corridor District. Within the framework of the long term cooperative effort between the City and Charter Township of Plymouth, this section is intended to promote a balance between business advertising needs, the aesthetic recommendations of the Ann Arbor Road Plan and design guidelines, and the safety needs of the passing motorist. 
(b)  Definitions: 
(1)  Abandoned sign: A sign which, for ninety (90) consecutive days, fails to direct a person to or advertise a bona fide business, tenant, owner, product or activity conducted, or product available on the premises where such a sign is displayed. 
(2)  Awning: A protective, roof-like covering, attached to the face of a building, as might be located over a window or door. 
(3)  Awning or canopy sign: A sign which is painted on, printed on or attached flat against the surface of an awning. 
(4)  Business center: A group of two (2) or more contiguous stores, businesses or offices, research facilities or industrial facilities developed as a planned complex which collectively have a name different from the name of any individual business, are under common ownership or management and share common parking areas, pedestrian areas, are linked architecturally or otherwise present the appearance of one (1) development site. Business centers may include shopping centers and other multi-tenant buildings. 
(5)  Canopy: A roof-like architectural structure, typically attached to the face of a building, and used to provide protection from the elements (e.g., a canopy over a walkway or a gas station canopy). 
(6)  Changeable copy sign: A sign that is designed so that the message can be changed, by physically replacing letters or by electric or electronic means. 
(7)  Construction sign: A ground or wall sign listing the name of the project developers, contractors, engineers, or architects on the site being developed. 
(8)  Directional sign : A ground sign located at the entry and/or exit of a business or commercial establishment which facilitates traffic flow. 
(9)  Directional sign, off-premises: A monument sign, the sole purpose of which is to direct traffic to one (1) or more commercial businesses which are located on premises without frontage on or visual exposure to a major thoroughfare or collector road. Such businesses shall front on a road or easement which is used for their primary public ingress and egress from the major thoroughfare or collector road. The purpose of the off-premises directional sign is to facilitate the flow of traffic, encourage the concentration of commercial uses, discourage strip commercial development, and not to advertise the business or products or services offered, (however, directional signs may have the logo and/or name of the business to which the sign relates). 
(10)  Festoon sign: Banners, pennants, incandescent light bulbs, or other such temporary features which are hung or strung overhead and which are not an integral, physical part of the building or structure they are intended to serve. 
(11)  Flashing, animated, or moving sign: A sign that has intermittently reflecting lights, or signs which use intermittent, flashing, scintillating, or varying intensity of illumination to create the appearance of movement, or a sign that has any visible portions in motion, either constantly or at intervals, whether caused by artificial or natural sources. 
(12)  Ground sign: A sign supported by one (1) or more uprights, poles, braces, or a masonry base, or a monument placed in or upon the ground surface and not attached to any building. Ground signs shall include monument and pole signs. 
(13)  Inflatable sign: A sign that is either expanded or its full dimensions are supported by gases contained within the sign, or a sign part, at a pressure greater than atmospheric pressure. 
(14)  Illuminated sign: A sign that is illuminated by a direct or indirect source of light so shielded that no direct rays from it are visible from any public right-of-way or from the abutting property. 
(15)  Institutional bulletin board: A structure containing a surfaced area upon which is displayed the name of a religious institution, school, library, community center or similar institutions, and the announcement of its services or activities. 
(16)  Marquee. A roof-like structure, often bearing a sign, projecting over an entrance to a theater. 
(17)  Marquee sign: A sign attached to a marquee projecting from and supported by the building. 
(18)  Menu board or order board: A sign which is intended to service patrons using a drive-thru facility. 
(19)  Monument sign: A ground sign that is mounted on a base which is in contact with or close to the ground. The base of a monument sign shall be no less than 75 percent of the greatest horizontal dimensions of the sign face, and the vertical separation between the lowest point of the sign face and the highest point of the sign base shall be no greater than 12 inches. 
(20)  Monument sign base : The lower part of a monument sign which may appear as a separate architectural feature, and serves as its ground support. 
(21)  Neon sign: A sign consisting of glass tubing, filled with neon or another gas, which glows when electric current is sent through it. 
(22)  Nonconforming sign: Any advertising structure or sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and any amendments thereto, and which fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this chapter. 
(23)  Off-premises sign: A sign which contains a message unrelated to a business or profession conducted on the premises, or to a commodity, service or activity, not sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 
(24)  Panel sign: A sign whose letters and/or symbols are on a panel contained within a frame, incorporated into a framed background which is an integral part of the sign. This definition is intended to distinguish between panel signs and signs consisting of individual freestanding letters and/or symbols. 
(25)  Permanent window sign: A window sign that is constructed of materials that do not require replacement on a frequent basis (in contrast to temporary paper window signs). 
(26)  Pole sign: A ground sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole(s) or other support(s) with a clear space of 8 feet or more between the bottom of the sign face and the grade. 
(27)  Political sign : Means a temporary sign, whose message relates to a candidate for political office, to a political party, to a political issue, or an ideological opinion. 
(28)  Portable sign : A freestanding sign not permanently anchored to secure to either a building or the ground, such as, but not limited to trailers, "A" frame and "T" shaped sign structures, including those mounted on wheeled trailers. 
(29)  Premises: Any lot or parcel of land, or building or site as otherwise used in this ordinance; a unit of contiguous real property under common ownership. 
(30)  Projecting wall sign: A sign that is attached to and projects from a building wall at an angle of up to 90 degrees. Panel and frame which projects from the wall at an angle or 90 degrees, by no more than four feet from the building, or one-third of the sidewalk width, whichever is less. Angular projection at the corner of a building is prohibited. Projecting wall signs shall clear sidewalk by at least ten feet and shall not extend vertically beyond the window sill of the second story. Projecting wall signs should be spaced at least 25 feet apart, shall not be internally illuminated and shall not contain changeable copy. A projecting wall sign does not include canopy, awning, roof, marquee, or internally illuminated signs. 
(31)  Real estate sign : A temporary non-illuminated sign for the purpose of advertising or promoting the sale, lease or rental of real estate. A permanent leasing sign is a real estate sign that is erected for an indefinite period of time for the purpose of offering space in a building for lease. 
(32)  Roof sign : A sign erected, constructed and maintained wholly upon or over the roof of any building, with its principal support on the roof structure. For purposes of this section, any architectural element which is used on the wall of a structure to give the appearance of a roof line similar to a mansard, gambrel or other roof type, shall be considered as a roof. A vertical plane or fascia which is attached to and located below the angled plane of a slope roof and which is less than 6 inches in height shall be considered part of the roof. 
(33)  Service club entrance sign: A sign, usually located along the main entrance ways to a community, displaying the names of service clubs and organizations, their meeting schedule and usually including the service club symbol or logo. The name of the community and a short salutary message may also be included. 
(34)  Sign: Any name, identification, description, object, device, structure, display or illustration which is affixed to, or painted, or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or piece of land, and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, service, event, organization, or business by any means, including words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images. 
(35)  Signable area: A continuous surface or wall unobstructed by windows, doors and other major architectural details. The signable area shall equal the area of (a  b) or (c  d) or (e  f) in the following illustration, at the choice of the applicant. 

Signable Area 
(36)  Temporary sign: Any sign regardless of size and materials that is not permanently fastened to any structure, such as posts with permanent footings, and that is limited in duration to thirty (30) days, except as otherwise specified. Temporary signs include paper window signs, inflatable signs, banners and pennants. 
(37)  Time-temperature sign: A sign which displays the current time or outdoor temperature or both and which displays no material except for the name of a business, product or service. 
(38)  Underhanging sign : A sign that is located on the underside of a canopy or walkway, typically for the benefit of pedestrians. 
(39)  Vehicle business sign: A sign painted or attached to a vehicle which is located on premises primarily for purposes of advertising the business, or product for sale on the premises. Commercially licensed vehicles which are generally used daily off-site are not included in this definition. 
(40)  Wall sign: A sign which is attached directly to or painted upon a building wall which does not extend above the height of the wall to which it is attached nor more than twelve (12) inches therefrom, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane parallel to the building wall. Included in the definition of wall signs are signs mounted above the eave line, but not extending above the roof peak and signs mounted flat against the building fascia, provided the sign does not protrude beyond any boundary of the fascia. 
(41)  Window sign: A temporary or permanent sign painted on or affixed to a window surface, suspended so as to hang more or less parallel with the window surface, or otherwise displayed in a manner intended to be viewed from outside the window. 
(c)  General standards. The following general standards shall apply to signs in the ARC, Ann Arbor Road Corridor District: 
(1)  Measurement of sign area: The entire area within a rectangle or square enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character, together with any frame, tower, or other material or color or internally illuminated area forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign, shall be included in the measurement. Such signs shall be deemed to be a single sign whenever the proximity, design, content or continuity reasonably suggests a single unit, notwithstanding any physical separation between parts. 

Computation of Sign Area 
a.  Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign, except that where two such faces are placed back to back and are at no point more than two feet from one another, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of one face, if the two faces are of equal area, or as the area of the larger face, if the two faces are of unequal area. 
b.  For ground signs, the area shall include the entire area of the sign upon which copy, lettering, drawings or photographs could be placed, excluding necessary uprights or supports. For monument signs, the base of a monument sign shall be excluded from the calculation of sign area for a distance to 30 inches above grade. Streetscape and landscape features which in the determination of the planning commission, are an integral part of the sign design shall also be excluded from the calculation of sign area. 
c.  For internally-illuminated awnings or canopies, the entire flat surface of the awning or canopy upon which the message is written shall be included in the sign area calculation. Signs mounted on awnings and canopies that are not internally-illuminated shall be subject to the sign area standards of measurements specified in paragraph (a), above. 
d.  For paper window signs the area shall include, the entire area of the paper. Where adjacent paper window signs are within eight inches of each other, they shall be measured as a single sign. 
(2)  Sign setback : Where it is specified that a sign must be setback a minimum or other certain distance from property lines, street setback lines or public right-of-way lines, such distance will be measured from the portion of the sign structure nearest to the specified line. For purposes of this measurement, the property lines, street setback lines and public right-of-way lines extend perpendicularly from the ground to infinity. 
(3)  Sign height: The height of a ground sign shall be the distance from the average level of the ground or pavement directly below the sign to the highest point of the sign structure, including any supportive or decorative appendages, without including any berm landscaping, grading, or artificially or unnaturally constructed raised portion of land at the point of measurement. 
(4)  Underground wiring: Where illumination is desired, underground wiring shall be required for all signs not attached to a building. 
(5)  Sign Lettering. Any sign which is proposed to include letters, symbols, emblems or other figures of similar character, which are larger than 16 inches, shall require planning commission approval. 
(d)  Prohibited signs. Except as permitted by Article XIX, the following signs shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Festoon signs. 
(2)  Signs which incorporate in any manner any flashing of intermittent lights. 
(3)  Inflatable signs, except as provided in Article XIX. 
(4)  Off-premises advertising signs. 
(5)  Portable signs. 
(6)  Roof signs. For the purpose of this section, any architectural element which is used on the wall of a structure to give the appearance of a roof line similar to a mansard, gambrel or other roof type shall be considered the same as a roof and no sign shall be permitted upon it. A vertical plane or fascia which is located below the angled plane of a sloped roof or roof element and which is less than six inches in height, shall be considered part of the roof and not used for signage. 
(7)  Vehicle business sign. 
(8)  Banners, pennants, spinners and streamers, except as provided in section 78-169(e)(14) and (f)(8) for banners. 
(9)  Any sign which revolves or has any visible moving part, visible revolving parts or visible mechanical movement of any description or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic pulsations, or by mechanical means, including intermittent electrical pulsations, or by action of normal wind currents, except those actions associated with street time/temperature signs. 
(10)  A sign or sign structure which is determined by the building official to be: 
a.  Is structurally unsafe. 
b.  Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or abandonment. 
c.  Is not kept in good repair. 
d.  Is capable of causing electrical shocks to persons likely to come in contact with it. 
(11)  Any sign which by reason of its size, location, content, coloring or manner of illumination, constitutes a traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic safety by obstructing the vision of drivers, or by obstructing, or detracting from the visibility of any traffic sign or control device on public streets and roads. 
(12)  Any sign which obstructs free ingress to or egress from a required door, window, fire escape or other required exit. 
(13)  Signs which make use of such words as "Stop", "Look", "Danger", or any other words, phrases, symbols or characters in such a manner as to interfere with mislead or confuse vehicular traffic. 
(14)  Any sign unlawfully installed, erected or maintained. 
(15)  Any sign now or hereafter existing which advertises a product, service or business no longer available at that location, including abandoned signs. 
(16)  Wall panel signs. 
(17)  Pole signs. 
(18)  Electronic or electric changeable copy signs, except as permitted time-temperature signs. 
(19)  Neon or string lights used to highlight architectural features or to frame a window or door, except as may be permitted under section 78-204, exterior lighting. 
(20)  Any type of sign not expressly permitted. 
(e)  Area, height, placement and other regulations for permitted signs. 
(1)  Ground signs. 
a.  Type. All ground signs shall be monument signs. 
b.  Location. Ground signs shall be located wholly within the boundaries of the property to which the sign relates, exclusive of the street setback or road right-of-way area. 
c.  Setback. On premises with street frontage less than 200 feet, ground signs shall be setback a minimum of five feet from the existing right-of-way or street setback line, whichever is greater. On premises with a street frontage of 200 feet or greater, ground signs shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet. 
d.  Sign area. 
1.  On premises with street frontage less than 200 ft., the maximum sign area shall be 25 square feet at the five-foot setback line. However, the maximum sign area shall be permitted to increase one square foot for each additional foot of setback, to a maximum area of 42 square feet. The base of a monument sign shall be excluded from the calculation of sign area for a distance of 30 inches above grade. 
Maximum Sign Area 
Premises With Street Frontage Less Than 200 Feet 
Distance From Street Setback Line Maximum 
Height Maximum 
Sign Area  5 ft. 8 ft. 25 sq. ft.  6 ft. 8 ft. 26 sq. ft.  7 ft. 8 ft. 27 sq. ft.  8 ft. 8 ft. 28 sq. ft.  9 ft. 8 ft. 29 sq. ft. 10 ft. 8 ft. 30 sq. ft. 11 ft. 8 ft. 31 sq. ft. 12 ft. 8 ft. 32 sq. ft. 13 ft. 8 ft. 33 sq. ft. 14 ft. 8 ft. 34 sq. ft. 15 ft. 8 ft. 35 sq. ft. 16 ft. 8 ft. 36 sq. ft. 17 ft. 8 ft. 37 sq. ft. 18 ft. 8 ft. 38 sq. ft. 19 ft. 8 ft. 39 sq. ft. 20 ft. 8 ft. 40 sq. ft. 21 ft. 8 ft. 41 sq. ft. 22 ft. 8 ft. 42 sq. ft. More than 22 ft. 8 ft. 42 sq. ft.  
2.  On premises with a street frontage of two hundred (200) feet or greater, the maximum sign area shall forty-two (42) square feet at the ten (10) foot setback line. However, the maximum sign area shall be permitted to increase based upon each additional foot of setback, to a maximum area of sixty (60) square feet in accordance with the following chart. The base of a monument sign shall be excluded from the calculation of sign area for a distance of thirty (30) inches above grade. 
Maximum Sign Area 
Premises With Street Frontage 200 Feet or Greater 
Distance From Street Setback Line Maximum 
Height Maximum 
Sign Area 10 ft. 10 ft. 42 sq. ft. 11 ft. 10 ft. 43 sq. ft. 12 ft. 10 ft. 45 sq. ft. 13 ft. 10 ft. 46 sq. ft. 14 ft. 10 ft. 48 sq. ft. 15 ft. 10 ft. 49 sq. ft. 16 ft. 10 ft. 51 sq. ft. 17 ft. 10 ft. 52 sq. ft. 18 ft. 10 ft. 54 sq. ft. 19 ft. 10 ft. 55 sq. ft. 20 ft. 10 ft. 57 sq. ft. 21 ft. 10 ft. 58 sq. ft. 22 ft. 10 ft. 60 sq. ft. More than 22 ft. 10 ft. 60 sq. ft.  
e.  Height. The maximum height shall be as follows: 
1.  On premises with a street frontage less than 200 feet: Eight feet. 
2.  On premises with a street frontage of 200 feet or greater: Ten feet. 
f.  Number. One ground sign shall be permitted per street frontage on any parcel. However, only one sign shall be permitted on lots having frontage on more than one street if a single sign can be located such that it is visible from both streets. In multi-tenant buildings or shopping centers, the sign area may be allocated for use by individual tenants. 
g.  Planning commission review; design standards. The planning commission shall review all ground sign applications to assure compliance with the design, placement and dimensional standards of this article. The following design standards shall apply: 
1.  Monument signs shall have a brick base or an approved equal subject to planning commission approval. Signs shall harmonize with the Ann Arbor Road Streetscape materials, and be incorporated into the streetscape design. Brick shall be Wyandotte Modular consistent with the standards and requirements of the Ann Arbor Road Streetscape Prototype, "Ann Arbor Road Standard Design Details," dated October 16, 2003 (see section 78-171), and as may be modified from time to time. 
2.  The base of any ground sign shall be landscaped to create a year round buffer for the sign. 
3.  Lettering style shall be clean and simple to assure readability and shall be in harmony with the style of architecture of the building. Generally, no more than two different fonts shall be used on each sign. 
4.  It is the intent of this article to require signs to be in harmony with the building color and architecture therefore generally no more than three colors may be used per sign and one (1) uniform, background color. Established company logos are exempt from color limitations. An established company logo is one that has historically been used as a symbol representing the company. For the purposes of this regulation, black and white shall be considered colors. 
5.  Sign messages shall be located at least 30 inches above the ground to allow for snow accumulation and plant growth. 
h.  Changeable copy signs. Changeable copy ground monument signs shall be permitted, subject to all of the requirements for ground signs specified herein, and the following additional requirements: 
1.  Letter height shall not exceed four inches. 
2.  Electronic or electric changeable copy signs are not permitted. 
3.  The area of the changeable copy sign shall be counted toward the maximum ground sign area. 
4.  The base of the sign shall be brick, with limestone capped brick piers on the two ends of the sign. The changeable copy sign shall not project above the brick piers by more than one-half of the message area's height. 
(2)  Wall signs. 
a.  The maximum wall sign area permitted shall be 50 percent of the signable area, up to a maximum wall sign area of 42 square feet. On a premises with an Ann Arbor Road street frontage of 200 feet or greater, permitted wall sign area shall be 30 percent of the signable area, up to a maximum of 90 square feet (see Table). 
Maximum Wall Sign Area 
Individual Letters 
Signable Area Maximum Percent of Signable Area Maximum Wall Sign Area 20 sq. ft. 50% 10 sq. ft. 30 sq. ft. 50% 15 sq. ft. 40 sq. ft. 50% 20 sq. ft. 50 sq. ft. 50% 25 sq. ft. 60 sq. ft. 50% 30 sq. ft. 70 sq. ft. 50% 35 sq. ft. 80 sq. ft. 50% 40 sq. ft. 84 sq. ft. 50% 42 sq. ft. Above 84 sq. ft. 42 sq. ft.  
Maximum Wall Sign Area 
200 ft. or Greater Frontage on Ann Arbor Road 
Signable Maximum Percent of 
Signable Area Maximum Wall Sign Area   50 sq. ft. 30% 15 sq. ft.   75 sq. ft. 30% 22.5 sq. ft.   100 sq. ft. 30% 30 sq. ft.   125 sq. ft. 30% 37.5 sq. ft.   150 sq. ft. 30% 45 sq. ft.   175 sq. ft. 30% 52.5 sq. ft.   200 sq. ft. 30% 60 sq. ft.   225 sq. ft. 30% 67.5 sq. ft.   250 sq. ft. 30% 75.0 sq. ft.   275 sq. ft. 30% 82.5 sq. ft.   300 sq. ft. 30% 90 sq. ft.   Above 300 sq. ft. 90 sq. ft.    
In the case of a wall sign which advertises more than one business or tenant, the maximum permitted sign area shall be allocated between the businesses or tenants. 
b.  Maximum height of a wall sign shall be the height of the wall to which the sign is attached, not to exceed 35 feet. 
c.  One wall sign shall be permitted on each facade which has a separate public means of ingress and egress. 
In the case of a building with more than one tenant, such as a shopping center or business center, one wall sign shall be permitted for the center itself and for each tenant that has its own separate door to the outside to provide public access. 
d.  Tenants that occupy a corner space in a multi-tenant structure shall be permitted to have one sign on each facade of the building which has a separate direct pedestrian access to that office or business establishment from the outside. Where several tenants use a common entrance in a multi-tenant structure, only one wall sign shall be permitted, but the total sign area should be allocated on an equal basis to all tenants. 
e.  Where separately owned businesses occupying a single building on a single parcel of land (such as a multi-tenant building, business center or shopping center) use individual wall signs, all such signs on the building or within the center shall be of a common style, e.g., individual freestanding letters shall be utilized with other signs composed of individual freestanding letters, 
f.  Panel signs shall be prohibited, except that the planning commission may permit panel signs upon finding that other types of permitted signs would not be practical or feasible because of the shape, character or configuration of the building or site and/or because of the nature of the message being conveyed. 
(3)  Projecting signs. Instead of wall or marquee sign, a business may be permitted to have a projecting sign, subject to the following specifications: 
a.  The maximum area of a projecting sign shall be 25 square feet on buildings located ten feet or less from the street setback line. The maximum area of a projecting sign shall be permitted to increase one square foot for each additional foot of setback greater than ten feet to a maximum area of 42 square feet. 
b.  One projecting sign shall be permitted on each facade which has a separate public means of ingress and egress. 
c.  Projecting signs shall be permitted only on zoning lots of 50 feet or more on the side on which the sign is to be mounted. 
d.  Projecting signs shall extend no higher than the height of the wall to which the sign is attached and no higher than the window sill of second story windows. Eight feet, six inches of clearance is required beneath projecting signs. 
e.  Signs must project at a ninety-degree angle to the building surface to which it is attached. Angular projection at the corner of a building is prohibited. 
f.  Signs shall not project more than five feet over the property line and more than four feet from the face of the building or one-third of the sidewalk width, whichever is less. 
g.  Projecting signs shall be attached directly to a building through building mounts or hung from a mast arm. These support members may also include decorative appurtenances, but external bracing such as guy wires and metal framework shall be prohibited. 
h.  Projecting signs shall be spaced a minimum of 25 feet apart. 
i.  Projecting signs shall not be internally illuminated. 
j.  Projecting signs shall not contain changeable copy. 
(4)  Underhanging signs. Where the roof structure of a building containing more than one business is extended over a walkway along the outer edge of the building, one pedestrian oriented underhanging sign may be permitted for each business in the building provided: 
a.  All signs are of identical size, shape, lettering style, and color scheme. 
b.  All signs shall contain the name of the business only. 
c.  Maximum of six square feet. 
(5)  Awning, canopy and marquee signs. Instead of a wall or projecting sign, a business may be permitted to have an awning, canopy or marquee sign, subject to the following specifications: 
a.  Marquee signs may be permitted, subject to the following: 
1.  Maximum area shall not exceed 50 percent of the signable area up to a maximum of 42 square feet. For this purpose, signable area shall be calculated as if the marquee did not exist. 
2.  Placement-Marquee signs may be positioned in one of two ways as follows: 
(i)  The display surface of the sign shall be attached flat against, and not extending beyond, the vertical surface of the marquee structure. 
(ii)  Individual cut-out letters mounted on top of the marquee edge and parallel to it. 
3.  Maximum height-No portion of a marquee sign shall be higher than the top of the marquee or the eave line of a building. 
b.  Awning and canopy signs. Awning and canopy signs may be permitted, subject to the following: 
1.  The maximum area shall not exceed that which is permitted for a wall sign, based on using the vertical face of the awning or canopy for calculation of signable area. 
2.  Placement. Awning and canopy signs shall be affixed or attached flat against a vertical surface of the awning or canopy, and shall not extend above, below or beyond the vertical surface of the awning or canopy. 
3.  Maximum height. No portion of an awning or canopy sign shall be higher than the eave line of the building. 
(6)  Window signs. 
a.  A maximum of 20 percent of the glass surface of the window segment in which the sign is located may be used for window signs. 
b.  No such signs shall be permitted in windows above the first story. 
c.  No more than two temporary window signs shall be permitted. 
(7)  Flags. Flags bearing the official design of a corporation or award flags subject to the following: 
a.  Such corporation or award flags shall be displayed on flag poles only. Attachment to any other site fixture or feature shall be prohibited. 
b.  A maximum of two such flags shall be permitted for each flag pole provided. 
c.  The maximum number of flag poles permitted per individual business shall be determined in accordance with the following table: 
Maximum Number of Flag Poles Permitted 
Street Frontage in Feet Maximum Number of Flag 
Poles Permitted 0-210 1 211-300 3 301 or greater 5  
d.  Placement of flag poles shall be in a manner and location subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The placement shall not impact adjacent properties, in particular, those of a residential nature. 
2.  The height of flagpoles shall conform to the height restrictions of the ARC District for buildings and structures. A flagpole shall be deemed to a structure under all provisions of this article. Flagpoles shall comply with the setback requirements for structures. 
3.  The placement shall not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
4.  The size, content, coloring or manner of illumination of said flags shall not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow. 
5.  No flag shall be permitted to project into the road right-of-way at full extension of the flag. 
e.  Flag poles shall not be located on the roof of a building. 
(8)  Directional signs. Directional signs intended to assist vehicular traffic flow subject to the following: 
a.  On-premises directional signs. 
1.  Directional signs shall not exceed two square feet per side, nor exceed two sides. 
2.  Said signs may incorporate a corporation or business logo provided the main theme of the sign shall be to facilitate vehicular traffic flow. 
3.  Placement shall be within the subject property; no such signs shall be permitted within the street setback area or right-of-way. 
4.  The size, content, coloring, placement or manner of illumination shall not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow. 
5.  Directional ground signs shall not exceed a height of six feet and may be located one at each driveway entrance. 
6.  No more than one directional wall sign may be located at each building entrance. 
b.  Off-premises directional signs. 
1.  In order to encourage the clustering of businesses, and minimize strip commercial development in accordance with the community master plan, while still allowing necessary and reasonable identification of businesses, facilitating the orderly flow of traffic, and avoiding unnecessary proliferation and excessive size of signs on major thoroughfares, off premises directional signs may be permitted on a limited basis. 
2.  Off-premises directional signs are permitted only upon review and approval of the planning commission, subject to compliance with the following conditions: 
(i)  Approval of the sign would serve to further the purposes specified in section 78-169(e) above. 
(ii)  The planning commission shall determine that the ARC zoned business has no frontage or access from a major thoroughfare; the premises of said business are within 1,200 feet of said thoroughfare; said business is not visible from a major thoroughfare, or is visible from a major thoroughfare but with no clear indication of how to access the business; and that adequate identification of the business and direction of traffic to the business would not be possible without an off-premises directional sign. 
(iii)  No off-premises directional sign shall be permitted without a recorded easement or executed agreement that accomplishes all of the following: 
(a)  States that the owner of the parcel on which the sign is to be placed grants permission for the off-premises directional sign to be located on the parcel, 
(b)  Stipulates which parcel(s) are entitled to use of the off-premises directional sign, and 
(c)  Specifies how the sign is to be maintained and establishes a means to assure that maintenance runs with the life of the sign. 
(iv)  Off-premises directional signs shall be located only on land zoned ARC and direct traffic to only land also zoned ARC. 
(v)  Off-premises directional signs shall be permitted only at the intersection of the access road for the business and a major thoroughfare, and only one such sign permitted at each intersection. The business access road may be a public street, private road, or recorded access easement over which the general public has ingress/egress rights. Said sign shall be in reasonable proximity to the intersection to enable the sign to direct traffic to the site of the business being identified by the sign. If multiple businesses served by the same access road require the use of the same intersection for an off-premises business directional sign, the same sign shall be used. 
(vi)  Off-premises directional signs shall be located entirely on private property and no closer than 30 feet from the centerline of the street, private road, or recorded access easement which provides access to the business. The sign shall be located a minimum of 60 feet from the centerline of the major thoroughfare. The sign location shall comply with all other setback and visibility requirements of the municipality. 
(vii)  Off-premises directional signs shall be monument signs with the minimum dimensions necessary to accomplish the purpose of directing traffic; however, in no case shall the sign area and height exceed the following dimensions. 
Planned No. of Users on Sign Maximum Sign Area Maximum 
Sign Height 1 12 sq. ft. 4.5 ft. 2 24 sq. ft. 6 ft. 3 or more 36 sq. ft. 8 ft.  
The base of an off-premises directional sign shall be excluded from the calculation of sign area for a distance of 30 inches above grade. 
(viii)  Space shall be allocated on the sign to allow identification of all businesses which use the same access road to use the off-premises directional sign. A common font and no more than one uniform background color shall be used. The sign shall state only the name of the business(es) being identified. A directional arrow may also be included on the sign. The sign base shall be of brick or decorative masonry block. 
(ix)  The ground within (5) feet of the base of the off-premises directional sign shall be landscaped in low shrubbery, ground cover or flowers, and said landscaping shall be maintained in presentable condition. 
(x)  Off-premises directional signs may be illuminated provided the illumination creates no perceptible glare on private property at a distance greater than ten feet from the sign and on public streets and the access drive. 
3.  The off-premises directional sign shall be maintained in a sound and presentable condition. If a business that is identified on the off-premise directional sign ceases to exist at its location or changes its name, the appropriate deletion or change to the copy of the sign shall be made within 30 days of the change in the business. 
4.  The existence of an off-premise directional sign shall not affect the permission of any other signage that is otherwise permitted by the municipality, including the following: 
(i)  Any other signage on the same parcel as the off-premises directional sign. 
(ii)  Any other signage on the same parcel as the business identified by the off-premises directional sign. 
(9)  Menu and/or order board. Menu and/or order board for a drive-thru facility subject to the following: 
a.  Said signs shall be located on the interior of the lot or parcel and shall not be readable from the exterior of the lot. 
b.  Said signs shall be intended to service the public utilizing the drive-thru facilities only. 
c.  The placement shall not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow in any manner. 
d.  The size, content, coloring or manner or illumination shall not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard or impair vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow. 
e.  The volume on order boards shall be maintained at the minimum level necessary so that it is audible to users, so as to minimize extraneous noise traveling off the site. 
(10)  Institutional bulletin boards. Institutional bulletin boards which comply with the standards for ground signs, herein. 
(11)  Political signs. Political signs subject to the following: 
a.  Political signs are permitted in any use district provided they do not exceed four square feet in area per side or four feet in height. 
(12)  Real estate signs. Real estate signs subject to the following: 
a.  Temporary real estate signs. 
1.  Such signs shall be limited to ground or wall signs only. One sign shall be permitted per parcel, regardless whether the property is represented by more than one real estate agency. 
2.  Maximum sign area shall not exceed 42 square feet. 
3.  Sign height shall not exceed four and one-half feet for a ground sign or eight feet for a wall sign. 
4.  Placement shall be wholly within the property boundaries to which the sign pertains. 
5.  The sign may be erected at the time the property is offered for sale and shall be removed within ten days of the sale or lease of the property. 
b.  Permanent leasing signs. Permanent leasing signs erected for a period of one year a longer shall be subject to the following: 
1.  If the permanent leasing sign is a ground sign, it shall be a monument sign and it shall be subject to the location, setback, and other applicable standards in section 78-170(e)(1). 
2.  If the permanent leasing sign is a wall sign, it shall be subject to the applicable standards in section 78-170(e)(2). 
3.  Permanent leasing signs shall comply with the maximum sign area and sign height requirements that apply to temporary real estate signs. 
4.  Such signs shall be maintained in good repair, and shall be replaced or renovated when weathered or worn. 
(13)  Temporary construction signs. Temporary construction signs subject to the following: 
a.  Such signs shall be limited to ground or wall signs. One sign shall be permitted per street frontage. 
b.  Total area of all temporary construction signs on a premises shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
c.  Sign height shall not exceed four and one-half feet for a ground sign or eight feet for a wall sign. 
d.  Placement shall be wholly within the property boundaries to which the sign pertains. 
e.  The sign shall not be erected prior to issuance of a building permit for the proposed construction project and shall be removed upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(14)  Banners. Banners used to draw attention to vehicle dealerships are permitted, provided that there is a maximum of one banner on each pole, and provided that they have no written message or corporate identity. Each banner shall not exceed a maximum area of 20 square feet. 
(f)  Permit required; permit exemptions. Except as noted in this sub-section, all signs shall require a permit prior to installation. The following signs shall be permitted without obtaining a sign permit: 
(1)  Street address signs (required). For purposes of identification by emergency personnel (fire, police, EMS) all businesses, offices, and industrial buildings shall prominently display their street address on the front side (facing the street) of their building or upon freestanding signs or building entranceways. All street addresses shall be in Arabic numerals, each numeral shall be large enough to be easily read from the street, but in no event smaller than four inches high by two and one-half inches wide, except for numeral one which shall have a width in proportion to its height. Street address signs shall not exceed three square feet in area. All numerals shall contrast with the surface they are applied to (light numerals on dark surfaces, dark numerals on light surfaces) shall be mounted high enough to be seen from the street, and shall not be obstructed from view by trees, shrubs or any other material. If the business cannot be seen from the street, an additional street address sign shall be displayed in an area where it can be seen from the street. Street address signs shall not be counted in the maximum sign area or maximum number of signs allowed on a parcel. 
(2)  Name plates identifying the occupant or address of a parcel of land not exceeding two square feet in area. 
(3)  Window signs not exceeding two square feet in area indicating the hours of operation for a business, and whether a business is open or closed. 
(4)  Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material. 
(5)  For sale signs attached to vehicles. 
(6)  Flags bearing the official design of a nation, state, municipality, educational institution or non-profit organization. 
(7)  Traffic safety and control signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental body, or other municipal signs such as the following: legal notices, railroad crossing, danger and other emergency notices as may be approved by the municipality. 
(8)  Community special event signs including municipal streetscape banners approved by the municipality. 
(9)  Private traffic control signs which conform to the requirements of the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices published in accord with Section 508 of Public Acts 300 or 1949, as amended. 
(10)  Park and playground signs. 
(11)  Political signs, subject to the requirements in section 78-170(e)(11). 
(12)  Temporary real estate signs. 
(13)  Any sign required by the municipality to be posted. 
(14)  Community entrance and streetscape signs erected by the municipality. 
(g)  Nonconforming signs. 
(1)  Any sign lawfully existing at the time of the adoption of this amendment which does not fully comply with all provisions shall be considered a legal nonconforming sign and may be permitted to remain as long as the sign is properly maintained and not detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
(2)  Continuance: Nonconforming signs shall not: 
a.  Be expanded or changed to another nonconforming sign; 
b.  Be relocated, or altered so as to prolong the life of the sign, or so as to change the shape, size, type, placement, or design of the signs structural or basic parts; 
c.  Be enhanced with any new feature including the addition of illumination; 
d.  Be repaired, except if such repair brings the sign into conformance with this ordinance, if such repair involves any of the following: 
1.  Expense which exceeds 50 percent of the sign's appraised value as determined by the designated municipal official; 
2.  Necessitates the replacement of both the sign frame and sign panels; 
3.  Replacement of the signs primary support pole(s) or other support structure; 
4.  For signs without framework for sign panels, requires replacement of the sign panels; 
e.  Be replaced; 
f.  Be re-established after the activity, business, or use to which it related has been discontinued for 90 days or longer. 
(3)  Permitted modification. The following modifications may be permitted: 
a.  A change solely in the wording of the copy; and 
b.  Routine repair to maintain the sign in a safe and aesthetic condition exactly as it existed at the time of the enactment of this amendment. 
(4)  Elimination of nonconforming signs. The municipality may acquire by purchase, condemnation, or by other means any nonconforming sign which it deems necessary to preserve the health, safety, and welfare of the community's residents. 
(h)  Modification to sign requirements. In consideration of the overall site and building design, the planning commission may modify the specific sign requirements outlined herein, provided that any such adjustment is in keeping with the intent of this section and the article in general. In determining whether a modification is appropriate, the planning commission shall consider the following: 
(1)  Topographic features or other unique features of the site that create conditions under which strict application of the sign regulations would be impractical or infeasible. 
(2)  Vehicular circulation, site access, and motorist visibility as related to sign placement and traffic safety. 
(3)  Impact of proposed modifications on surrounding properties. 
(4)  The extent to which the public benefit intended by the sign regulations could be better achieved with a sign that varies from the requirements specified herein. 
(i)  Variances. The zoning board of Appeals (ZBA) shall have authority to vary the restrictions relating to the ARC District upon finding that practical difficulties exist and that the strict application of this article would place the applicant at a substantial and significant disadvantage with respect to other signs controlled by the article. Comparisons to existing nonconforming signs shall not be considered by the ZBA. 
(j)  Non-commercial message permitted. Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, a sign structure permitted in this chapter as an on-premise advertising sign or an off-premises advertising sign may contain a non-commercial message. 
(Ord. of 6-7-04; Ord. No. 2008-03,  2, 3, 8-4-08) 
Sec. 78-170. - Amendments. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for coordination by which the city and the township may amend the text and/or district boundaries of the ARC, Ann Arbor Road Corridor District. Amendments which would affect the continuity of the boundaries, or uniformity of the district's regulations by creating differences between the city and township lands, are contrary to the intent of the ARC District. 
(b)  Amendment requirements. The township board or the city commission may, from time to time, on recommendation from its respective planning commission, on its own initiative or on petition, amend, supplement, modify or change the district boundaries or regulations herein, pursuant to the authority of its respective enabling legislation (Michigan P.A. 184 of 1943, as amended, or Michigan P.A. 207 of 1921, as amended). Amendments to the text of the ARC District and amendments which would remove land from the ARC District shall require approval of both the City Commission and Township Board. Amendments which would add land to the ARC District shall require approval from only the municipality having jurisdiction over that land. 
(Ord. of 6-7-04) 
Sec. 78-171. - Ann Arbor Road standard design details. 

Ann Arbor Road standard design details (1) 

Ann Arbor Road standard design details (2) 
Secs. 78-172-78-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - MU MIXED USE DISTRICT 

Sec. 78-180. - Intent. 
    The MU - Mixed Use District is designed to include a mixture of residential, office and low intensity commercial uses. The MU district is to be limited to the Old Village Section of the city, where over the years a combination of land uses has developed. Industrial uses are not considered compatible within the MU district. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-181. - Principal uses permitted. 
(a)  In the mixed use district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  One-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Home occupation, subject to the following: 
a.  No home occupation shall be permitted that: 
1.  Changes the outside appearance of the dwelling and/or property. 
2.  Creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or results in electrical interference, or becomes a nuisance. 
3.  Results in outside storage or display of anything including signs except for nameplate as may otherwise be allowed herein. 
4.  Requires the employment of anyone in the home other than the dwelling occupant. 
5.  Requires exterior building alterations to accommodate the occupation. 
6.  Occupies more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling or utilizes a garage or other accessory building. 
7.  Requires parking for customers that cannot be accommodated on the existing driveway and/or not exceeding one parking space at curbside on the street. 
8.  Requires the delivery of goods or the visit of customers before 7:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. 
b.  The following are permitted home occupations provided they do not violate any of the provisions of subsection (3)a of this section: 
1.  Dressmaking, sewing and tailoring. 
2.  Painting, sculpturing, writing or photography. 
3.  Telephone answering. 
4.  Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving and lapidary work. 
5.  Teaching or music lessons limited to four students at a time. 
6.  Computer operations. 
7.  Salesperson's office or home office of a professional person. 
8.  Laundering and ironing. 
9.  Repair of clocks, instruments or other small appliances which do not create a nuisance due to noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or results in electrical interference. 
10.  Day care home (family). 
c.  The following are prohibited as home occupations: 
1.  Barbershops and beauty parlors. 
2.  Dance studios. 
3.  Private clubs. 
4.  Repair shops which may create a nuisance due to noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference. 
5.  Restaurants. 
6.  Stables or kennels. 
7.  Tourist homes. 
8.  Automobile repair or paint shops. 
d.  Any proposed home occupation that is neither specifically permitted by subsection (3)b of this section nor specifically prohibited by subsection (3)c of this section shall be considered a special use and be granted or denied upon consideration of those standards contained in subsection (3)a of this section and under the procedures specified in section 78-281. 
e.  Home occupation permits shall be limited to the applicant who legally resides in the residence. 
(4)  Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in Article XVII of this chapter may be allowed provided front, side and rear yards are increased above the minimum required yards by one foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed and in no instance shall a principal building be set back less than 15 feet from abutting properties zoned for residential use. 
b.  Non-profit day care centers may be located in a church building as an accessory use to a church. 
(5)  Public, parochial and private intermediate or secondary schools offering courses in general education, not operated for profit. 
(6)  Utility and public service buildings and uses (without storage yards), when operating requirements necessitate the locating of such building within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity. 
(7)  Uses and buildings of the city (without storage yards). 
(8)  Day care home (group) for children subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Such facility shall have received a state license to operate prior to seeking a special use permit under this chapter. 
b.  Not less than 400 square feet of outdoor play area per child shall be provided on the site. The play area shall not occupy a front yard. 
c.  Screening and fencing of outdoor play area shall be provided as required by the planning commission. 
d.  Parking shall be provided to allow for direct drop-off and pick-up of children without requiring children to cross public streets. 
(9)  Day care homes for adults subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Not more than six persons other than the full-time occupants of the dwelling may be cared for in any one dwelling. 
b.  No overnight accommodations shall be provided. 
c.  Such facility shall not provide nursing or medical care. 
d.  Parking shall be provided to allow direct drop-off and pick-up of adults without such adults having to cross public streets. 
e.  Fencing of yards utilized for recreation or outdoor activities shall be provided. 
(10)  Private non-commercial recreational areas, institutional or community recreation centers, and non-profit swimming pool clubs, all subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The proposed site, for any of the uses permitted herein, which would attract persons from or are intended to serve areas beyond the immediate neighborhood, shall have at least one property line abutting a major thoroughfare as designated on the major thoroughfare plan. 
b.  Front, side and rear yards shall be at least 80 feet wide, and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs and grass. All such landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition. 
c.  Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate not less than 1/2 of the member families and/or individual members. The planning commission may recommend the modification of the off-street parking requirements to the zoning board of appeals in those instances wherein it is specifically determined that the users will originate from the immediately adjacent areas, and will, therefore, be pedestrian. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or zoning compliance permit, bylaws of the organization and such other information of the organization as determined by the zoning board of appeals shall be provided in order to establish the membership involved for computing the off-street parking requirements. In those cases wherein the proposed use or organization does not have bylaws or formal membership, the off-street parking requirement shall be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. 
d.  Whenever a swimming pool is constructed under this chapter, such pool area shall be provided with a protective fence six feet in height and entry shall be provided by means of a controlled gate. 
e.  Buildings erected on the premises shall not exceed one-story or 14 feet in height. 
f.  All lighting shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so arranged as to direct the light away from all residential lands which adjoin the site. 
g.  All parking shall be surfaced as required in the general provisions for off-street parking requirements. 
h.  The off-street parking and general site layout and its relationship to all adjacent lot lines shall be reviewed by the planning commission, who may impose any reasonable restrictions or requirements so as to ensure that contiguous residential areas will be adequately protected. 
(11)  Bed and breakfast operations shall be located only on major or collector thoroughfares as designated in the city's master plan and shall further be subject to city licensing provisions. Bed and breakfast operations shall further be subject to the following: 
a.  Such dwellings shall meet all applicable codes and ordinances of the city, county and state. 
b.  Floor plans drawn to scale of all floors to be utilized for bed and breakfast activities shall be submitted to the city. 
c.  Buildings shall be suitable in character for the use proposed and shall not be cause for a change in character of the neighborhood. 
d.  The dwelling shall be a building with not more than six sleeping rooms available for guests of the bed and breakfast dwelling. 
e.  There shall be no separate cooking facilities provided for the bed and breakfast occupants. Meals, other than those served as a part of the normal operation of the household, shall be served only to occupants of the bed and breakfast facility. 
f.  Approved smoke detectors shall be provided in individual sleeping units and in common hallways. 
g.  Emergency egress lighting to assure continued illumination for a duration of not less than one hour in case of emergency or primary power loss. 
h.  An approved fire extinguisher in the common hallway accessible to all occupants. 
i.  Every sleeping unit shall have at least one operable window approved for emergency egress or rescue, except where the sleeping unit is provided with a door to a corridor having access to two remote exits in opposite directions. 
j.  Occupancy shall be of a transient nature for periods not to exceed one week in duration in any one month by any transient occupant. A guest registry indicating name, address, phone number and vehicle license number, shall be kept indicating dates of arrival and departure of guests and shall be available to the city for inspection upon request. 
k.  An unlighted sign not exceeding six square feet in area may be provided. Such sign may be provided as a ground sign or wall sign. 
l.  Off-street parking shall be provided based upon one space for each rental room and one space for the operator of the facility. It is the city's intent to not encourage yards to be destroyed, landscaping removed or the integrity of the neighborhood altered in order to provide parking. In those instances where parking requirements cannot be met, the applicant may request special consideration from the planning commission. In such a case the applicant shall submit an analysis of parking required and parking provided within a 300-foot radius of the subject parcel. After analyzing this data, the planning commission may lower the number of the required parking spaces based on the fact that sufficient off-street parking exists in the neighborhood. 
m.  Such bed and breakfast dwelling shall not be located within two 200 feet as measured from the nearest property lines of another such facility. 
(12)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
(b)  Required conditions. All dwelling units shall be reviewed by the building official subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Dwelling units shall conform to all applicable city codes and ordinances and state and federal requirements with respect to the construction of the dwelling. 
(2)  Dwelling units shall be permanently attached to a perimeter foundation. In instances where the applicant elects to set the dwelling on piers or other acceptable foundations which are not at the perimeter of the dwelling, then a perimeter wall shall also be constructed. Any such perimeter wall shall be constructed of durable materials and shall also meet all local requirements with respect to materials, construction and necessary foundations below the frost line. Any such wall shall also provide an appearance which is compatible with the dwelling and other homes in the area. 
(3)  Dwelling units shall be provided with exterior finish materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(4)  Dwelling units shall be provided with roof designs and roofing materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(5)  Dwelling units shall be provided with an exterior building wall configuration which represents an average width to depth or depth to width ratio which does not exceed three to one, or is in reasonable conformity with the configuration of dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(6)  The dwelling shall contain storage capability in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever is less. 
(7)  Any such dwelling shall be anchored by an anchoring system approved by the city. 
(8)  The building official may request a review by the planning commission of any dwelling unit with respect to subsections (3), (4), and (5) of subsection 78-181(b). The building official or planning commission shall not seek to discourage architectural variation, but shall seek to promote the reasonable compatibility of the character of dwelling units, thereby protecting the economic welfare and property value of surrounding residential uses and the city at large. In reviewing any such proposed dwelling unit, the building official may require the applicant to furnish such plans, elevations and similar documentation as is deemed necessary to permit a complete review and evaluation of the proposal. When comparing the proposed dwelling unit to similar types of dwelling areas, consideration shall be given to comparable types of homes within 300 feet. If the area within 300 feet does not contain any such homes, then the nearest 25 similar type dwellings shall be considered. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-182. - Uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
(a)  The following uses may be permitted by the planning commission subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use, including the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission, and the imposition of special conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to ensure that the land use or activity authorized is compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use, and subject further to a public hearing held in accord with section 78-281: 
(1)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(2)  Office buildings for any of the following occupations: governmental, executive, administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic, drafting, sales, post offices and public utility offices. 
(3)  Medical office or dental office, including clinics. 
(4)  Facilities for human care such as convalescent homes. 
(5)  Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, including drive-through facilities, and similar uses. 
(6)  Private clubs and lodge halls. 
(7)  Off-street parking lots. 
(8)  Business schools or private schools operated for profit. 
(9)  Clinics and veterinary facilities provided there are no outdoor animal runs or other outdoor facilities for animals. 
(10)  Meeting halls and related services. 
(11)  Other uses similar to the above uses. 
(12)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses. 
(13)  Any generally recognized retail business which supplies commodities on the premises, for persons residing in adjacent residential areas such as: groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods and notions or hardware. 
(14)  Any personal service establishment which performs services on the premises for persons residing in adjacent residential areas, such as: shoe repair, dry cleaning shops, tailor shops, beauty parlors, barbershops, banks and savings and loan offices. Any service establishment of an office-showroom or workshop nature of an electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, shoemaker, baker, printer, upholsterer, or an establishment doing radio, television or home appliance repair, photographic reproduction, and similar establishments that require a retail adjunct and of no more objectionable character than the aforementioned subject to the following provision: No more than five persons shall be employed at any time in the fabrication, repair and other processing of goods. 
(15)  Restaurants, or other places serving food, except those having the character of a drive-in. 
(16)  Professional offices of physicians, lawyers, dentists, chiropractors, architects, engineers, and similar or allied professions. 
(17)  Other uses similar to the above and subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the premises where produced. 
b.  All business, servicing or processing except off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings. 
(18)  Accessory structures, uses and signs customarily incidental to the above permitted uses and subject to all requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-183. - Required conditions. 
(a)  In the case of multiple dwelling developments, all site plans shall be submitted to the planning commission for its review and approval prior to issuance of a building permit. Approval shall be contingent upon a finding that: 
(1)  The site plan shows that a proper relationship exists between local streets and any proposed service roads, driveways, and parking areas to encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety; and 
(2)  All the development features including the principal building or buildings and any accessory buildings, or uses, open spaces, and any service roads, driveways and parking areas are so located and related to minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent property. These effects include, but are not limited to, channeling excessive traffic onto local residential streets, lack of adequate screening or buffering of parking or service areas, or building groupings and circulation routes located as to interfere with police or fire equipment access. 
(b)  All dwelling units shall be reviewed by the building official and shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Dwelling units shall conform to all applicable city codes and ordinances and state or federal requirements with respect to the construction of the dwelling. 
(2)  Dwelling units shall be permanently attached to a perimeter foundation. In instances where the applicant elects to set the dwelling on piers or other acceptable foundations which are not at the perimeter of the dwelling, then a perimeter wall shall also be constructed. Any such perimeter wall shall be constructed of durable materials and shall also meet all local requirements with respect to materials, construction and necessary foundations below the frost line. Any such wall shall also provide an appearance which is compatible with the dwelling and other homes in the area. 
(3)  Dwelling units shall be provided with exterior finish materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(4)  Dwelling units shall be provided with roof designs and roofing materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(5)  Dwelling units shall be provided with an exterior building wall configuration which represents an average width to depth or depth to width ratio which does not exceed three to one, or is in reasonable conformity with the configuration of dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(6)  The dwelling shall contain storage capability in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever shall be less. 
(7)  Any such dwelling unit shall be anchored by an anchoring system approved by the city. 
(8)  The building official may request a review by the planning commission of any dwelling unit with respect to subsections (1), (2) and (3) of this subsection. The building official or planning commission shall not seek to discourage architectural variation, but shall seek to promote the reasonable compatibility of the character of dwelling units, thereby protecting the economic welfare and property value of surrounding residential uses and the city at large. In reviewing any such proposed dwelling unit, the building official may require the applicant to furnish such plans, elevations and similar documentation as is deemed necessary to permit a complete review and evaluation of the proposal. When comparing the proposed dwelling unit to similar types of dwelling areas, consideration shall be given to comparable types of homes within 300 feet. If the area within 300 feet does not contain any such homes, then the nearest 25 similar type dwellings shall be considered. 
(c)  No interior display shall be visible from the exterior of the building, and the total area devoted to display, including both the objects displayed and the floor space set aside for persons observing the displayed objects, shall not exceed 25 percent of the usable floor area of either the first or second story, or in the basement. 
(d)  The outdoor storage of goods or materials shall be prohibited irrespective of whether or not they are for sale. 
(e)  Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or materials, beyond that normally incident to the above permitted uses, shall be prohibited. 
(f)  Since this mixed use district is for the convenience shopping of persons residing in adjacent residential areas, permitted uses shall not include business in the character of a drive-in or open-front store. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2012-04,  8, 11-5-12) 
Secs. 78-184-78-189. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVII. - SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 78-190. - Limiting height, bulk, density and area by zoning district. 
    The following table indicates the height, bulk, density and area limitations by zoning district: 
Minimum Size Lot Per Dwelling Unit Maximum Height 
of Structures Minimum Yard Setback 
(Per Lot in Feet) Minimum Floor Area Per Unit 
(sq. ft.) Maximum % Lot Area Covered By All Buildings Maximum 
Floor Area 
Ratio Sides Zoning 
District Area in 
sq. ft. Width In stories In feet Front Least one Total of two Rear R-1 One-Family Residential 7,200 60 2 25 (b) 25 (m, o) 6 (a) 12 35 950 35 (v) .40 RT-1 Two-Family Residential 3,500 30 2 25 (b) 25 (m, o) 10 (a) 20 35 780 30 (v) .40 (w) RM-1 Multi-Family Residential (c, l) - 2 25 (b) 25 (d) 10 (d) 20 (d) 35 (d) - - .40 (w) RM-2 Multi-Family Residential (c, l) - 4 - 25 (d) 10 (d, e) 20 (d, e) 35 (d) - - .40 (w) O-1 Office - - 2 30 20 (o) (f) (f) 20 (g, j) - - - O-2 Office 15,000 75 3 45 50 (o) (f) (f) 20 (g, j) - - - B-1 Local Business - - 2 25 10 (f) (f) 35 (g, j) - - - B-2 Central Business - - 3 40 (n) - (f) (j) (j) - - - B-3 General Business - - 2 30 - (f) (f) 10 (g, j) - - - ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor - - 2 30 (p) 10 (q) 10 (r, s, t) 20 (s) 20 - - - ARC Ann Arbor Road Corridor [78-161(c)(24)] (applicable to Plymouth Township) - - - 35 50 20 (y) 40 20 - - - MU-Mixed Use 3,500 (c, l) 30 2 25 (b) 15 (o) 10 (f) 20 (f) 35 (g, j) - 35 .40 (w) I-1 Light Industry - - - 45 25 (h) 10 (i, k) 20 (i, k) 10 (i, k) - - - I-2 Heavy Industry - - - 60 50 (h) 20 (i k) 40 (i, k) 20 (i, k) - - -  
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2012-04,  9, 11-5-12; Ord. No. 2015-04,  4, 7-6-15; Ord. No. 2017-01,  2, 1-3-17 ) 
Sec. 78-191. - Notes to schedule. 
(a)  The side yard abutting upon a street shall not be less than eight feet for R-1 districts or 12 feet for RT-1 districts when there is a common rear yard. In case of a rear yard abutting a side yard of an adjacent lot, the side abutting a street shall not be less than the required front yard of that district. 
(b)  The height of any main building may exceed the maximum permitted height by one foot for each additional one foot by which the width of each yard exceeds the minimum yard requirement with a maximum height not to exceed five feet above the maximum height permitted. 
The building height of a single-family home in the R-1 zoning district shall be limited to 25 feet or as otherwise permitted in this section. Loft areas or finished attics in the R-1 district, which have a floor area of less than 1/3 of the floor area of the floor below, shall also be restricted to a total building height of 25 feet and shall be required to have a minimum side yard of 12 feet and a minimum lot width of 60 feet. 
(c)  The total number of rooms in a multiple dwelling structure of two stories or less shall not be more than the area of the parcel, in square feet, divided by 1,300. The total number of rooms in a multiple dwelling of over two stories but not exceeding four stories shall not be more than the area of the parcel, in square feet, divided by 900. Not more than ten percent of the units on any given parcel may be of an efficiency apartment type. For the purpose of computing rooms, the following shall control: 
Efficiency apartment unit = 1 room  One-bedroom unit = 2 rooms Two-bedroom unit = 3 rooms Three-bedroom unit = 4 rooms Four-bedroom unit = 5 rooms  
Plans presented showing one-, two-, or three-bedroom units and including a den, library, or other extra room shall count such extra rooms as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density. 
The area used for computing density shall be the total site area exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way of either interior or bordering streets. 
(d)  In RM districts the minimum front and rear yards shall be equal to the height of the building, except that where a front lot line abuts a street, 1/2 the width of the right-of-way of such street may be considered as front yard setback, but in no instance shall any front or rear yard setback be less than 25 feet. 
(1)  In all RM-1 and RM-2, Multiple-Family Residence Districts, the minimum amount of usable open space or recreation area per dwelling unit (exclusive of a required front yard, parking areas or driveways) shall be equal to 150 square feet of lot area per bedroom. 
(2)  If more than one building shall be constructed on the same site the following requirements shall also apply. Minimum distance between buildings shall be: 
a.  Seventy feet when front to rear. 
b.  Seventy feet when front to front. 
c.  Seventy feet when rear to rear. 
d.  Twenty-five feet end to end. 
e.  Fifty feet end to front. 
f.  Fifty feet end to rear. 
(e)  For each story in excess of two stories, a side yard of 21/2 feet for each additional story shall be provided, in addition to the minimum ten foot requirement. The distance between buildings on the same lot shall be regulated by the building distance formula specified in subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines, except as otherwise specified in the building code. On the exterior side yard which borders on a residential district, there shall be provided a setback of not less than ten feet on the side or residential street. If walls of structures facing interior lot lines contain windows or other openings, side yards of not less than ten feet shall be provided. The setback shall be measured from the nearest side of the existing and/or proposed right-of-way lines, whichever is greater. 
(g)  One-half the width of alleys at the rear of the lot may be considered in computing rear yard setbacks. 
(h)  Parking shall be permitted in a required front yard. 
(i)  An obscuring screen shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of section 78-206. The greenbelt planting plan shall be reviewed and approved in conformity with section 78-203. 
(j)  Off-street loading space shall be provided in the rear yard in the ratio of at least one space per each establishment and shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area. Off-street loading space shall further meet the requirements of section 78-273. This provision shall not apply in the CBD district as defined and encompassed by Wing, Harvey, Church, Deer and Union Streets. In those instances where properties abut an alley such alley may be substituted for off-street loading requirements in business districts. In office districts off-street loading may take place in undesignated places in parking lots provided such loading is of a short-term nature. 
(k)  For side or rear yards which border on a residential district, there shall be provided a setback of not less than 20 feet in the I-1, light industrial district and 40 feet in the I-2, heavy industrial district. The side yard requirement on an interior side yard abutting an industrial district may be waived by the planning commission providing that the combined total side yard requirement of 20 feet in the I-1 district and 40 feet in the I-2 district is located on the other side and provided further that the planning commission finds that such a building location on the lot line shall not adversely affect existing and/or potential development patterns in the area and that the building location and construction are acceptable to the city building and fire departments. 
(l)  A minimum lot size of not less than 10,000 square feet shall be provided for any multiple dwelling sites. 
(m)  Parking shall not be allowed in a front yard setback area other than in the driveway. 
(n)  Per the overlay district map for the central business district, building heights are limited to 40 or 50 feet for specified areas of the downtown. 
(o)  The established front setbacks for structures within established R-1, RT-1, MU, O-1 and O-2 zoning districts shall be at least 90 percent of the average front yard setback of surrounding buildings. The average setback and front building line shall be determined by examining existing buildings located on the same side of the street and within 200 feet of the subject parcel. If the resulting setback is less than 15 feet, then the allowed setback shall be no less than the allowed setback average. For a single family residential project that meets the "front porch exception" standards listed in 78-43(11) or (12), or 78-53(11) or (12), the average front setback shall be calculated using the front wall of the surrounding dwellings rather than the edge of any existing porches. In any case, the minimum average front yard setback for an incentive porch shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. The building official may exclude structures used in calculating average front setbacks when the structure deviates by more than 25 feet forward or back from the average setbacks of other structures found within 200 feet. 
(p)  The planning commission shall have the authority to approve an increase in building height up to a maximum of 38 feet, provided that the building does not exceed two stories and conforms with one of the following criteria: 
(1)  The additional height is necessary to achieve two stories due to the particular nature and functions of the approved use. 
(2)  The additional height is necessary to accommodate architectural features that enhance the character of the building and the district. 
(q)  When parking is furnished between the building and the street, a front yard of not less than 75 feet shall be provided. 
(r)  When a side yard is adjacent to a residential use, a side yard of not less than 20 feet shall be provided. 
(s)  Side yards are not required along an interior side parcel line, where all walls of building s abutting such interior side parcel line are wholly without or other openings and are of fireproof construction, but if the side wall is not of fireproof construction, a side yard of not less than ten feet shall be provided. When an interior business parcel abuts a residential parcel, a side yard of not less than 20 feet shall be required in addition to the required screening and land use buffer. 
(t)  When parking is furnished in the side yard on the street side of a corner parcel, a side yard of not less than seven feet shall be provided. 
(u)  When such a use is adjacent to a residential district and not separated there from by a street, a side yard and/or a rear yard of not less that 75 feet shall be provided. 
(v)  For projects that meet the standards listed in section 78-43(11) or (12), or section 78-53(11) or (12) and construct an eligible front porch, the area of the eligible front porch located in the front yard setback shall be excluded from the lot coverage calculation. 
(w)  Floor area ratio (FAR) shall be applied to single-family and two-family residential buildings only. For two-family buildings, the total building floor area, as defined, shall be used to calculate the total FAR for the lot. For mixed use projects, FAR shall apply to single-family and two-family residential buildings only. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2014-05,  3, 6-2-14; Ord. No. 2015-04,  5, 7-6-15; Ord. No. 16-02,  2, 7-18-16 ; Ord. No. 2017-01,  2, 1-3-17 ) 
Secs. 78-192-78-199. - Reserved 
ARTICLE XVIII. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 78-200. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Whenever any provision of this chapter imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this chapter then the provisions of such other provision shall govern. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-201. - Scope. 
    No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, constructed or altered and maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-202. - Performance standards. 
    No use otherwise allowed shall be permitted within any district which does not conform to the following standards of use, occupancy, and operation, which standards are hereby established as the minimum requirements to be maintained within such area: 
(1)  Smoke. 
a.  Density. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the emission of any smoke from any source whatever to a density greater than that density described as No. 1 of the Ringlemann Chart. 
b.  Exception. Smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal to but not darker than No. 2 of the Ringlemann Chart for a period, or periods, aggregating four minutes in any 30 minutes shall be permitted. 
c.  Method of measurement. For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringlemann Chart, as now published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines, which is hereby made a part of this chapter, shall be the standard. However, the Unbrascope readings of smoke densities may be used when correlated with Ringlemann's Chart. 
d.  Emission from fireplaces used for non-commercial or purpose shall be exempt. 
(2)  Dust, dirt and fly ash. 
a.  Quantity. No person shall operate or cause to be operated, maintained or cause to be maintained, any process for any purpose, or furnace combustion device for the burning of coal or other natural or synthetic fuels, without maintaining and operating, while using such process or furnace or combustion device, recognized and approved equipment, means, method, device or contrivance to reduce the quantity of gasborne or airborne solids of fumes emitted into the open air, which is operated in conjunction with said process, furnace, or combustion device so that the quantity of gasborne or airborne solids shall not exceed 0.20 grains per cubic foot of the carrying medium at a temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit or as regulated the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality MDEQ. 
b.  Method of Measurement. For the purpose of determining the adequacy of such devices these conditions are to be conformed to when the percentage of excess air in the stack does not exceed 50 percent at full load. The foregoing requirement shall be measured by the A.S.M.E. Test Code for dust-separating apparatus. All other forms of dust, dirt and fly ash shall be completely eliminated insofar as escape or emission into the open air is concerned. The building official may require such additional data as is deemed necessary to show that adequate and approved provisions for the prevention and elimination of dust, dirt and fly ash have been made. 
(3)  Open storage. The open storage of any industrial equipment, vehicles and all materials including wastes, shall be provided with an obscuring screen in accordance with the provisions of section 78-296. The extent of such obscuring screen may be determined by the planning commission depending upon the nature of the material to be stored. 
(4)  Glare and radioactive materials. Glare from any process (such as or similar to arc welding or acetylene torch cutting) which emits harmful ultraviolet rays shall be performed in such a manner as not to be seen from any point beyond the property line and as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines. Radioactive materials and waste, including electromagnetic radiation such as X-ray machine operation, shall not be emitted to exceed quantities established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of Standards, when measured at the property line. 
(5)  Fire and explosive hazards. 
a.  In the I-1 and I-2 districts the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning, as determined by the fire marshal, is permitted, subject to compliance with the performance standards in subsections (1) through (4) of this section. 
b.  The storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials, goods, or products ranging from free or active burning to intense burning, as determined by the fire marshal, is permitted subject to compliance with all other yard requirements and performance standards in subsections (1) through (4) of this section, and providing that the following conditions are met: 
1.  Such materials or products shall be stored, utilized, or produced within completely enclosed buildings or structures having incombustible exterior walls, which meet the requirements of the building code of the city. 
2.  All such buildings or structures shall be set back at least 40 feet from lot lines, or in lieu thereof, all such buildings or structures shall be protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system complying with installation standards prescribed by the National Fire Protection Association. 
3.  The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum gases, and explosives shall comply with the state rules and regulations as established by Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1941 (MCL 29.1 et seq., MSA 4.559(1) et seq.), as amended. 
(6)  Noise. Objectionable sounds, including those of an intermittent nature, shall be controlled in accordance with the City of Plymouth Noise Ordinance. 
(7)  Odor emissions. No person, wherever located, shall cause or allow the emission of odorous air contaminants from any single source such as to result in detectable odors which are measured in excess of the following limits: 
a.  For areas used predominately for residential or commercial purposes, it is a violation if odors are detected after the odorous air has been diluted with seven or more volumes of odor-free air. 
b.  In all other land-use areas, it is a violation if odors are detected after the odorous air has been diluted with 15 or more volumes of odor-free air. 
c.  When the source is a manufacturing process, no violation of (7)a., and b., herein shall be cited by the city, provided that the best practical treatment, maintenance, and control currently available shall be utilized in order to maintain the lowest possible emission of odorous gases, and, where applicable, in determining the best practical control methods, the city shall not require any method which would result in an arbitrary and unreasonable taking of property or in the practical closing of any lawful business or activity if such would be without corresponding public benefit. 
d.  For all areas, it is a violation when odors are detected after the odorous air has been diluted with 127 or more volumes of odor-free air, in which case provisions of (7)c. herein shall not be applicable. 
(8)  Wastes. 
a.  No waste shall be discharged in the public sewer system which is dangerous to the public health and safety. The following standards shall apply at the point wastes are discharged into the public sewer. 
b.  Acidity or alkalinity shall be neutralized within an average pH range of between 51/2 to 71/2 as a daily average on the volumetric basis, with a temporary variation of pH 4.50 to 10.0. 
c.  Wastes shall contain no cyanides. Wastes shall contain no chlorinate solvents in excess of 0.1 ppm; no fluorides shall be in excess of ten ppm; and shall contain no more than five ppm of hydrogen sulphide and shall contain not more than ten ppm of sulphur dioxide and nitrates; and shall contain no more than 25 ppm of chromates. 
d.  Wastes shall not contain any insoluble substance in excess of 10,000 ppm or exceed a daily average of 500 ppm or fail to pass a number eight standard sieve or have a dimension greater than 1/2 inch. 
e.  Wastes shall not have chlorine demand greater than 15 ppm. 
f.  Wastes shall not contain phenols in excess of 0.05 ppm. 
g.  Wastes shall not contain any grease or oil or any oily substance in excess of 100 ppm or exceed a daily average of 25 ppm. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-203. - Plant material and landscaping requirements. 
    Whenever in this chapter a greenbelt or planting is required, it shall be planted to completion within three months, and no later than November 30, from the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy if such certificate is issued during the April 1 to September 30 period; if the certificate is issued during the October 1 to March 31 period, the planting shall be completed no later than the ensuing May 31; plantings shall thereafter be reasonably maintained, including permanence and health of plant materials, to provide a screen to abutting properties and including the absence of weeds and refuse. Spacing, as required by this Section, shall be provided in any greenbelt or planting. A permanent certificate of occupancy shall only be issued after inspection and approval of such planting by the city. 
(1)  Plant material spacing and size. 
a.  Plant material shall not be located within four feet of the property line. 
b.  Where plant materials are placed in two or more rows, plantings shall be staggered. 
c.  Evergreen trees shall not be less than seven feet in height. When planted informally, they shall be spaced not more than 20 feet on centers. When planted in rows, they shall be spaced not more than 12 feet on centers. 
d.  Narrow evergreen trees shall not be less than five feet in height. When planted informally, they shall be spaced not more than 20 feet on centers. When planted in rows, they shall be spaced not more than 12 feet on centers. 
e.  Large shrubs shall not be less than 30 inches in height. When planted informally, they shall be spaced not more than six feet on centers. When planted in rows, they shall not be more than four feet on centers. 
f.  Small shrubs shall not be less than 30 inches in spread. They shall be planted not more than four feet on centers. 
g.  Large deciduous trees shall not be less than 21/2 inches in caliper. When placed informally, they shall be planted not more than 30 feet on centers. 
h.  Small deciduous trees shall not be less than 11/2 inches in caliper. When planted informally, they shall be spaced not more than 15 feet on centers. 
(2)  Mixture of materials. A mixture of plant materials (evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs) is required in all landscape plans as a protective measure against disease and insect infestation. Plant materials used together informally shall meet the on-center minimum spacing requirements: 
Minimum Recommended Distances Between Plant Materials 
Plant 
Material 
Types Evergreen 
Trees 
(Feet) Narrow 
Evergreen 
Trees (Feet) Large 
Deciduous 
Trees (Feet) Small 
Deciduous 
Trees (Feet) Large 
Shrubs 
(Feet) Small 
Shrubs 
(Feet) Evergreen Trees Min. 10 Min. 12 Min. 20 Min. 12 Min. 6 Min. 5 Narrow 
Evergreen 
Trees Min. 12 Min. 5 Min. 15 Min. 10 Min. 5 Min. 4 Large 
Deciduous 
Trees Min. 20 Min. 15 Min. 20 Min. 15 Min. 5 Min. 3 Small 
Deciduous 
Trees Min. 12 Min. 10 Min. 15 Min. 8 Min. 6 Min. 3 Large 
Shrubs Min. 6 Min. 5 Min. 5 Min. 6 Min. 4 
Max. 6 Min. 5 Small Shrubs Min. 5 Min. 4 Min. 3 Min. 3 Min. 5 Min. 3  
(3)  Parking lot landscaping and screening. 
a.  Parking lots which are visible from a public right-of-way (excluding a public alley) shall have the following landscaping between the parking lot and the right-of-way: 
1.  A landscaped strip at least ten feet in width or wider as may be required. 
2.  One tree for every 30 feet or fraction thereof of street frontage of the parking lot. 
3.  Five shrubs for every 30 feet or fraction thereof of street frontage of the parking lot. 
Parking Lot Screening from Roadway 
Parking Lot Screening From Roadway 
b.  Parking lots of greater than 5,000 square feet shall meet the following landscaping requirements for the interior of the parking lot: 
1.  Within the interior of the parking lot there shall be one square foot of landscaped area for each 15 square feet of the parking lot. Greenbelt areas, buffers or landscape strips required in other sections of this chapter shall not be counted towards the requirement of interior parking lot landscaping. 
2.  Each interior landscaped area shall have at least 150 square feet. 
3.  The landscaped areas shall be located in a manner that breaks up the expanse of paving throughout the parking lot. Parking lot islands shall be a minimum width of six feet in any direction. 
4.  There shall be at least one deciduous tree for each 300 square feet or fraction thereof of interior landscaped area. Each individual landscaped area shall contain at least one tree. 
Interior Parking Lot Landscaping 
Interior Parking Lot Landscaping 
c.  Parking lots of greater than 5,000 square feet, but less than 10,000 square feet, shall have interior landscaping located within the lot or around its perimeter. Perimeter landscaping shall follow the requirements of section 78-203 and walls required in section 78-206 may be replaced by suitable screening or landscaping. 
d.  A parking lot of an office, commercial or industrial use adjacent to a public park facility or land principally used or zoned for residential purposes shall have a landscape strip at least 15 feet wide between it and all areas of such park or residential land, as required in section 78-206. 
Landscape Strip 
Landscape Strip 
(4)  Landscape planting plan review and field inspection. 
a.  Whenever in this chapter plantings are required, a plan for planting and landscaping shall be provided showing materials, their location, spacing, size and number as required by this section and other sections of this chapter. 
b.  In developments providing open space such as multiple housing developments, open space subdivisions, and cluster housing developments, a plan for landscaping shall include the development proposals for the open space as well as proposals for planting. 
c.  Final landscaping and planting plans shall be submitted for review by the city within 60 days of the date of approval of the site plan for the proposed development. A building permit will not be issued until landscaping and planting plans are approved. 
d.  Review fees for landscaping and planting plans shall be charged to the applicant in accord with fees established from time to time by resolution of the city commission. 
(5)  Suggested plant materials. 
a.  Evergreen trees: 
Pine 
Douglas-Fir 
Fir 
Hemlock 
Spruce 
b.  Narrow evergreens: 
Red Cedar 
Arborvitae 
Junipers 
c.  Large deciduous trees: 
Oaks 
Ginkgo (male) 
Birch 
Linden 
Hard Maples 
Beech 
Honeylocust (seedless & thornless) 
d.  Small deciduous trees: 
Hornbeam 
Hawthorn 
Magnolia 
Mountain Ash 
Redbud 
Flowering Dogwood 
Flowering Crabs (disease resistant varieties) 
e.  Large shrubs: 
1.  Deciduous: 
Honeysuckle 
Lilac 
Forsythia 
Border Privet 
Sumac 
Pyracantha 
Barberry 
Flowering Quince 
Sargent Crabapple 
Dogwood (Red Osier, Grey) 
Cotoneaster (Pekin, Spreading) 
2.  Evergreen: 
Irish Yew 
Hicks Yew 
Mugo Pine 
Pfitzer Juniper 
Savin Juniper 
f.  Small shrubs: 
1.  Deciduous: 
Regal Privet 
Fragrant Sumac 
Japanese Quince 
Potentilla 
Compact Burning Bush 
Cotoneaster (Cranberry, Rockspray) 
2.  Evergreen: 
Dwarf Mugo Pine 
Big Leaf Winter Creeper 
Arborvitae 
Low Spreading Junipers (Andora, Hughes, Tamarack, etc.) 
Spreading Yews (Dense, Brown's, Ward, etc.) 
g.  Trees not suggested: 
Box Elder 
Ash Trees 
Willows 
Soft Maples (Silver) 
Poplars Elms 
Horse Chestnut (nut bearing) 
Tree of Heaven, Russian Olive 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-204. - Exterior lighting. 
(a)  Residential lighting standards. 
(1)  All outdoor lighting in residential use districts used to light the general area of a site shall be shielded or directed in a manner which reduces glare and shall be so arranged as to reflect objectionable lights away from all adjacent residential districts or adjacent residences. 
(b)  Non-residential lighting standards. 
(1)  Time period. Required lighting shall be turned off daily from 1/2 hour before sunrise to 1/2 hour after sunset. 
(2)  Permitted lighting. Only non-glare, color-corrected lighting shall be permitted. In commercial and industrial districts, full cutoff shades are required for light sources higher than 15 feet so as to direct the light onto the site and away from adjoining properties. The lighting source shall not be directly visible from adjoining properties. Lighting shall be shielded so that it does not cause glare for motorists. 
(3)  Intensity. 
a.  Site lighting. Lighting for uses adjacent to residential properties shall be designed and maintained such that illumination levels do not exceed 0.1 foot-candles along property lines. Lighting for uses adjacent to non-residential properties shall be designed and maintained such that illumination levels do not exceed 0.3 foot-candles along property lines. The light intensity provided at ground level shall be a minimum of 0.3 foot-candle anywhere in the area to be illuminated. Light intensity shall average a minimum of 0.5 foot-candle over the entire area, measured five feet above the surface. 
b.  Parking lots. Parking lot illumination levels shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  For residential uses, churches, schools and child care facilities, all parking lots must be illuminated at levels of at least 0.4 but not exceed 0.6 foot-candles. 
2.  For non-residential uses, illumination levels shall be a function of the size of the parking lot: 
Size Minimum Illumination Small (5-10 spaces) 0.4 Medium (11-99 spaces) 0.6 Large (100+ spaces) 0.9  
(4)  Height. Except as noted below, lighting fixtures shall not exceed a height of 25 feet or the height of the building, whichever is less, measured from the ground level to the centerline of the light source. Fixtures should provide an overlapping pattern of light at a height of seven feet above ground level (See attached diagram). The planning commission may modify these height standards in the commercial and industrial districts, based on consideration of the following: the position and height of buildings, other structures, and trees on the site; the potential off-site impact of the lighting; the character of the proposed use; and, the character of the surrounding land use. In no case shall the lighting exceed the maximum building height in the district in which it is located. More specifically, in industrial districts the height of lighting fixtures may be equal to the height of the principal building on the site on which the lighting is located, provided that such lighting does not exceed 30 feet and is located at least 200 feet from any residential district. 
(5)  Sign lighting. Signs shall be illuminated in accordance with the regulations set forth in the adopted sign ordinance, article XIX. 
(6)  Site plan requirements. All lighting, including ornamental lighting, shall be shown on site plans in sufficient detail with appropriate photometric studies to allow determination of the effects of such lighting upon adjacent properties, traffic safety, and overhead sky glow. The objective of these specifications is to minimize undesirable off-site effects. Building or roof mounted lighting intended to attract attention to the building and/or use and not strictly designed for security purposes shall not be permitted.Temporary holiday lighting and decorations are exempt from the aforementioned provisions. 

Diagram Notes 
A.  Non-glare, color corrected lighting with full cutoff shades for commercial and industrial sites, on daily from a 1/2 hour after sunset to a 1/2 hour before sunrise. 
B.  Overlapping light pattern at approximately seven feet. 
C.  Average minimum light intensity: 0.5 foot-candle, not to exceed a maximum of 20 foot-candles, measured five feet above the surface. 
D.  Minimum light intensity at ground level, anywhere on site: 0.3 foot-candle. 
E.  Maximum height: Twenty-five feet or height of building, whichever is less, unless modified by planning commission. 
F.  Light directed away from adjoining properties. Uses adjacent to residential properties must maintain illumination levels not to exceed 0.1 foot-candles at the property line, and uses adjacent to non-residential properties must maintain levels not to exceed one foot-candle. 
G.  For residential uses, churches, schools, and child care facilities, all parking lots must maintain illumination levels of at least 0.4 but not exceed 0.6 foot-candles. For non-residential uses, illumination levels shall be a function of the size of the parking lot (see section 78-204(b)(3)b.) 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-205. - Residential entranceway. 
    In all residential districts, entranceway structures including but not limited to walls, columns and gates marking entrances to single-family subdivisions or multiple housing projects may be permitted and may be located in a required yard, except as provided in section 78-207, provided that such entranceway structures shall comply with all codes of the city, and shall be approved by the building department and a permit issued. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-206. - Walls and berms. 
(a)  For the use districts and uses listed below, there shall be provided and maintained on those sides abutting or adjacent to a residential district, a screening wall, fence, landscaped berm or landscape strip as required below. The height of the fence, wall, or berm shall be measured from the surface of the parking area or land on the nonresidential side of the wall. 
Use Height 
Requirements (1) RM, RM-1 and RM-2 districts (on those sides adjacent to one-family residential districts) 41/2 feet to 61/2 feet (2) P-1 vehicular parking districts 41/2 feet (3) Off-street parking area (other than vehicular parking districts) 41/2 feet (4) O-1, O-2, B-1, B-2 and B-3 districts 41/2 feet to 61/2 feet (5) I-1 and I-2 districts 41/2 feet to 8 feet (6) Utility buildings, stations and/or substations 61/2 feet  
(b)  In the case of variable wall, fence or berm height requirements such as in subsections (a)(1), (4), and (5) of this section, the extent of the obscuring wall, fence, or berm shall be determined by the planning commission on the basis of land usage, provided further that no wall, fence or berm shall be less than the above required minimum. 
(c)  Required walls shall be located on the lot line except where underground utilities interfere and except in instances where this chapter requires conformance with yard setback lines. Required walls may, upon approval of the zoning board of appeals, be located on the opposite side of an alley right-of-way from a nonresidential zone that abuts a residential zone when mutually agreeable to affected property owners. The continuity of the required wall on a given block will be a major consideration of the zoning board of appeals in reviewing such request. 
(1)  Required walls shall have no openings for vehicular traffic or other purposes, except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except as may be approved by the building official. All walls herein required shall be constructed of face brick or comparable nonporous facing materials and shall be durable, weather resistant, rust-proof and easily maintainable. Wood screen walls or fences shall be cedar, wolmanized or treated wood and may only be used in areas not adjoining parking lots or roadways, and which will not be subject to damage from vehicular traffic. Fences shall comply with the City of Plymouth Fence Ordinance. Solid stockade fences shall be prohibited. Open weave or shadow box style fences which permit air flow shall be permitted. 
(2)  Plant materials along a wall or fence shall include at least one tree for each 20 feet or fraction thereof, and shall form a continuous screen from four feet, six inches in height to eight feet in height as required in section 78-206(a). 

(d)  Required berms shall be constructed as landscaped earth mounds with a crest area at least two feet in width. The exterior face of the berm shall be constructed as an earthen slope. The interior face of the berm may be constructed as an earthen slope, or retained by means of a wall, terrace or other means acceptable to the building official. Whenever an earthen slope is provided, it shall be constructed with an incline not to exceed one foot of vertical rise to three feet of horizontal distance. 
(1)  Berm slopes shall be protected from erosion by sodding or seeding. If slopes are seeded, they shall be protected with erosion control methods until the seed germinates and a permanent lawn is established. The berm area shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be planted with shrubs, trees or lawn and shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition. 
(2)  Plant materials within the berm area shall include at least one tree for each 20 feet or fraction thereof, and shall form a continuous screen from four feet, six inches in height to eight feet in height as required in section 78-206(a). A planting plan and grading plan shall be prepared for the berm and shall be reviewed by the planning commission. 

Berms 
Berms-Cont'd. 
Berms-2 
(e)  If a landscape strip is used as a buffer between conflicting uses, the landscape strip shall be at least ten feet in width. The landscape strip shall be planted with dense foliage in such manner as to provide a minimum opacity of 80 percent in summer and 60 percent in winter. 

Landacape Strip 
(f)  The planning commission may waive or modify the foregoing requirements of section 78-206, where cause can be shown that no good purpose would be served and that the waiver or modification would neither be injurious to the surrounding neighborhood nor contrary to the spirit and purpose of this chapter provided that in no instance shall a required wall or berm be permitted to be less than four feet, six inches in height. In those instances where suitable screening will be achieved, the planning commission may allow planting, earth berms, or treated wood walls in place of masonry walls. 
(1)  In consideration of request to waive wall or berm requirements between residential and nonresidential districts, or as otherwise required herein, the planning commission shall consider: 
a.  Whether or not the residential district is considered to be an area in transition and will become nonresidential in the future based on the adopted master plan. 
b.  Whether or not the existing use of land adjacent thereto is such that the obscuring effect of a wall or berm would achieve no substantial screening function. 
c.  Whether or not the ground elevation of the site in question and the land adjacent thereto is such that a wall or berm would not be required to provide the required obscuring effect. 
(2)  The planning commission may temporarily waive wall or berm requirements for an initial period not to exceed 12 months. Granting of subsequent waivers shall be permitted, provided that the planning commission shall make a determination as hereinbefore described for each subsequent waiver. 
(g)  The city may require that suitable maintenance guarantee be provided for the continued maintenance of walls required under this chapter. 
(h)  The requirement for an obscuring wall between off-street parking areas, outdoor storage areas, and any abutting residential districts may not be required when such areas are located more than 200 feet distant from such abutting residential district. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2011-03,  1, 1-17-11) 
Sec. 78-207. - Corner clearance. 
(a)  A clear vision area shall be established within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between such right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection. Walls, fences, berms, shrubs, hedges or other plantings (excluding trees) and signs in this area shall not exceed 30 inches in height above the average gutter grade adjacent to this area. Trees planted or signs erected within this same area shall not have branches or portions of the sign area lower than eight feet above the average gutter grade. 
(b)  The planning commission may require adequate sight visibility, corner clearance and building setback within the B-2 zoning district. This may be required at the intersection of driveways and a public right-of-way in a manner to aid vehicular and pedestrian traffic. A triangular area of unobstructed vision for motorists and pedestrians shall be maintained at the intersection of the street right of way and driveway. The triangular area shall comply with Section 78-207 or as modified by the Building Official or Planning Commission for sites where strict compliance is impractical. 

(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2007-01,  5, 5-21-07) 
Sec. 78-208. - Residential fences. 
    Fences or walls are permitted, subject to the paramount provisions of the City of Plymouth Fence Ordinance (Chapter 18, Building Regulations Article X, Fences 18-371-18-380) and subject to the further provisions of this section. If any of the provisions of this section should conflict with the City of Plymouth Fence Ordinance, such provisions shall be controlling on the question of fences. It is the intent, however, that the following provisions be construed harmoniously with the fence ordinance where possible. 
(1)  Fences on all lots of record in all residential districts which enclose property and/or are within a required side or rear yard shall not exceed six and one-half feet in height, measured from the surface of the ground, and shall not extend toward the front of the lot nearer than the front of the house or the required minimum front yard, whichever is greater. In the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard, the side yard abutting a street shall be continuation of the required front setback on the lot to the rear, and no fence shall project into this area. When side yards abut on frontages across a common street, the side yard abutting a street shall not be less than the required front yard of the district and no fence shall project into this area. (See Figures 1, 2, and 3) 
Figure 1. Fence Location 

Figure 2. Fence Location 

Figure 3. Fence Location 

(2)  Recorded lots having a lot area in excess of two acres and a frontage of at least 200 feet, and acreage or parcels not included within the boundaries of a recorded plat, in all residential districts, are excluded from these regulations. 
(3)  Fences on lots of record shall not contain barbed wire, electric current, or charge of electricity. This shall exclude underground electric fences used for pet containment. 
(4)  All fences or walls shall be constructed with the finished side exposed to neighboring properties, the support posts placed on the inside, and in a manner which serves to enhance the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood or surrounding area. 
(5)  Posts and finials may extend no more than six inches above the maximum permitted height of a fence. 
(6)  Fences for swimming pools shall comply with the regulations of the state construction code. 
(7)  No fence, wall, or plantings shall interfere with visibility from a driveway, alley or intersection. All fences, walls, or plantings shall comply with the corner clearance requirements of section 78-207. 
(8)  Fences which enclose public or institutional parks, playgrounds, or public landscaped areas, situated within an area developed with recorded lots, shall not exceed eight feet in height measured from the surface of the ground, and shall not obstruct vision to an extent greater than 25 percent of their total area. 
(9)  Fences or walls within a required front yard area shall be decorative style only consisting of wrought iron, metal, or picket fences and masonry or stone walls. Decorative fences or walls placed within a front yard shall not exceed 30 inches in height. A decorative fence or wall shall contribute to the identification and beauty of the principal building. Chain link fences are not allowed within a required front yard area. 
(10)  Walls constructed of masonry, stone or pre-cast materials and constructed within a side or rear yard shall have a maximum height of 30 inches. This shall exclude screening walls constructed between conflicting land uses as specified in section 78-206. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2011-03,  2, 1-17-11) 
Sec. 78-209. - Industrial fences. 
    Fences are permitted in industrial districts as follows: 
(1)  Fences shall not be allowed within the front yard of any industry on sites of less than ten acres in size. Fences may be allowed in front yards of sites of ten acres or more after review and approval of the planning commission. 
(2)  Fences not to exceed eight feet in height shall be permitted in side and rear yards. Barbed wire shall be allowed on fences not less than eight feet in height in not more than three strands mounted in a "Y" at the top of the fence and shall be permitted provided such "Y" is located to project over the property being fenced. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-210. - Street access. 
(a)  Any lot created after the effective date of this chapter shall have frontage upon a public street right-of-way or legally recorded access easement at least 60 feet in width, unless a private road of lesser width has been approved by the city commission. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-211. - Temporary buildings and structures. 
    Temporary buildings and structures, including trailers, incidental to construction work on a lot, may be placed on such lot, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Temporary buildings and structures may only be used for the storage of construction materials, tools, supplies and equipment, for construction management and supervision offices, and for temporary on-site sanitation, solid waste or fuel facilities, related to construction activity on the same lot. 
(2)  No temporary building or structure shall be used as a dwelling unit. 
(3)  A building permit for such building or structure shall be issued by the building official prior to installation. 
(4)  Temporary buildings and structures shall be removed from the lot within 15 days after an occupancy permit is issued by the building official for the permanent structure on such lot, or within 15 days after the expiration of a building permit issued for construction on such lot. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-212. - Home occupations. 
    A home occupation, defined as an occupation or profession carried on in the home by resident members of the household where such use is clearly incidental and secondary to the principal use of the dwelling as a residence, shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  That such home occupation shall be carried on within the dwelling or within a building accessory thereto. 
(2)  That the character or appearance of the residence shall not change and that the home occupation shall not generate more traffic from cars or trucks than normally associated with a residential dwelling. 
(3)  That no article shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises, except such as is produced within the dwelling or accessory building or is provided incidental to the service or profession conducted within the dwelling or accessory building. 
(4)  The home occupation shall not display or create outside the building any external evidence of the operation of the home occupation, except that there may be one sign, not to exceed three square feet in area and not located within the road right-of-way, as approved by the building official. 
(5)  The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants, and not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation. 
(6)  That there shall be no exterior storage of materials or equipment. 
(7)  That no nuisance shall be generated by any heat, glare, noise, smoke, vibration, noxious fumes, odors, vapors, gases, chemicals, or matter at any time. 
(8)  That no hazard of fire, explosion, or radioactivity shall exist at any time. 
(9)  That only members of the household occupying the dwelling shall be employed in the dwelling or accessory building. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2012-04,  10, 11-5-12) 
Sec. 78-213. - Mechanical equipment. 
    Any mechanical equipment, including water and gas meters, elevator housings, stairways, tanks, heating, ventilation and air conditioning equipment (HVAC), and other similar equipment, located on the roof and any part of a building shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  All such equipment shall be screened by a solid wall, fence, landscaping and/or architectural feature that is compatible in appearance with the principal building. 
(2)  Roof-mounted equipment shall not exceed a height of ten feet above the surrounding roof surface, and shall occupy no more than 15 percent of the total roof area. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-214. - Essential public services. 
    The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of essential public services shall be permitted in any zoning district; it being the intention thereof to exempt such erection, construction, alteration or maintenance from the application of this chapter. Essential services shall be subject to site plan review, article XVII, unless waived by the building official. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-215. - Condominium development standards. 
    The intent of this section is to provide regulatory standards for condominiums and condominium subdivisions similar to those required for projects developed under other forms of ownership. 
(1)  General requirements. 
a.  Each condominium lot shall be located within a zoning district that permits the proposed use. 
b.  Each condominium lot shall front on and have direct access to a public street or a private street approved by the planning commission. Approval for a private street may be conferred by the planning commission in conjunction with article XX, site plan review. 
c.  All condominium project plans shall conform to the plan preparation requirements, design, layout, and improvements standards and all other requirements as established in the City of Plymouth Subdivision Regulations. 
d.  For the purposes of this ordinance, each condominium lot shall be considered equivalent to a single lot and shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(2)  Site plan approval required. Approval of the site plan and condominium documents by the planning commission shall be required as a condition to the right to construct, expand or convert a site condominium project. Preliminary and final approval shall not be combined. 
a.  Approval process. 
1.  A site plan pursuant to the standards and procedures set forth in article XX of this chapter shall be submitted to the planning commission for review. 
2.  The applicant shall submit the condominium documents and master deed to the city staff and consultants for review. The condominium documents shall be reviewed with respect to all matters subject to regulation by the city including without limitation; ongoing preservation and maintenance of drainage, stormwater retention, wetlands, woodlands, and other natural features; maintenance of private roads, if any; and maintenance of stormwater, sanitary, and water facilities and utilities. 
All review comments shall be submitted to the building official who shall compile the findings prior to consideration of the site plan for approval by the planning commission. 
3.  Following receipt of preliminary approval, the applicant shall also submit to the building official plans in sufficient detail for the city, along with appropriate consultants, to determine compliance with applicable laws, ordinances and design standards for construction of the project. 
All review comments shall be submitted to the building official who shall compile the findings prior to consideration of the site plan for approval by the planning commission. 
4.  Upon completion of the review of the condominium documents and plans and receipt of the recommendations and findings from city staff and consultants, the site plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for review in accordance with article XX of this chapter. 
5.  If the site plan, condominium documents and/or plans conform in all respects to applicable laws, ordinances and design standards, approval shall be granted by the planning commission. 
6.  If the site plan, condominium documents and/or engineering plans fail to conform to the ordinance or development standards, final approval shall be denied by the planning commission. 
7.  In the interest of insuring compliance with this article and protecting the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city, the planning commission, as a condition of approval of the site plan, may require the applicant to deposit a performance guarantee as set forth in the zoning code for the completion of improvements associated with the proposed use. 
b.  Information required prior to occupancy. Prior to the issuance of occupancy permits for any condominium units, the applicant shall submit the following to the city: 
1.  A copy of the recorded condominium documents (including exhibits). 
2.  A copy of any recorded restrictive covenants. 
3.  A copy of the site plan on laminated photostatic copy or mylar sheet. 
4.  Evidence of completion of improvements associated with the proposed use including two copies of an "as-built survey". 
c.  Revision of site condominium plan. If the site condominium subdivision plan is revised, the site plan shall be revised accordingly and submitted for review and approval or denial by the planning commission before any building permit may be issued, where such permit is required. 
d.  Amendment of condominium documents. Any amendment to a master deed or bylaws that affects the approved site plan or any conditions of approval of a site plan shall be reviewed and approved by the city staff or consultants and planning commission before any building permit may be issued, where such permit is required. The planning commission may require its review of an amended site plan if, in its opinion, such changes in the master deed or bylaws require corresponding changes in the original site plan. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-216. - Wireless communication. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  It is the policy of the city to minimize the overall number of newly established locations for wireless communication facilities and wireless communication support structures within the community, and encourage the use of existing structures for attached wireless communication facility purposes. It is further the purpose and intent of the city to provide for such authorization in a manner which will protect the public health, safety, and welfare and retain the integrity of neighborhoods and the character and aesthetic quality of the community at large. This policy is consistent with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 and PA 110 of 2006, as amended (MCL 125.3514). 
(b)  Authorization. Wireless telecommunication facilities may be permitted within the City of Plymouth as either a permitted use subject to administrative review, permitted use subject to site plan approval, or as a special use according to the following regulations: 
(1)  Wireless communication equipment as a permitted use subject to administrative review. 
A proposal for attached wireless communication facilities that satisfies the following criteria does not require special use or site plan approval. Confirmation that these criteria are satisfied shall be determined by an administrative review by the building Official prior to issuance of any construction code permits. Such proposals shall also be reviewed for compliance with the standards and conditions in subsection (c), General regulations, with the certification to identify any items of noncompliance. The wireless facility shall also comply with the following: 
a.  The existing wireless communications support structure and/or wireless communications equipment compound are in compliance with this section and, if not, are in compliance with a prior approval under this section. 
b.  The proposal will not increase the height of the wireless communications support structure by more than 20 feet or ten percent of its original height (as first erected without any later additions), whichever is greater. 
c.  The proposal will not increase the width of the wireless communications support structure by more than necessary to the stated and documented purpose of the increase. 
d.  The proposal will not increase the area of the existing wireless communications equipment compound to more than 2,500 square feet. 
(2)  As a permitted use subject to site plan approval. In the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts, a wireless communication facility shall be a permitted use subject to the standards and conditions of this section. The following wireless communication facilities shall also be considered a permitted use: 
a.  A proposed collocation upon a wireless communication support structure which has been approved by the city for such collocation but which is not permitted by administrative review under subsection (b)(3). 
b.  Wireless communication equipment on an existing utility pole structure located within a right-of-way and not previously approved and used as a wireless communications support structure, where there will be no substantial change in physical dimensions of the existing pole. 
(3)  As a special use. 
a.  A collocation on an existing structure which does any of the following: increases the height of the support structure by more than 20 feet or ten percent of its original height, increase the width of the support structure or increases the area of the equipment compound greater than 2,500 square feet. 
b.  Subject to the standards and conditions set forth in this section, new wireless communication facilities shall be considered as a special use in any areas outside of the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts. 
c.  If it is demonstrated by an applicant that a wireless communication facility, in order to operate, is required to be established outside of I-1 and I-2 districts and that existing structures are not available for collocation in other parts of the city, such wireless communication facilities shall be considered elsewhere in the city as a special land use, subject to the following: 
1.  At the time of the submittal, the applicant shall demonstrate that alternative locations cannot reasonably meet the coverage and/or capacity needs of the applicant. 
2.  Where feasible, wireless communication facilities shall be of a design such as a steeple, bell tower, water tower, or other form which is compatible with the existing character of the proposed site, neighborhood and general area, as approved by the city. 
3.  Locations outside of the I-1 and I-2 districts may only be considered at the following locations, subject to application of all other standards contained in this section: 
i.  Municipally-owned sites. 
ii.  Other governmentally owned sites. 
iii.  Religious or other institutional sites. 
iv.  Public or private school sites. 
v.  Public utility sites. 
4.  If sites are not available in the I-1 or I-2 district, or on parcels identified above in subsection 2(c)(iii), other locations where there is a demonstrated need for service can be considered. 
5.  All other criteria and standards set forth below in Subsection c. and d. are met as follows: 
(c)  General regulations. 
(1)  Standards and conditions applicable to all facilities. All applications for wireless communication facilities shall be reviewed in accordance with the following standards and conditions, and, if approved, shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with such standards and conditions. 
a.  Facilities shall not be demonstrably injurious to neighborhoods or otherwise detrimental to the public safety and welfare. 
b.  Facilities shall be located and designed to be compatible with the existing character of the proposed site and harmonious with surrounding areas. 
c.  Applicants shall demonstrate an engineering justification for the proposed height of the structures and an evaluation of alternative designs which might result in lower heights. 
d.  The following additional standards shall be met: 
1.  The maximum height of the new or modified support structure and antenna shall not exceed height limits provided in Table 216-1, and shall be the minimum height demonstrated to be necessary for reasonable communication by the applicant and by other entities to collocate on the structure. 
     Table 216-1 
     Support Structure Height Limits by Zoning District 
Zoning District Height Limit R-1, RT-1, RM-1, RM-2, O-1, O-2, B-1, B-2, B-3, ARC, P-1 145 feet I-1, I-2 180 feet  
Additional height over that which is provided in Table 216-1 may be permitted, in the sole discretion of the planning commission, when it can be demonstrated by the applicant that additional height is required to permit collocation. Evidence of collocation shall be provided by the applicant if additional height over that which is provided in Table 216-1 is requested. The accessory building contemplated to enclose such things as switching equipment shall be limited to the maximum height for accessory structures within the respective zoning district. 
2.  The setback of the support structure and accessory structures shall be 200 feet from the boundary of any residentially zoned property. Otherwise, the setback of the support structure and accessory structures shall be 100 feet or a distance equal to one hundred and 125 percent of the height of the support structure (whichever is greater) from an adjacent property boundary and all existing or proposed rights-of-way. 
3.  There shall be unobstructed access to the support structure, for police, fire and emergency vehicles, and for operation, maintenance, repair and inspection purposes, which may be provided through or over an easement. 
4.  The city shall review and approve the architecture and color of the support structure and all accessory buildings so as to minimize distraction, reduce visibility, maximize aesthetic appearance, and ensure compatibility with surroundings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to maintain the wireless communication facility in a neat and orderly condition. If lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications Commission, Michigan Aeronautics Commission, or other governmental agencies, it shall be red between sunset and sunrise, white between sunrise and sunset, and shall blink or flash at the longest permitted intervals, unless otherwise required. 
5.  The support system shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable building codes and shall include the submission of a soils report from a geotechnical engineer, licensed in the State of Michigan. This soils report shall include soil borings and statements indicating the suitability of soil conditions for the proposed use. The requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communication Commission, and Michigan Aeronautics Commission shall be submitted by the applicant in the original application for approval. The applicant shall furnish a written certification from the manufacturer or designer of the support system that the support system has been evaluated by a registered professional engineer and that the support system can safely accommodate attached antennas under expected weather conditions. 
(2)  Standards and conditions applicable to special land use facilities. Applications for wireless communication facilities which shall be approved as special land uses shall be reviewed, and if approved, constructed and maintained, in accordance with the standards and conditions of this section and in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  The applicant shall demonstrate the need for the proposed facility based upon one or more of the following factors: 
1.  Proximity to an interstate or major thoroughfare. 
2.  Areas of population concentration. 
3.  Concentration of commercial, industrial, and/or other business centers. 
4.  Areas where signal interference has occurred due to tall buildings, masses of trees, or other obstructions. 
5.  Topography of the proposed facility location in relation to other facilities with which the proposed facility is to operate. 
6.  A demonstrated need, including deficiency of service, proof of dropped calls, and/or inadequate capacity to accommodate call volume. The city may seek the advice of experts in the field or independent third parties for technical assistance regarding radio frequency engineering. 
b.  The proposal shall be reviewed in conformity with the collocation requirements of this section. 
(d)  Application requirements. 
(1)  Building permit applications shall be required for wireless facilities proposed as a permitted use subject to administrative review. 
(2)  A site plan and special use application shall be required for wireless facilities proposed as a special use, in accordance with Article XX and Article XXIII. 
For wireless facilities subject to special use application, a site plan shall also include a detailed landscape plan prepared in accordance with section 78-203. The purpose of landscaping is to provide screening and aesthetic enhancement for the structure base, accessory buildings and enclosure. In all cases, fencing of a minimum of six feet in height shall be required for protection of the support structure and security from children and other persons who may otherwise access facilities. 
(3)  An application shall include a description of security to be posted at the time of receiving a building permit to ensure removal of the facility when it has been abandoned or is no longer needed, as provided in subsection (f). In this regard, the security shall be posted and maintained in the form of: (1) cash; (2) irrevocable letter of credit; or, (3) other security arrangement found acceptable by the city manager. 
(e)  Procedures. 
(1)  Review and administrative actions on special land use and site plan approval applications. 
a.  The building official shall promptly review special land use and site plan approval applications to determine if they are administratively complete by inclusion of all information required in subsection (d). If the application is not complete, no later than 14 business days after receiving it the building official shall provide a written or electronic notice to the applicant specifying the information necessary to complete the application. Such initial review for completeness by the building official shall be on behalf of the planning commission for special land use and site plan approvals. 
b.  The building official shall review supplemental information submitted in response to an incomplete application notice and notify the applicant of any remaining deficiencies. 
c.  An application shall be administratively complete upon the building official's determination or the expiration of 14 business days from receipt of the application without a notice to the applicant of deficiencies. 
d.  Upon a special use or site plan approval application being administratively complete, the building official shall promptly schedule it for a planning commission meeting that will allow for a planning commission site plan decision or special land use decision after the required public hearing within the time periods in subsection (e)(2) below. 
e.  If the applicant has disclosed professional opinions supporting the application and the building official or planning commission has determined that independent professional review for the city of any such opinion should be performed, the reasonable costs of such review may be assessed to the applicant by a written notice from the building official as a professional review cost to be paid in accordance with the notice. 
(2)  Decisions on special use and site plan approval applications. 
a.  The planning commission shall approve or deny a special land use application for a new wireless communications support structure not more than ninety (90) days after it is administratively complete. 
b.  For all special use, site plan applications, and applications subject to administrative review, other than new wireless communications support structures, the planning commission shall approve or deny the application not more than 60 days after it is administratively complete. 
(3)  Post-approval costs, fees, and administrative actions. Zoning permits to implement and grant the authority allowed by a special land use or site plan approval for wireless communication facilities, and zoning certificates of use and occupancy for such facilities, shall be issued subject to and conditioned on all of the following: 
a.  Any conditions of the special land use or site plan approval. 
b.  Payment of any outstanding professional review costs as described in subsection e.1)(e). 
c.  Payment of permit fees in an amount established by or in accordance with a Resolution of city commission. 
(f)  Removal. 
(1)  A wireless communication facility must furnish reasonable evidence of ongoing operation at any time after the construction of an approved tower. 
(2)  A condition of every approval of a wireless communication facility shall be adequate provision for removal of all or part of the facility by users and owners upon cessation of operation. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2014-03,  6, 2-17-14) 
Sec. 78-217. - Projections into setbacks. 
    Projections into setbacks shall be permitted as follows: 
Projection... ...Into Front Yard Setback ...Into Side Yard Setback ...Into Rear Yard Setback At or Below Grade: Egress window/areaway recess* Not permitted 3 feet from face of structure (interior dimension) 3 feet from face of structure (interior dimension) Stairs from basement Not permitted Not permitted 4 feet (interior dimension) Patios 4 feet, but no closer than 10 feet from the front property line Not permitted 10 feet from property line Above Grade but Below Roof: Air conditioning condensers Not permitted 4 feet 4 feet Architectural features, as defined 4 inches 4 inches 4 inches Awning/canopy 3 feet Not permitted 3 feet Balcony 4 feet Not permitted 4 feet Bay window (limited to 8 feet in width; maximum 2 per side) 2 feet Not permitted 2 feet Cantilevered floor area (Box Out) 2 feet Not permitted 2 feet Cellar door Not permitted Not permitted 8 feet Chimney(limited to 8 feet in width) 1 foot Not permitted 1 foot Deck** Not permitted Not permitted 12 feet, but limited to three feet high Generators Not permitted Not permitted Not permitted Porch, uncovered 6 feet Not permitted 12 feet, but limited to three feet high Porte cochere (excluding gutters) Not permitted 2 feet from property line Not permitted Roof Area: Cornices, eaves, overhangs, brackets, soffits (excluding gutters) 2 feet 2 feet 2 feet Dormers 1 Not permitted Not permitted Not permitted  
*Areaway construction can project above grade no more than 12 inches. 
**The portion of a deck which occupies the rear yard setback shall not be converted into any enclosed habitable spaces. 
(1) Projections containing floor area, including decks, shall be included in the lot coverage calculation. See Sections 78-43 and 78-53 for the front porch exclusion from lot coverage. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 16-02,  2, 7-18-16 ) 
Sec. 78-218. - Foundation walls. 
(1)  The exposed foundation wall between the average of finished grades at the center of all walls of the building and the highest portion of the first floor shall not exceed 36 inches from the average grade plane. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, the above ground level (average grade plane) for that wall shall be measured at the sidewalk, unless otherwise defined herein. This height limit shall not include areas for walk out basements, window wells or other portions of exposed foundation wall which cannot be reasonably lowered or covered as determined by the building official. 
(2)  Elevation measurements of the top of the basement footings shall be provided to the building official by a licensed engineer or surveyor before a backfill inspection can be conducted to confirm that the actual elevations meet the submitted plans. 
( Ord. No. 16-06,  2, 10-17-16 ) 
Sec. 78-219. - Grading, drainage and building grades. 
(1)  The ground areas outside the walls of any building or structure hereafter erected, altered, or moved shall be so designated that surface water shall flow away from the building walls in such a direction and with such a method of collection that inconvenience or damage to adjacent properties will not result. Where property is developed adjacent to existing properties previously developed, existing grades of adjacent properties shall have priority. Grades around houses or structures shall meet existing grades in the shortest possible distance, as determined by the building official, but under no circumstances shall exceed 1:4 slopes or 25 percent grades. 
(2)  To minimize impacts on contiguous, previously developed, single-family residential property and ensure compatibility for new projects in established residential neighborhoods, the first story elevation height of new structures shall be consistent with the first floor elevation height of contiguous residences, in conformance with other requirements of this ordinance. Any property owner/developer who intends to add fill above the height of the existing contiguous grades shall demonstrate to the building official's satisfaction, that additional fill is not detrimental to surrounding properties in terms of compatibility and drainage. 
(3)  A certificate of occupancy will not be issued until final grades are approved by the city building official. A certificate of grading shall be completed by the applicant. The building official shall require a certified copy of the grading plan to be submitted by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor. 
( Ord. No. 16-06,  2, 10-17-16 ) 
ARTICLE XIX. - SIGNS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-02, adopted Jan. 16, 2017, restated and amended former Art. XIX,  78-220-78-231, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. XIX pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 10-6-2003; Ord. No. 2005-08,  2, 7-18-05; Ord. No. 2008-03,  4, 8-4-08. 

Sec. 78-220. - Intent. 
    The intent of this article is to regulate the location, size, construction and manner of display of signs and outdoor advertising in order to minimize their harmful effects on the public health, safety and welfare and to balance the First Amendment concerns articulated by the United States Supreme Court in Reed v. Gilbert (2015). It is the intent of this Code to regulate many aspects of signs that have nothing to do with a sign's message, such as size, building materials, lighting, moving parts and portability. It is intended by this article to give recognition to the legitimate needs of business, industry and other activities, through appropriate guidelines, in attaining their identification and informational objectives. It is a basic tenet that failure to regulate them may lead to poor identification of neighboring businesses, deterioration and blight of the business and residential areas of the city, conflicts between different types of land use, and reduction in traffic safety to pedestrians and motorists. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-16-17 ) 
Sec. 78-221. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned sign means a sign which, for 90 days, fails to direct a person to or advertises a bona fide business, tenant, owner, product or activity conducted, or product available on the premises where such sign is displayed. 
    Accessory sign means a sign which pertains to the principal use of the premises. 
    Advertising means the use of a sign to call the public's attention to goods or services for sale, or business' name and/or locations, so as to get them to buy or shop for those goods or services, at those businesses. 
    Area of sign means the total area included within the polygon caused by encompassing the outermost portions of the sign or around the outermost edges of a sign formed of letters or symbols only. An area so created shall include all solid surfaces as well as openings and shall include all sides serving as a sign surface. For canopy/awning signs only the logo and lettering area shall be used in calculating sign square footage. 
    Awning sign (see canopy sign) means a sign which is printed or otherwise affixed to an awning which may be rolled or folded up against the wall to which it is attached. 
    Banner: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is attached to a pole or a building at one or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners. 
    Bench sign means an advertising sign placed upon a bench or other seating structure. 
    Building sign: Any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a ground sign or a hanging sign. Building signs shall include the following types of signs as defined in this section: banner, canopy, projecting and wall. 
    Canopy sign means a sign which is part of or located on a canopy or awning which is attached to the building or structure they are intended to serve. Canopy signs shall also include internally illuminated translucent fabric awnings or fabric canopies which advertise goods or services. 
    Change of copy refers to the change of names, logos, symbols, or other graphic items of information, as long as the structural characteristics including size, shape, or frame is not modified. 
    Changeable copy sign: means a sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the structural integrity of the sign. A sign on which the message changes more than eight times per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this ordinance. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a "time and temperature" portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this ordinance. 
    Construct or erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, suspend, or affix. 
    Construction and/or real estate development signs means signs pertaining to projects or real estate developments under construction. 
    Directional sign means a sign which indicates the route or location of facilities, services, or activities which are of public interest, and signs denoting the direction of vehicular traffic. 
    Festoon sign means banners, pennants, incandescent light bulbs, or other such temporary features which are hung or strung overhead and which are not an integral, physical part of the building or structure they are intended to serve. 
    Flag: means any fabric or banner containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity. 
    Flashing, animated or moving sign means a sign that has intermittently reflecting lights, or signs which have movement of any illumination such as intermittent, flashing, scintillating, or varying intensity, or a sign that has any visible portions in motion, either constantly or at intervals, whether caused by artificial or natural sources. 
    Ground sign means a sign supported by one or more upright brace or braces of reasonable size necessary to support such sign, permanently mounted in or upon the ground and in no way attached to a building structure. 
    Hanging sign means a sign for pedestrian traffic that is not supported by any means from the ground or sidewalk and which is fastened to or suspended from a structure. 
    Height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of: 
(1)  Existing grade prior to construction; or 
(2)  The newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purposes of locating the sign. 
In cases where the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a pubic street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the zoning lot, whichever is lower. 
    Identification nameplate sign means a sign stating the name and/or address of a person or firm. 
    Inflatable sign means a sign, figure or object that is either expanded to its full dimensions or supported by gases contained within the sign, figure or object, or part, at a pressure greater than atmospheric pressure. 
    Interior window sign means window copy painted or otherwise attached to the interior window surface, or any sign hung so that its primary purpose is to be observed from outside the building. 
    Lawn extension means that area between the sidewalk and the curb. 
    Marquee sign means a display sign attached to or hung from a roof like structure projecting over an entrance and from and supported by a building, but not including canopy or awning signs. 
    Non-accessory sign means a sign which pertains to other than the principal use of the premises. 
    Nonconforming sign means any advertising structure or sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the effective date of this ordinance and any amendments thereto, and which fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this chapter. 
    Off-premises sign means a sign which contains a message unrelated to a business or profession conducted on the premises, or to a commodity, service or activity, not sold or offered upon the premises where such sign is located. 
    Political sign means a temporary sign, whose message relates to a candidate for political office, to a political party, to a political issue, or an ideological opinion. 
    Portable sign means a freestanding sign not permanently anchored or secured to either a building or the ground, such as, but not limited to trailers, "A" frame, "T" shaped sign, and wire frame structures. 
    Premises means any lot or parcel of land or building or site as otherwise used in this chapter. 
    Projecting wall sign means a sign panel and frame which projects from the wall at an angle of 90 degrees, by no more than four feet from the building, or 1/3 of the sidewalk width, whichever is less. 
    Public property means any land within the city that is not privately owned. 
    Public right-of-way means that area designated for public use by easement, dedication or otherwise, from one property line to another property line. As shown in the plat records of the city or recorded with the county register of deeds. 
    Real estate sign means a temporary sign placed upon a property advertising that the particular property it is placed upon is for sale, rent, or lease. 
    Roof sign means a sign which is erected, constructed, or maintained upon the roof or parapet of a building. 
    Sign means the use of a device to display any word, numeral, figure, device, letter, symbol, insignia, illustration, design, trademark, or combination of these by which information is made known to the general public and is visible from off the site or lot. 
    Sign setback means that where it is specified that a sign must be located a minimum or other certain distance from property lines or public rights-of-way, such distance will be measured from the portion of the sign structure nearest to the specified line. For purposes of these measurements, the property lines and public rights-of-way lines extend vertically and perpendicularly from the ground to infinity. 
    Temporary sign means any sign, regardless of size and materials that is not permanently fastened to any structure, including posts with permanent footings. 
    Vehicle business sign means a sign painted or attached to a vehicle which is parked or placed upon the owner's premises primarily for purposes of advertising the premises. Commercially licensed vehicles which are generally used daily off-site are not included in this definition. 
    Wall sign means a sign attached to, or placed flush against, the exterior wall or surface of any building, no portion of which projects more than 16 inches from the wall. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-16-17 ) 
Sec. 78-222. - Violations and penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, maintain, enlarge, alter, move or convert any sign in the city, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, move or convert any sign regulated by this article, except a sign which is permitted by the provisions of this article. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a civil infraction pursuant to section 78-382 of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-16-17 ) 
Sec. 78-223. - Signs not permitted. 
    All signs not expressly permitted in section 78-226 are prohibited. Examples of signs not permitted are: 
(1)  Abandoned sign; 
(2)  Banner sign; 
(3)  Bench sign; 
(4)  Festoon sign; 
(5)  Flashing, animated or moving sign; 
(6)  Inflatable sign as defined; 
(7)  Non-accessory sign; 
(8)  Nonconforming sign; 
(9)  Off-premises sign; 
(10)  Portable sign; 
(11)  Roof sign; 
(12)  Vehicle sign; and 
(13)  Any other type of sign not expressly permitted in section 78-226. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-16-17 ) 
Sec. 78-224. - Reserved. 
Sec. 78-225. - Required conditions in any use district. 
    The following conditions shall apply to all signs erected or located in any use district: 
(1)  Signs shall pertain only to the sale, rental, or use of the premises on which located, or to the goods sold or activities conducted thereon. 
(2)  No sign shall be erected until approved by the building official and a permit issued. 
(3)  Only signs established by city, county, state or federal government may be located in or project into public right-of-way or public property or lawn extensions, unless specifically provided otherwise herein. 
(4)  Wall signs shall be displayed flat against the wall of the building. No signs shall be painted directly on a roof or wall. 
(5)  In business, office and industrial districts, canopy or awning signs shall be considered to be wall signs and subject to the size limitation and placement regulations of wall signs. 
(6)  Ground signs, real estate signs, political signs, garage sale signs, and temporary signs may have a maximum of two sides, each with the allowable area, and they shall be placed so as not to obstruct the clear vision of pedestrians, cyclists or motorists. 
(7)  Directional signs shall not exceed two square feet per side nor exceed two sides, shall contain no advertising, except the business name or logo, and may be illuminated. Directional ground signs shall not exceed a maximum of two sides, nor a height of six feet, and may be located one at each driveway entrance. 
(8)  Interior window signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the glass surface of the window area in which the sign is located; shall not require a permit; shall be permitted in addition to any permitted wall or ground sign; and shall be located only on the first floor front facade of the building. Buildings on a corner lot shall be permitted window signs on each road frontage. 
(9)  Temporary signs for special civic events may be permitted. Such signs shall not exceed four square feet in area per side or four feet in height and shall not be illuminated. Permission cannot be granted for a temporary sign for a commercial, industrial or private use. 
(10)  Illuminated signs shall not interfere with the vision of pedestrians, cyclists, motorists or adjacent property owners, and shall not be of the flashing, moving or intermittent type. 
(11)  One sign per premises shall be permitted, provided it shall not exceed four square feet per side in area or four feet in height, and shall be removed within seven days of the rental, lease or acceptance of offer to purchase. 
(12)  Signs[DD1] are permitted in any use district provided they do not exceed four square feet in area per side and four feet in height. 
(13)  Construction and/or real estate development signs are permitted only on the premises upon which the construction or development is taking place. The permitted sign may be erected only after a building permit for the project has been issued and shall be removed when 51 percent of the units or square footage of the project are occupied, whichever occurs first. The location, size, height, setbacks, type and number of signs shall be the same as required for business districts. 
(14)  For purposes of identification by emergency personnel (fire, police, EMS) all businesses, offices, industrial buildings, apartment complexes, or residences either multiple- or single-family, shall prominently display on the front side (facing the street) of their building or upon freestanding signs or entranceways to all buildings, their street address. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). If the residence or business cannot be seen from the street, an additional street address sign shall be displayed in an area where it can be seen from the street. In all residences with more than one unit, such as apartments, each individual unit shall be clearly marked. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-16-17 ) 
Sec. 78-226. - Signs permitted. 
    The following signs are permitted subject to compliance with the requirements in this article: 
(1)  Canopy/awning sign; 
(2)  Directional sign; 
(3)  Garage and yard sale sign; 
(4)  Ground sign; 
(5)  Interior window sign; 
(6)  Political sign; 
(7)  Real estate sign; 
(8)  Temporary sign; 
(9)  Wall sign; 
(10)  Construction and/or real estate development signs; 
(11)  Projecting wall sign; and 
(12)  Signs advertising religious services. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-16-17 ) 
Sec. 78-227. - Measurement. 
(a)  Sign area. Sign area shall be computed as follows: 
(1)  General requirements. Where a sign consists of a generally flat surface or sign face on which lettering and other information is affixed, the sign area shall be computed by measuring the entire face of the sign including any framing or borders. 
(2)  Individual letters. Where a sign consists of individual letters and logo affixed directly to a building, the area of the sign shall be computed by measuring the area of the envelope required to enclose the lettering and logo. 
(3)  Freestanding sign. The area of a double-faced freestanding sign shall be computed using only one face of the sign provided that: 1) the outline and dimensions of both faces are identical, and 2) the faces are back-to-back so that only one face is visible from any given direction. 
(4)  Ground sign. The area of a ground sign shall be computed by measuring the entire vertical surface of a face upon which the letters and logo are attached. In the case of a multi-faced ground sign, the area of the sign shall be computed using only one face of the sign. 
(5)  Cylindrical sign. The area of a cylindrical ground sign shall be computed by multiplying the circumference of the cylinder by its height. 
(6)  Temporary signs. All temporary signs on property located in any zoning district shall be permitted, provided it shall not exceed four square feet per side in area and four feet in height. 
(b)  Setback and distance measurements. The following guidelines shall be used to determine compliance with setback and distance measurements: 
(1)  The distance between two signs shall be measured along a straight horizontal line that represents the shortest distance between the two signs. 
(2)  The distance between a sign and a parking lot or building shall be measured along a straight horizontal line that represents the shortest distance between the outer edge of the parking lot or building. 
(3)  The distance between a sign and a property line shall be measured along a straight horizontal line that represents the shortest distance between the sign and the property line. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-16-17 ) 
Sec. 78-228. - Ground signs. 
(a)  General requirements. (The following regulations shall apply to all ground signs except for ground signs located in the ARC Zoning District which shall be governed by section 78-169.) 
(1)  Within all non-residential zoning districts including non-residential uses contained in the MU mixed use district, only one ground sign shall be permitted per zoning lot. If the frontage of a zoning lot exceeds 400 linear feet two such ground signs may be permitted. One additional ground sign may be permitted at a secondary entrance if it is not located on the same street as the primary entrance. Maximum sign area is provided in "Table A" found in the following pages. 
(2)  Within all residential zoning districts including residential uses contained in the MU mixed use district, only one ground sign shall be permitted at the primary entrance for the purpose of identifying a subdivision, site condominium, multiple family development, or mobile home park. 
(3)  Within all residential zoning districts, only one ground sign shall be permitted per zoning lot for the purpose of identifying a non-residential special land use. One additional ground sign may be permitted at a secondary entrance if it is not located on the same street as the primary entrance. Maximum area is provided in "Table A" below. 
(4)  One freestanding identification sign stating the name of a business center and major tenants therein may be erected for a shopping center, office park, industrial park or other integrated group of stores, commercial buildings, office buildings or industrial buildings. The sign area shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. Such signs may be up to eight feet in height. If the lot fronts on two or more collector or arterial streets one such sign may be permitted for each frontage. 
(5)  Within all PUD districts, the number and size and location of ground signs shall be determined by the intended use of the premises, subject to the review and approval of the city during PUD plan review. 
(6)  All ground signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from all road rights-of-way and shall be located no closer than five feet from the edge of the principal entrance driveway and all property lines. 
(7)  The support structure for a ground sign shall not exceed 25 percent of the maximum permissible area of the sign measured by viewing the elevation of the sign perpendicular to the sign face, unless otherwise approved during the site plan review process. 
(b)  Maximum height and area requirements for ground signs shall be applied within each zoning district according to the following schedule. The maximum height and area for ground signs within business centers are pursuant to paragraph (a)(4) above: 
Table A. Ground Signs/Allowable Height and Maximum Area 
Maximum Area (sq. ft.) District Max. Height (ft.) Per Side Total *R-1 4 18 36 *RT-1 4 18 36 *RM-1 6 25 50 *RM-2 6 25 50 O-1 8 25 50 O-2 8 25 50 B-1 8 25 50 B-2 15 25 50 B-3 15 25 50 I-1 6 25 50 I-2 6 25 50 MU 4 18 36 ARC Subject to the standards of Section 78-169.  
*Ground signs permitted in these districts are for non-residential special uses permitted in the residential districts. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-16-17 ) 
Sec. 78-229. - Building signs/wall signs. 
(a)  General requirements: (The following regulations shall apply to all building signs/wall signs except for such signs located in the ARC Zoning District which shall be governed by Section 78-169.) 
(1)  Within all non-residential zoning districts, a combination of building signs may be established not to exceed the maximum sign area per "Table B" for each zoning lot (for a single business). Signs for multiple tenant shopping centers shall not exceed 25 square feet. 
(2)  For each single-family or two-family dwelling unit, with a separate means of ingress and egress, one wall sign not exceeding two square feet in area per unit, indicating the name and/or address of the occupant, home occupation or bed and breakfast operation is permitted. Home occupation and bed and breakfast operations shall not be permitted individual ground signs. 
(3)  Within all PUD districts, the number and size of wall signs shall be determined by the intended use of the premises, subject to the review and approval of the city, during PUD plan review. 
(4)  One projecting sign may be permitted for each first-floor business within the B-2 central business district. The projecting sign may be a maximum of eight sq. ft. in area (each side) and shall be included in the total amount of signs permitted for the subject building. Changeable copy shall not be permitted as a part of projecting signs. Projecting signs must provide a clear distance of eight feet from the sidewalk and ten feet from any driveway. The leading edge of a projecting sign shall not extend more than four feet from the face of the building that it is attached to. Wall signs or awning signs shall not be permitted in conjunction with a projecting sign. Projecting signs shall be spaced at least 25 feet apart and shall not be internally illuminated. 
(5)  Channel letter signs are considered to be wall signs that are mounted so that the face of the letters are parallel to the building wall. Mounting regulations for channel letter signs, from wall to outermost face, are as follows: 
a.  Channel letters with transformers mounted inside the letters shall not extend more than 16 inches from the building wall. 
b.  Channel letters with remote transformers shall not extend more than 12 inches from the building wall. 
c.  Channel letters mounted on a raceway shall not extend more than 16 inches from the building wall. 
d.  Channel letter signs must provide a clear distance of eight feet from the sidewalk to bottom edge of the sign, but shall not extend over public or private roadways, or parking lots. 
(b)  A cabinet flat wall sign shall not exceed more than 12 inches from the building wall. Other wall signs shall not exceed more than eight inches from the wall. 
(c)  Illuminated canopy and translucent fabric awning signs shall be considered a wall sign. The entire illuminated surface shall be considered a part of the sign for purposes of area calculation. 
(d)  Maximum area requirements for building signs shall be applied within each zoning district according to the following schedule. One (1) wall sign or canopy sign shall be permitted on each facade, which has a separate public means of ingress and egress. 
Table B. Building Signs/Wall Signs Maximum Area 
District Maximum Area in sq. ft. O-1 25 O-2 25 B-1 25 B-2 25 B-3 25 I-1 25 I-2 25 MU 25 ARC Subject to section 78-169  
( Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-16-17 ) 
Sec. 78-230. - Nonconforming existing signs. 
    Nonconforming signs are those signs that do not comply with the size, placement, construction or other standards or regulations of this chapter, but were lawfully established prior to its adoption. Signs for which the zoning board of appeals has granted a variance are exempt and shall not be defined as nonconforming. It is the intent of this ordinance to encourage eventual elimination of nonconforming signs. This objective is considered as much a subject of public health, safety, and welfare as the prohibition of new signs in violation of this chapter. Therefore, the purpose of administering this chapter is to remove illegal non-conforming signs while avoiding any unreasonable invasion of established private property rights. 
    A nonconforming sign may be continued and shall be maintained in good condition as described elsewhere in this section, however, the following alterations are regulated: 
(1)  A nonconforming sign shall not be structurally altered so as to change its shape, size, type or design unless such change shall make the sign conforming. 
(2)  A nonconforming sign may undergo a "change of copy" or the replacement of names, logos, symbols, numbers or other graphic items of information as long as the structural characteristics, including size, shape or frame, are not modified. 
(3)  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign. 
(4)  A nonconforming sign shall not be re-established after the activity, business, or use to which it related has been discontinued for 90 days or longer. 
(5)  A nonconforming sign may undergo normal maintenance and repair such as painting, replacement of lights, and replacement of letters. Normal maintenance shall not exceed 60 percent of the appraised market value. 
(6)  A nonconforming sign shall not be re-established after damage or destruction if the estimated expense of reconstruction exceeds 60 percent of the appraised replacement cost as determined by the building official. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-16-17 ) 
Sec. 78-231. - Hanging signs/pedestrian traffic signage. 
    General requirements: Hanging signs shall be allowed within the B-1 B-2, and MU zoning districts and shall be governed by the following regulations: 
(1)  One hanging sign may be permitted for each first-floor business or tenant space with a separate means of ingress and egress within the B-1, B-2 and MU zoning districts. 
(2)  The hanging sign may be in addition to a wall sign for each business site. However, hanging signs are not allowed at business sites which display a projecting sign or a ground sign. A hanging sign shall also not be allowed at business sites which display a nonconforming wall sign or signs which exceed the current allowed square footage for wall signs. 
(3)  Hanging signs shall be measured in the following manner: 
a.  The maximum area for a hanging sign shall be six square feet per side or maximum of 12 square feet of total surface area. 
b.  The maximum distance from the face of the building to the sign edge closest to the right-of-way, shall be 30 inches or the depth of the awning whichever is less. 
c.  The dimension of the hanging sign which is parallel to the face of the building shall not be more than the dimension which is perpendicular to the face of the building. 
(4)  The hanging sign must be located in the center third of the storefront/business site or over an entrance door. 
(5)  The minimum height or clearance above a walking surface shall be seven feet. 
(6)  Hanging signs shall not be allowed above a street or alley where they could interfere with vehicular traffic. 
(7)  Signage lettering or numerals shall not exceed eight inches excluding letters or digits used as part of a logo. 
(8)  Hanging signs shall not be internally illuminated. 
(9)  Hanging signs within the city's historic district shall be subject to and approved by the Kellogg Park Historic District Commission. 
(10)  Hanging signs shall be subject to sign application procedures of section 78-225 and permitting requirements of the building department. 
(11)  All hanging signs shall be safely and securely attached by not less than two metal chains, metal brackets or wrought iron brackets firmly secured. No excess chain shall be allowed. In no case shall any hanging sign be attached with wire, string, rope, wood, or secured by nails. 
( Ord. No. 2017-02, 1-16-17 ) 
Secs. 78-232-78-239. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XX. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 

Sec. 78-240. - Purpose. 
    It is the intent of this article to require site plan review approval prior to issuance of a building permit for certain buildings, structures, and uses that can be expected to have a significant impact on natural resources, traffic patterns, adjacent parcels, and the character of future development, and for all special land uses, to ensure that all such buildings, structures, and uses are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-241. - General procedures. 
    Site plan review shall be conducted by the planning commission with the assistance of the building official and administrative, consulting and technical personnel as may be deemed necessary to properly evaluate a proposed plan. A site plan shall be submitted for review in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and such other rules and procedures established by the city. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-242. - Submitted for approval. 
    A site plan shall be submitted to the city for approval of: 
(1)  Any development, except single-family and two-family residential, for which off-street parking areas are provided as required in section 78-271. In those instances where a change in use is proposed that does not require an increase in parking demand, such use shall only require the review of the building official provided, however, the building official may request the review of the planning commission. 
(2)  Any use in an RM, OS, B, I or P district lying contiguous to, or across a street from, a single-family residential district. 
(3)  Any use or change of use, except single-family or two-family residential. 
(4)  All residentially related uses permitted in a single-family district such as, but not limited to, churches, schools and public facilities. 
(5)  Site plans for all subdivisions, site condominiums, cluster housing and multiple-family developments involving more than one building. 
(6)  Special land uses in all zoning districts. 
(7)  Wireless communication towers. 
(8)  Any proposal to build, expand, or decrease an off-street parking lot. 
(9)  Any request to add a use on an existing site, including expansion in area, volume or intensity of an existing use. 
(10)  Any other change in use or development that could affect compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter. 
(11)  All uses not otherwise included within a specific use district. 
    The building official shall not issue a building permit for construction of, addition to, any one of the above listed buildings or structures until a final site plan therefore has been approved and is in effect. A use, not involving a building or structure, as above listed, shall not be commenced, or expanded nor shall the building official issue a certificate of occupancy for such use, until a final site plan has been approved and is in effect. 
    No grading, removal of trees or other vegetation, land filling, or construction of improvements shall be commence for any development for which site plan approval is required until a final site plan is approved and is in effect, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
    For changes of use and site alterations or building expansions, the Planning Commission shall determine the extent of improvement required in relation to the extent of change proposed. In particular the Planning Commission may require changes to improve public safety, closure or redesign of driveways, redesign or resurfacing of parking and loading areas, installation of curbing, replacement or additions to landscaping or screening, upgrades to lighting, relocation and enclosure of waste receptacles, and upgrades to the building exterior. 
    Site alterations shall rectify or eliminate existing nonconforming site features such as nonconforming landscaping, parking, lighting, drainage, etc. However, the elimination of nonconformities shall be restricted to those areas of the site proposed for alteration and not necessarily the entire site. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2012-02,  3, 1-3-12; Ord. No. 2012-04,  11, 11-5-12) 
Sec. 78-243. - Uses exempt from site plan review. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued for any construction, reconstruction, erection, and/or expansion except in accordance with a site plan approved by the planning commission, except as hereafter provided. A site plan approved by the planning commission shall not be necessary for issuing permits in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Construction, reconstruction, erection and/or expansion of a single- or two- family dwelling on a parcel zoned solely for residential purposes. 
(2)  All developments regulated by the Subdivision Control Act of 1967, as amended (MCLA 560.101 et seq.) and the City of Plymouth Subdivision Control Ordinance. 
(3)  Construction solely on the building interior that does not increase usable floor area or increase on site parking requirements. 
(4)  Construction or erection of signs; retaining walls; fences; buffer walls; refuse storage stations; sidewalks; antennas; lights; poles; and cooling, heating, or other mechanical equipment when located on a building or occupying a ground area of less than 100 square feet. 
(b)  Site plans not required to be reviewed by the planning commission shall be reviewed by the building official. The building official shall review such plans in accordance with the same procedures, requirements, and standards used by the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-244. - Planned unit developments, site condominiums and condominium subdivisions. 
    Site plans shall be required for planned unit developments, site condominiums and condominium subdivisions and shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-245. - Application and review procedures for site plan approval. 
(a)  An application provided on a form provided by the city, along with the required fee and 14 copies of the site plan shall be submitted to the building official. 
(b)  Planning commission review. The planning commission, city staff and consultants shall review the site plan and provide comments on its compliance with the site plan approval standards and other sections of this chapter. 
(c)  Any applicants for site plan review may elect to submit a preliminary and final site plan concurrently in accordance with the requirements and procedures of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-246. - Compliance required. 
    Every site plan submitted to the city shall be in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the city's rules and procedures for site plan submittal and review. No site plan shall be approved until same has been reviewed by the building official and administrative and technical personnel for compliance with the standards of this chapter and other requirements of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-247. - Information required. 
    The following information shall be included on the site plan in addition to those items specified in the application for site plan review: 
(1)  A scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet if the subject property is less than three acres, and one inch equals 100 feet if three acres or more. 
(2)  Date, north point and scale. 
(3)  The dimensions of all lot and property lines showing the relationship of the subject property to abutting properties. 
(4)  The location of all existing and proposed structures on the subject property and all existing structures within 100 feet of the subject property. 
(5)  The location of all existing and proposed drives and parking areas. 
(6)  The location and right-of-way widths of all abutting streets and alleys. 
(7)  The names and addresses of the architect, planner, designer, engineer or person responsible for the preparation of the site plan. 
(8)  All requirements of the city's application for site plan review, dated August 1989 shall be complied with including the following site plan review checklist below. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-248. - Site plan review checklist. 
YES NO N/A 1. Correct scale ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 2. Name of person preparing plan* ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 3. Date, north point ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 4. Property line dimension ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 5. Street right-of-way widths ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 6. Existing utilities (sewer, water, gas, etc.) ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 7. Show adjacent property and buildings ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 8. Existing topography, trees and other features ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 9. Off-site ground, parking lot, roadway, driveway and/or structure elevations for minimum distance of 50 feet ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 10. On-site grid of maximum 100 feet intervals each way (closer where rolling terrain warrants) and minimum 2.0 feet contours ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 11. Location of new structures including side and front yard setbacks and building length and width (show a general floor plan) ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 12. Number of dwelling units per building ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 13. Height of structure ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 14. Percent one room apartments (efficiencies) ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 15. Total number of rooms if multiple-family ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 16. Parking requirements met ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 17. Number of units and bedrooms each building ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 18. Parking lot layout (showing paved area) including ingress and egress and service area ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 19. Parking lot space dimensions ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 20. Loading and unloading space ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 21. Site grading and drainage plan (on-site elevations for pavements, drives, parking lots, curbs, sidewalks and finish grade at bldg.) ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 22. Utility connections (sanitary sewer, water, storm sewers) ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 23. On-site storm water retention ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 24. Fire hydrants (on- and off-site) ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 25. Sidewalks and elevations ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 26. Sedimentation and erosion control plan ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 27. Landscape plan showing plant materials to be used ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 28. Sign requirements met ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 29. Require walls and fences or greenbelts ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 30. Corner clearance ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 31. Service drive needed ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 32. Acceleration lanes and traffic pattern ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 33. Trash receptacle locations ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 34. Mail box locations ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 35. Air conditioner unit locations ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 36. Special site features (play areas, pools, etc.) ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 37. Handicapped facilities ..... [ ] [ ] [ ] 38. Building elevation drawings ..... [ ] [ ] [ ]  
*Where property line surveys, topography, sewer, water or storm drains are shown, the name of the registered engineer or land surveyor preparing such elements of the plan shall be indicated on the plan. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-249. - Factors considered. 
    In the process of reviewing the site plan, the following shall be considered: 
(1)  The location and design of driveways providing vehicular ingress to and egress from the site, in relation to streets giving access to the site, and in relation to pedestrian traffic. 
(2)  The traffic circulation features within the site and location of automobile parking areas; and may make such requirements with respect to any matters as will assure: 
a.  Safety and convenience of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic both within the site and in relation to access streets. 
b.  Satisfactory and harmonious relationships between the development on the site and the existing and prospective development of contiguous land and adjacent neighborhoods. 
(3)  The planning commission may further require landscaping, fences and walls in pursuance of these objectives and same shall be provided and maintained as a condition of the establishment and the continued maintenance of any use to which they are appurtenant. 
(4)  In those instances where an excessive number of ingress and/or egress points may occur with relation to major or secondary thoroughfares, thereby diminishing the carrying capacity of the thoroughfare, the planning commission may require marginal access drives. For a narrow frontage, which will require a single outlet, the planning commission may require that money be placed in escrow with the city so as to provide for a marginal service drive equal in length to the frontage of the property involved. Occupancy permits shall not be issued until the improvement is physically provided, or monies have been deposited with the city treasurer. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-250. - Duration of approval. 
    All site plan approvals granted by the planning commission, pursuant to the requirements of this section, shall be for a period of one year from the date of approval. The building official shall not issue a building permit for any type of construction on the basis of the approved site plan after such approval has expired. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-251. - Approval of minor site development plans. 
    The city may approve minor site development plan applications when the change will have no effect on the movement of automobiles and persons to and from the property and will not require additional parking spaces, subject to concurrence of the city engineer, chairperson of the planning commission and the city planner. A minor site plan may be applied for any of the following site modifications: 
(1)  The proposed addition constitutes less than 1,000 square feet or not more than 20 percent of the existing floor area. 
(2)  The building modification or change of use does not require additional off-street parking. 
(3)  The building or site modification does not encroach upon an existing parking lot or require the purchase of parking space credits. 
(4)  The building or site modification is not adjacent to single-family (R-1) zoned properties. 
(5)  A building or site modification will not have a significant impact upon adjoining land uses. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-252. - Grading. 
    Upon request, the building official may permit, when justifiable conditions are found to exist, and after preliminary site plan approval has been given, the movement of soil, the layout of footings and the construction of foundation walls prior to site plan approval, provided: 
(1)  A grading plan, drawn to local specifications and when necessary to county specifications, has been reviewed and approved. 
(2)  A soil erosion permit, when required, has been secured. 
(3)  Footing and foundation design plans have been approved by all applicable state, county, local departments and consultants. 
(4)  A resolution absolving the city of any liability has been submitted by the applicant and approved by the city. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-253. - Fees. 
    Fees for review of expired site plan will be waived in those instances where no substantial change in conditions of the site plan or abutting uses has taken place or a change in zoning standards has been adopted since approval of the site plan. In those instances where conditions have changed, the fee for review of expired site plans or new site plans shall be the same as for the initial submittal. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Secs. 78-254-78-259. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND USES 

Sec. 78-260. - Regulations. 
    Accessory buildings, structures, and uses except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations of this chapter applicable to the main building. 
(2)  An accessory building shall not be erected in any front or required yard setback except as allowed by this article. 
(3)  No accessory building, structure or use may be placed on a lot without a principal building. 
(4)  The height of the accessory structure having a dormer(s), which occupies ten percent or more of the total roof area, shall be determined by measuring the average height between the eaves and the ridge of the dormer(s). 
(5)  No more than two detached accessory buildings in residential districts shall be permitted on any lot. 
(6)  No detached accessory building in residential districts shall be located closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line. In those instances where the rear lot line is coterminous with an alley right-of-way, the accessory building shall be no closer than one foot to such rear lot line. In no instance shall an accessory structure be located within a dedicated easement right-of-way. 
(7)  All accessory buildings, structures and uses combined shall cover no more than 35 percent of the area created by the required rear yard setback. 
(8)  No detached accessory building in any residential district shall exceed 11/2 stories or 15 feet in height. The minimum eave height for an accessory building shall not be less than seven feet from the average grade plane. 
(9)  When an accessory building is located on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, such building shall not project beyond the front yard line required on the lot in rear of such corner lot. When an accessory building is located on a corner lot the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the side lot line of the lot to its rear, such building shall not project beyond the side yard line of the lot in the rear of such corner lot. 
(10)  For accessory buildings or structures in the required rear yard of a residential lot, the total combined length of all walls of such building(s) or structure(s) that parallel the rear lot line shall be no longer than 50 percent of the length of the rear lot line as follows: 
a.  If the 50 percent calculation results in a combined length of 30 feet or less, then the combined length allowed may be up to a maximum of 30 feet. 
b.  If the 50 percent calculation results in a combined length of more than 30 feet, then the combined length allowed is the result of the calculation, but in no instance may be more than 50 feet. 
Figure 1. Accessory Building Location for Corner Lots with
Front-Side Yard Situation 

Figure 2. Accessory Building Location for Corner Lots with
Side-Side Yard Situations 

Figure 3. Accessory Building Location for Corner Lots with
Front-Front Yard Situation 

(11)  Accessory buildings within all other nonresidential districts shall comply with applicable setback and height restrictions specified for the zoning district wherein the accessory use or structure is located. 
(12)  Detached accessory buildings shall not be used as habitable space. 
(13)  Detached accessory structures must be located a minimum of ten feet from the principle structure on site. 
(14)  Private wind energy conversion systems shall be subject to regulations contained in section 78-261. 
(15)  No detached accessory building in any residential district shall be constructed with an attached deck or balcony which exceeds 32 square feet. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2010-02,  4, 4-5-10; Ord. No. 2012-04,  12, 11-5-12; Ord. No. 2014-05,  4, 6-2-14; Ord. No. 2014-05,  4, 6-2-14; Ord. No. 16-06,  3, 10-17-16 ; Ord. No. 2017-09 ,  1, 1-2-18) 
Sec. 78-261. - Wind energy conversion systems. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of the City of Plymouth to promote the effective and efficient use of wind energy conversion systems (WECS) by regulating the siting, design, and installation of such systems to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. In no case shall this ordinance guarantee the wind rights or establish access to the wind. 
(b)  Approval required. Except where allowed as an accessory use or as a special use as listed in Article XII and XIII, it shall be unlawful to construct, erect, install, alter, or locate any WECS project within the city. 
(c)  Accessory uses. Private WECS projects located on lots within the city, and within any zoning district shall be allowed as an accessory use. Accessory use private WECS projects shall conform to the regulations of this section, including maximum height and minimum setback standards. 
(d)  General standards. The following standards shall apply to all private and commercial wind energy conversion systems in the city: 
(1)  Design safety certification. The safety of the design of all private and commercial WECS structures shall be certified by a the manufacturer. 
(2)  Controls and brakes. All private and commercial WECS structures shall be equipped with manual and automatic controls to limit rotation of blades to a speed below the designed limits of the WECS. The manufacturer must certify that the rotor and overspeed control design and fabrication conform to applicable design standards. 
(3)  Setbacks. All private and commercial WECS structures must be setback from property lines at a distance equal to or greater than the height of the structure, measured from the base of the structure to the highest reach of its blade. This shall include WECS structures attached to a garage or residential unit. 
(4)  Height. Private WECS structures shall not be greater than forty (40) feet in height. This shall include WECS structures attached to a garage or residential unit. Commercial WECS shall not exceed a height greater than the minimum setback to any property line. 
(5)  Interference. All private or commercial WECS structures shall be designed and operated to minimize or mitigate interference with existing electromagnetic communications, such as radio, telephone, microwave or television signals. 
(6)  Noise levels. The noise level for a WECS structure shall comply with the standards set forth in Section 34-89 of the City of Plymouth Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02,  5, 4-5-10) 
Secs. 78-262-78-269. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXII. - PARKING, LOADING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 78-270. - Off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  There shall be provided in all districts at the time of erection or enlargement of any main building or structure, automobile off-street parking space with adequate access to all spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces, in conjunction with all land or building uses, shall be provided prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as hereinafter prescribed. 
(1)  Off-street parking for other than residential use and other than those spaces accommodated by payment in lieu of parking as approved by the city commission shall be either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured by public right-of-way from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot. Ownership of the parking lot must be the same as the building. Spaces may be leased from municipal lots or other lots controlled by the city or downtown development authority (DDA), provided such spaces are within 300 feet of the building and the lease is not in default. Rate and terms of the leased spaces shall be determined by the city commission. Default of a parking lease agreement will constitute a violation and enforcement by the city. 
(2)  Residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of parking spaces, driveways, garage, or combination thereof and shall be located on the premises they are intended to service, and subject to the provisions of section 78-272. 
(3)  Unless otherwise provided herein, off-street parking shall not be permitted in any required or non-required front yard, except for use of the driveway. Off-street parking shall be permitted within the required side or rear yard setbacks, provided a minimum five foot setback is maintained between off-street parking and the side and rear lot lines of all adjoining properties. This requirement may be waived or modified by the planning commission for sites where there is limited land area available to meet the strict requirements of this section or for sites where it is possible to provide additional landscaping or screening to buffer parking from adjoining uses and a public road right-of-way. 
(4)  Any area once designated as required off-street parking shall not be changed to any other use unless and until equal facilities are provided elsewhere. 
(5)  Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this chapter in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or use. 
(6)  Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking, in which case the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses computed separately. 
(7)  In the instance of dual function of off-street parking spaces where operating hours of buildings do not overlap, the zoning board of appeals may grant a variance from the parking requirements of this chapter. 
(8)  The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks, or the repair of vehicles is prohibited. 
(9)  For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with a use which is similar in type as noted in section 78-271 below. 
Units and methods of measurement. For the purpose of determining off-street parking requirements, the following units of measurement shall apply: 
a.  Floor area: Where floor area is the unit for determining the required number of off-street parking spaces, said unit shall mean the gross floor area, except that floor area's within the principal building used for parking, incidental service and storage, housing of mechanical equipment, heating systems and similar uses need not be included. 
b.  Employees: For requirements stated in terms of employees, the calculation shall be based upon the maximum number of employees likely to be on the premises during the largest shift. 
c.  Places of assembly: In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of assembly in which those in attendance occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating facilities, each 24 inches of such shall be counted as one seat. In cases where a place of assembly has both fixed seats and open assembly area, requirements shall be computed separately for each type and added together. 
d.  Fractional requirements. When units or measurements determining number of required parking spaces result in requirement of a fractional space, any fraction shall require one parking space. 
(10)  Parking requirements within the B-2 central business district. 
a.  Within the B-2 central business district only, parking required for principal uses permitted or special land uses permitted (Sections 78-101 and 78-102) shall be based upon a parking rate according to the following schedule: 
Residential Two (2) spaces for each dwelling unit Retail One space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area Office One space for each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area Medical Office One space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area Restaurant One space for each 250 sq. ft. of gross floor area  
The above parking schedule and requirements for off-street parking shall be required for all new development. For existing development where there is a proposed intensification of use which requires additional parking, a property owner or developer will be responsible for that portion which is greater than the parking required for the current use. For example, an existing retail use which is being converted to a restaurant use shall require additional parking for that portion of restaurant parking over and above what is previously credited for retail use. 
The planning commission and/or city commission may also consider previously assigned parking credits established by payment in lieu of parking or by other previously approved parking arrangements recognized by the city. It is the responsibility of the property owner or applicant to provide written documentation on the existence of prior parking credits. These credits or payments in lieu of parking may be considered for fulfilling all or a portion of the off-street parking requirements of subsection 78-270(10). 
b.  Uses other than those listed above shall meet the parking requirements of section 78-271. 
c.  The planning commission or city commission may, at their discretion, modify the numerical requirements for off-street parking, based on evidence provided by the applicant that indicates that another standard would be more reasonable because of the level of current or future employment and/or the level of current or future customer traffic. The planning commission or city commission may also consider parking standards such as the Institute Of Transportation Engineers (ITE) or other documented parking standards or studies, including shared parking/collective parking arrangements and/or peak/non-peak parking demand. The planning commission or city commission may also consider prior arrangements or written agreements established before December 31, 2011, which satisfies required parking for the downtown or B-2 zoning district. 
d.  Within the B-2 central business district only, for all buildings which include a mix of uses, the total number of parking spaces required by each separate use shall be divided by a sharing factor according to the following matrix: 
Residential Retail Office Residential 1 1.2 1.4 Retail/Restaurant 1.2 1 1.2 Office 1.4 1.2 1  
(modified from SmartCode) 
For projects involving more than two land uses, the sharing factor shall be based upon the highest sharing factor of all land uses. A minimum floor area of at least twenty-five (25%) percent of the total building area for each shared land use shall be required in order to be eligible for a sharing factor. 
e.  In the interest of creating a viable central business district and to enhance the goal of separation of pedestrian and vehicular requirements, it is the goal of the City of Plymouth to encourage development of strategically located parking lots. These strategically located parking lots are developed largely out of public support to discourage the indiscriminate location or small dysfunctional parking spaces and the creation of a compatible and aesthetic arrangement of land uses. In keeping with this policy, the provision of off-street parking requirements as herein provided may be waived or modified by resolution of the city commission. 
In lieu thereof, the city commission may determine that the number of spaces normally required at the time of erection, enlargement or change of use of any building or structure requiring off-street parking space pursuant to section 78-270(a)(10), may be provided in the form of lease payments, special assessments, or other forms of payment in lieu of parking according to policies established by resolution of the city commission. In establishing such policy, the city commission shall take into account the current inventory and future needs of B-2 parking, as well as the benefit to the private owners and to the public from such parking which would subsequently be provided by the city. In implementing such policy, the city commission shall assure that the future needs for parking in the B-2 shall be adequately met by such alternative fee arrangements in lieu of parking. Payments in lieu of parking requirements are non-refundable. 
f.  Requirements for off-street parking may be waived or modified as part of a planned unit development (PUD). 
g.  Parking within the B-2 zoning district shall comply with barrier free/accessible parking requirements of the State Construction Code. 
h.  Within the B-2 zoning district, a change of use or an intensification of land use which requires additional parking shall not be entitled to the non-conforming use status as provided in section 78-352 or section 78-353 and assumed parking exemptions. Such change of use shall be required to provide parking in accordance with this section. 
(b)  Off-street parking for other than residential use and other than those spaces accommodated by payment in lieu of parking as approved by the city commission shall be either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured by public right-of-way from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot. When any required off-street parking is provided, not upon the same lot, but a lot within 300 feet of the building it is intended to serve, documentation meeting the requirements for recording at the register of deeds, shall be provided reflecting that the ownership of the realty (upon which parking is located) has given to the owner of the realty (upon which the building requiring the parking is located), a permanent right of use for the required number of parking spaces. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2007-01,  6, 5-21-07; Ord. No. 2012-02,  4-6, 1-3-12; Ord. No. 2012-04,  13, 11-5-12) 
Sec. 78-271. - Schedule. 
    The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule: 
Use Number of Minimum Parking Spaces 
Per Unit of Measure (1) Residential: a. Residential, one-family and two-family Two for each dwelling unit. b. Residential within the B-2 central business district One for each dwelling unit, plus one for each bedroom in excess of one per unit. c. Residential, multiple-family Two for each dwelling unit having two or less bedrooms and 21/2 for each dwelling unit having three or more bedrooms, plus five for any office building or club house facility. d. Housing for the elderly One for each two units and one for each employee. Should units revert to general occupancy, then two spaces per unit shall be provided. A minimum of one visitor space shall be required for each six dwelling units. e. Mobile home park Two for each mobile home site and one for each employee of the mobile home park. f. Rooming houses and rooming units One for each bedroom or room which could be so used. (2) Institutional: a. Churches, temples, or places of worship. One for each two seats or four feet of pews in the main unit of worship, plus any additional spaces needed for any day care, school, recreational facilities, meeting rooms, offices, and other uses determined by calculation by other section. An operations plan shall be submitted to support the amount of parking provided. b. Hospitals Two for each one bed plus parking for related uses. c. Convalescent and/or nursing homes One for each four beds. d. Municipal recreation centers Five spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area, plus parking required for outdoor facilities, or 1/3 parking space per person of permitted capacity whichever is greater. e. Elementary and junior high schools One for each one teacher, employee, or administrator in addition to the requirements of the auditorium. f. Senior high schools trade school, colleges and universities. One for each one teacher, employee or administrator and one for each ten students, in addition to other applicable requirements, i.e. auditorium, etc. g. Private clubs or lodge halls One for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes. h. Private golf clubs, swimming pool clubs, tennis clubs or other similar uses One for each two member families or individuals plus spaces required for each accessory use such as a restaurant or bar. i. Golf courses, including par-3, open to the general public, except miniature courses Six for each one golf hole and one for each one employee, plus spaces required for each accessory use, such as a restaurant or bar. j. Fraternity or sorority One for each five permitted active members, or one for each two beds, whichever is greater. k. Stadium, sports arena or similar place of outdoor assembly One for each three seats six feet of benches, (bleachers), whichever is greater. l. Theaters and auditoriums One for each three seats plus one for each two employees. m. Nursery school, day nurseries or child care centers One for each 150 square feet of usable floor area. n. Library and museums One for each 150 square feet of usable floor area. o. Post office One for each 100 square feet of lobby area plus one for each employee. (3) Business and commercial: a. Planned commercial or shopping center One for each 100 square feet of usable floor area for the first 15,000 square feet. One for each 125 square feet for the next 15,001 to 450,000 square feet of usable floor area. b. Club warehouse One for each 150 square feet for that area in excess of 450,000 square feet of usable floor area. Six spaces per 1,000 square feet of usable floor area. c. Auto wash (automatic) One for each one employee. In addition, reservoir parking spaces equal in number to ten times the minimum capacity of the auto wash. Maximum capacity of the auto wash shall mean the greatest number of automobiles possible undergoing some phase of washing at the same time, which shall be determined by dividing the length in feet of each wash line by 20. d. Auto wash (self-service or coin-operated) Four for each washing stall in addition to the stall itself. e. Beauty parlor or barbershop Three spaces for each of the first two beauty or barber stations, and 11/2 spaces for each additional station. f. Bowling alleys Five for each one bowling lane plus parking for accessory uses. g. Dance halls, pool or billiard parlors, rolling skating rinks, exhibition halls and assembly halls without fixed seats One for each two persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes. h. Drive-in restaurant One for each employee and one for each 25 square feet of usable floor area. i. Drive-thru restaurant One for each employee and five stack-up spaces for each drive through window or station. j. Carry-out restaurant (with no eating on premises) One for each employee and one for each 30 square feet of usable floor area with a minimum of six spaces. k. Establishment for sale and consumption on the premises of beverages, food and refreshments Outside of the downtown development district: One for each 75 square feet of usable floor area or one for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes, whichever is greater. Within the downtown development district: Effective May 1, 1994: One for each 150 square feet of usable floor space; and effective January 1, 1997: One for each 75 square feet of usable floor area or one for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes, whichever is the greater. l. Furniture and appliance or household equipment repair shops, showroom of a plumber, decorator, electrician, or similar trade, shoe repair, and other similar uses One for each 800 square feet of usable floor area. (For that floor area used in processing, one additional space shall be provided for each two persons employed therein). m. Gasoline service stations (full service) Two for each lubrication stall, rack or pit; and one for each gasoline pump stand; and one for each vehicle used as part of the equipment of the gasoline service station and one for each employee. n. Gasoline filling stations (self-service) 11/2 for each fuel nozzle. In addition, one parking space shall be provided for each 50 square feet of usable floor area in the cashier's and office areas. In no instance shall such a facility provide less than three parking spaces. In no instance shall a required parking space or its maneuvering area conflict with vehicles being fueled or awaiting fuel. o. Convenience store, with or without gasoline service. Four spaces per 1,000 square feet of usable floor area, plus spaces required for an auto service station activities or gasoline sales. p. Custom workshops such as furniture refinishing or custom designed furniture manufacturing. One space for each 800 square feet of gross floor area. q. Dry cleaners. Two spaces per each 1,000 square feet of usable floor area plus two stacking spaces for each drive-through lane. r. Food stores. One space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area. s. Furniture/carpet store. 11/2 spaces per 1,000 square feet of usable floor area. t. Motor vehicle sales and service establishments. One space for each 200 square feet of usable floor space of salesroom and two spaces for each one auto service stall in the service room. The areas devoted to customer service and employee parking shall be clearly delineated on the parking plan and reserved for that purpose. Parking space is exclusive of the requirement for new vehicle storage and display. u. Oil change facility. A minimum of three spaces for employees, but not less than two for each lubrication stall, rack, pit, or similar service area. In addition, two waiting spaces for each service area shall be provided. v. Swimming pool. One space per each three persons of capacity authorized by the building code. w. Video rental establishments. 15 spaces per 1,000 square feet of usable floor area, with a minimum of six spaces provided. x. Ice skating or roller rink One for each seat or six feet of benches, or one for each 150 square feet of skating area, whichever is greater. y. Laundromats and coin-operated dry cleaners One for each two washing and dry-cleaning machines. z. Miniature golf courses Two for each one hole plus one for each one employee. aa. Mini-storage rental units One space for each employee and one space for each 50 storage rental units. bb. Mortuary establishments One for each 50 square feet of viewing room floor area. cc. Motel, hotel or other commercial lodging establishments, including bed and breakfast inn. One for each one occupancy unit plus one for each one employee plus one space for each three seats used for food, beverage, banquet and/or meeting room area. dd. Retail stores except as otherwise specified herein One for each 200 square feet of usable floor space. ee. Public utility structures One for each employee on the maximum work shift. ff. Indoor tennis or racquetball facility Four for each court plus spaces as required for each accessory use such as a full service bar or restaurant. gg. Amusement arcade One for each one game table and one for each amusement device. hh. Athletic clubs, exercise establishments, health studios, sauna baths, judo clubs and other similar uses One parking space for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes plus one space per employee, or one space for each 11/2 clothing lockers, whichever is greater. (4) Offices: a. Branch bank, credit union or savings and loans. One space per each 200 square feet of usable floor area plus two spaces per each 24-hour teller, plus two stacking spaces for each drive-up teller. b. Business offices or professional offices, except as indicated in subsection (4)d of this section. One for each 300 square feet of usable floor space. c. Professional offices of doctors, dentists or similar professions One for each 75 square feet of usable floor area in waiting rooms, and one for each examining room, dental chair, office, laboratory, x-ray therapy room or similar use area plus one for each one employee. d. Courts (city, county, district or state) One space for each two seats in court rooms, plus four spaces for each conference room, plus one space per employee. (5) Industrial: a. Industrial or research establishments and related accessory offices Five plus one space for every 11/2 employees in the largest working shift or one for each 450 square feet of usable floor area in those instances where shift size is not known. Space on the site shall also be provided for all construction workers during periods of plant construction. b. Wholesale and warehouses establishments and related accessory offices (non-retail warehouse) One for every one employee in the largest working shift, or one for every 1,700 square feet of usable floor space, whichever is greater. (6) Handicapped (all districts): Off-street parking facilities shall provide spaces for the handicapped in accord with the provisions of Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq., MSA 5.2949(1) et seq.), as amended.  
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-272. - Space layout, standards, construction and maintenance. 
    Whenever the off-street parking requirements in section 78-271 require the building of an off-street parking facility, or where P-1 vehicular parking districts are provided, such off-street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards and regulations: 
(1)  No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until a permit therefore is issued. Applications for a permit shall be submitted with two sets of site plans for the development and construction of the parking lot showing that the provisions of this Section will be fully complied with. 
(2)  Off-street parking space layout, standards, maneuvering lane. 
Parking Lot Dimensions 
Parking Pattern 
in degrees Maneuvering Lane Width 
(feet) Parking Space Width 
(feet) Parking Space Length 
(feet) Total Width of 1 Tier of Parking Spaces Plus Maneuvering Lane 
(feet) Total Width of 2 Tiers of Parking Spaces Plus Maneuvering Lane 
(feet) 0 (Parallel parking) 12 8 23 20 28 30 to 53 15 9 20 35 55 54 to 74 15 9 20 351/2 58 75 to 90 20 9 20 40 60  
The parking lot dimensions may be required to be increased in those instances where fire or safety apparatus is required to utilize the maneuvering lane. 
(3)  All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes. Backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot shall be provided and approved by the city engineer and the chief of police, who shall have full power to regulate and determine the places of ingress and egress so that traffic on the streets and highways of the city shall be controlled, regulated and coordinated and to require the installation and maintenance of suitable barriers to ensure the safety of pedestrians passing any such parking lot, in order to provide for the greatest possible public safety and welfare. Such necessary directional signs and controls as are required by the chief of police shall be established and maintained by the owner or lessee of the parking lot. All drives and parking areas shall be surfaced in a manner equivalent to that which is provided for the parking areas under section 78-147 et seq. 
(5)  Each entrance to and exit from any off-street parking lot located in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall be at least 25 feet distant from adjacent property located in any single-family residential district. 
(6)  The off-street parking area shall be provided with a continuous and obscuring wall not less than four feet, six inches in height measured from the surface of the parking area. This wall shall be provided on all sides where the next zoning district is designated as a residential district. When a front yard setback is required, all land between such wall and the front property line or street right-of-way line shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be landscaped with deciduous shrubs, evergreen material and ornamental trees. The ground area shall be planted and kept in lawn. All such landscaping and planting shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
(7)  The entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuvering lanes required under this section, shall be provided with asphaltic or concrete surfacing in accordance with specifications approved by the city. All drives shall be surfaced in a manner equivalent to that which is provided for the parking areas under section 78-147. Screening and landscaping and lighting shall be provided in keeping with the requirements of sections 78-203 and 78-204. Plans for the layout of parking lot shall show a total dimension across two tiers of spaces and one aisle (maneuvering lane) of at least the standards as required in section 78-272. 
(8)  All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so installed as to be confined within and directed onto the parking area only. 
(9)  In all cases where a wall extends to an alley which is a means of ingress and egress to an off-street parking area, it shall be permissible to end the wall not more than ten feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking area. 
(10)  The planning commission, upon application by the property owner of the off-street parking area, may modify the yard or wall requirements where, in unusual circumstances, no good purpose would be served by compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(11)  The parking area shall be so designed as to provide a landscape plan in accord with section 78-203. 
(12)  To facilitate adequate turning radius within parking lots, interior landscape islands shall be a maximum of 18 feet as measured from the center of the parking isle. Interior parking lot isles at the end of a "double row" of parking shall be no more than 36 feet in length total. 
(13)  Curbing or bumper blocks shall be provided where parking spaces abut landscaping or sidewalks. If sidewalks and integrated curbing are used, the sidewalk abutting a parking stall shall be a minimum of seven feet in width. No more that two feet of the seven-foot wide sidewalk may be counted towards the length of a parking stall in order to accommodate for the front overhang of vehicles. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-273. - Residential driveways. 
(1)  New driveways constructed for residential access within the R-1 and RT-1 Districts shall meet all the following standards: 
(a)  Shall be a minimum of nine feet in width and clear of encumbrances such as columns. 
(b)  Shall be located on the side of the new dwelling that is opposite any existing driveway on an adjacent parcel, when possible. 
(c)  Shall be located at least one foot from the side property line. The one-foot buffer area shall be landscaped with appropriate plant material such as turf grass, perennials or shrubs. 
(2)  Existing driveways within the R-1 and RT-1 districts may be reconstructed in the same location. Where two existing driveways abut one another, they may continue but shall be relocated if possible; continuation of this condition is discouraged. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 16-02,  2, 7-18-16 ) 
Sec. 78-274. - Off-street loading and unloading. 
    On the same premises with every building, structure, or part thereof, involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use of dedicated rights-of-way. Such space shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Within an I-1 or I-2 district, all spaces shall be laid out in the dimension of at least ten by 50 feet, or 500 square feet in area, with a clearance of at least 14 feet in height. Loading dock approaches shall be provided with a pavement having an asphaltic or Portland cement binder so as to provide a permanent, durable and dustless surface. All spaces in I districts shall be provided in the following ratio of spaces to floor area: 
Gross Floor Area 
in Square Feet Loading and Unloading Space Required       0-  1,400 None   1,401- 20,000 One space  20,001-100,000 One space plus one space for each 20,000 square feet in excess of 20,001 square feet 100,001 and over Five spaces  
(2)  All loading and unloading in the I-1 and I-2 districts shall be provided off-street in the rear yard or interior side yard, and shall in no instance be permitted in a front yard except as follows: 
a.  I-1 districts. Permit off-street loading and unloading at a front facade truck entrance to a structure, and in the front yard, when the front facade of the industrial operation portion of the structure is set back at least 65 feet from the front property line, and provided further that the office portion of the structure is constructed forward of the industrial operation so as to be situated between the minimum front yard setback line of 50 feet and the industrial operation. 
b.  I-2 districts. Permit off-street loading and unloading as a front facade truck entrance to the structure, and in the front yard, when such front facade is set back sufficiently to permit truck maneuvering on the property behind a greenbelt screen planting berm or wall set back at least 40 feet from the front lot line and so constructed as to totally obscure the loading and unloading operation. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-275. - Parking of mobile homes and recreational vehicles. 
    The parking of a mobile home or recreational vehicle not owned by a resident of the city for periods exceeding 24 hours on lands not approved for said vehicles shall be expressly prohibited, except that the City Police Department may extend temporary permits allowing the parking of such vehicles in a rear yard on private property, not to exceed a period of two weeks. All mobile homes or recreational vehicles owned by residents of the city and stored on their individual lots shall be allowed for periods exceeding 24 hours with no permit required, and shall be stored only within the confines of the rear yard, except for temporary loading and unloading, and shall further respect the requirements applicable to Article XXI, Accessory Buildings, section 78-260, Regulations, insofar as distance from principal structures, lot lines and easements are concerned. For the purpose of this article, the area occupied by the stored mobile home or recreational vehicle shall be computed as lot coverage and shall not exceed the maximum coverage permitted under section 78-190 and 78-191. All such vehicles parked or stored on lands not approved for storage or parking shall not be connected to sanitary facilities or any utilities, except for repair or servicing, and shall not be occupied. 
Secs. 78-276-78-279. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIII. - SPECIAL USES 

Sec. 78-280. - Intent. 
    The intent of this article is to provide for specific regulations which apply to special land uses. The regulations set forth in the article are in addition to the standards and procedures set forth in the various zoning districts. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 1-6-14) 
Sec. 78-281. - Special uses. 
(a)  Application. Applications for special use permits authorized in this chapter shall be submitted to the building official on a form provided by the city. In addition to a complete application form, the applicant is required to submit a site plan prepared in accordance with article XX, site plan review. 
(b)  Procedures. 
(1)  The building official shall review the proposed application and site plan to determine if all required information has been supplied, and, forward the completed application, site plan, and supporting data to the city planning commission or city commission depending on the special use permit being requested. Any request for a special use permit made pursuant to section 78-297 of this chapter shall be approved by the city commission only. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the application for a special use permit, the planning commission or city commission, as specified, shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the notification requirements described hereafter. 
A notice of the public hearing shall be published in at least one newspaper of general circulation and sent by mail or personal delivery to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. 
The notice shall be given not less than five days or more than 15 days before the date the application will be considered. The notice shall describe the property in question and the nature of the special use permit request; state the time, date, and location of the public hearing; and, indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
(3)  Upon conclusion of the public hearing procedures, the planning commission or city commission, as specified, may issue a special use permit. Upon approval of a special use, the planning commission or city commission, as specified, may consider the site plan. A copy of the planning commission's or city commission's decision, with any conditions or reasons for rejection, shall be sent promptly to the building official and to the applicant. 
(c)  Basis of determinations. The planning commission or city commission, as specified, shall review the proposed special use in terms of the standards stated within this chapter and shall establish that such use and the proposed location: 
(1)  Will be harmonious and in accordance with the general objectives or any specific objectives of the City of Plymouth Master Plan. 
(2)  Will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential character of the area. 
(3)  Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future nearby uses. 
(4)  Will be compatible with adjacent uses of land and will promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. 
(5)  Will be served adequately by essential public services and facilities or that the persons responsible for the establishment of the proposed use will provide adequately any such service or facility. 
(6)  Will not create excessive additional public costs and will not significantly decrease property values of surrounding properties. 
(7)  Will meet all the requirements and standards of this chapter and any other applicable laws, standards, ordinances, and/or regulations. 
(d)  Conditions and safeguards. The planning commission or city commission, as specified, may impose such additional conditions and safeguards deemed necessary for the general welfare, for the protection of individual property rights, and for insuring that the purposes of this chapter and the general spirit and purpose of the district in which the special use is proposed will be observed. Such conditions shall conform to the standards found in Act 110 of 2006, as the same may be amended or superseded from time to time. The planning commission or city commission, as specified, may summarize the conditions of approval on a form issued by the building official which shall be signed by the chairperson of the planning commission or mayor and the applicant. 
(e)  Voiding and extensions of permit. Unless otherwise specified by the planning commission or city commission, as specified, any special use permit granted under this section shall be null and void unless the property owner shall have made application for a building permit within one year from the date of the granting of the permit. The building official shall give notice by certified mail to the holder of a permit that is liable for voiding action before voidance is actually declared. Said notice shall be mailed to the permit holder at the address indicated in said permit. Within 30 days of receipt of notice of voiding of the permit, the applicant shall have the right to request an extension of the permit from the planning commission or city commission, as specified. The planning commission or city commission, as specified, may grant an extension thereof for good cause for a period not to exceed six months. 
(f)  Reapplication. No application for a special use permit which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted until the expiration of one year or more from the date of such denial, except on grounds of newly discovered evidence or change of conditions found to be sufficient to justify reconsideration by the planning commission or city commission, as specified. 
(g)  Revocation of a special use permit. A special use permit may be suspended or revoked according to the following procedure: 
(1)  Conditions which may give rise to a suspension or revocation proceeding include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  The special approval use was not constructed in conformance with the approved plans, or the property is not being used in conformance with the approved special use; or the approved special use is not operational within two years of the date of special use approval; or 
b.  Compliance with the special use permit and any conditions have not been consistently demonstrated and administrative attempts to secure compliance have been unsuccessful; or 
c.  The special use permit is issued erroneously on the basis of incorrect or misleading information supplied by the applicant and/or his agent; or 
d.  The operation of the use granted by special use permit has created a risk or danger to the public health, safety, or welfare; or 
e.  The special use is a violation of any provisions of this chapter or other city, county, state or federal regulations. 
(2)  If the building official, community development director or designee determines that a condition for suspension or revocation of the special use permit exists, the building official, community development director or designee shall prepare a report in writing specifying the specific factual details for the violation and which support the suspension or revocation of the special use permit. 
(3)  The building official, community development director or designee shall file the report so prepared with the city manager, who shall provide a copy to the city commission and serve a copy of such report upon the permitee or its authorized agent or employee personally or by regular mail and certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(4)  After the city manager submits the report to the city commission, the city clerk shall schedule a hearing within a reasonable period of time after city commission's receipt of the report to consider the alleged violation. Notice of the hearing(s) shall be served by the city clerk upon the permitee or its authorized agent or employee personally or by regular mail and certified mail, return receipt requested not less than seven (7) days before a scheduled hearing date, and such notice shall advise the permitee of its right to be represented by legal counsel at the hearing before the city commission. 
(5)  At all such hearing, the permitee shall have the legal right to defend against the allegations made by way of confronting any adverse witnesses, by being able to present witnesses in his/her behalf, by being allowed to present arguments, personally or through legal counsel in his/her own behalf. 
(6)  The city commission shall prepare a written statement of its findings within 30 days of the conclusion of all such hearings and shall serve such findings upon the permitee either personally or by regular mail and certified mail, return receipt requested. If the city commission decides that the special use permit shall be suspended or revoked, the permitee shall not thereafter conduct, operate or carry on the business or use for which the special use permit was granted. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2014-02,  2, 1-6-14) 
Sec. 78-282. - Adult regulated uses. 
    In the development and implementation of this section, it is recognized that there are certain uses, which by their very nature are recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics (particularly when several of them are concentrated in a small area), thereby having a deleterious effect on surrounding neighborhoods. Regulation of the location of these uses is necessary to ensure that the adverse effects of such businesses will not cause or contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the city's residential neighborhoods or commercial centers. The proximity of adult uses to certain uses considered particularly susceptible to the negative impacts or the concentration of adult uses tends to erode the quality of life, adversely affect property values, disrupt business investment, encourage residents and businesses to move or avoid the community, increase crime and contribute a blighting affect on the surrounding area. It is the intent of this section to provide reasonable regulations for the establishment of adult regulated uses in a viable, accessible location where the adverse impact of their operations may be minimized. 
    The permitted or special approval uses permitted in any given zoning district, and listed below, shall be subject, unless otherwise required by the planning commission, to all the following conditions and regulations regarding site development. 
(a)  Definitions for adult regulated uses. The following uses are regulated by this subsection. 
(1)  Adult entertainment business. One or a combination of more than one of the following types of businesses: adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion theater, adult personal service business, adult novelty business, or adult nightclub. 
(2)  Adult book or supply store. An establishment having as a principle activity the sale of books, magazines, newspapers, video tapes, video discs and motion picture films which are characterized by their emphasis on portrayals of human genitals and pubic regions or acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy. 
(3)  Adult motion picture theater. An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons having as a principal activity displaying motion pictures characterized by their emphasis on portrayals of human genitals and pubic regions or acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy for observation by patrons therein. 
(4)  Adult mini-motion picture theater. An enclosed building having as a principal activity the presenting of material characterized by emphasis of portrayals of human genitals and pubic regions or acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy for observation by patrons therein in individual viewing booths. 
(5)  Adult novelty business. A business which has a principal activity the sale of devices of simulated human genitals or devices designed for sexual stimulation. 
(6)  Adult personal service business. A business which has as a principle activity a person, while nude or partially nude, providing personal services for a person on an individual basis in a closed room. It includes, but it is not limited to, the following activities and services; massage parlors, exotic rubs, modeling studios, body painting studios, wrestling studios, individual theatrical performances. It does not include activities performed by persons pursuant to, and in accordance with, licenses issued to such persons by the State of Michigan. 
(7)  Adult night club. A business with the principal activity of providing entertainment by nude or partially nude performers. 
(8)  Principal activity. A use accounting for more than 20 percent of a business' stock in trade, display space, floor space, live entertainment time or movie display time per year. 
(b)  Required spacing. The establishment of the types of adult regulated uses listed in above, shall meet all of the following space requirements; with the distance between uses measured horizontally between the nearest point of each property line: 
(1)  At least 1,000 feet from any other adult regulated use; 
(2)  At least 500 feet from all churches, convents, temples and similar religious institutions; 
(3)  At least 500 feet from all public, private or parochial nurseries, primary or secondary schools, playgrounds, licensed child care facilities, and hospitals; 
(4)  At 500 feet from any one-family or multiple-family residential district or use; 
(5)  At 500 feet from any pool or billiard hall, coin-operated amusement center, indoor and outdoor recreation such as miniature golf, dance club catering primarily to teenagers, movie theaters, ice or roller skating rinks, and similar uses frequented by children and teenagers. 
(c)  Special site design standards. 
(1)  Maximum size of the building shall be 3,000 square feet. 
(2)  The building and site shall be designed, constructed and maintained so material such as a display, decoration, or sign depicting, describing, or relating to activities or merchandise within the structure cannot be observed by pedestrians, motorists on a public right-of-way or from an adjacent land use. 
(3)  Adult regulated uses shall be located within a free-standing building. A shared or common wall structure or shopping center is not considered to be a free-standing building. 
(4)  The color of the building materials shall be subject to approval by the planning commission. 
(5)  A 41/2 foot high brick or masonry wall shall be constructed to screen the parking lot from the adjacent public rights-of-way. The planning commission may permit use of landscaping in place of a wall. 
(6)  No person shall reside in or permit any person to reside in the premises of an adult regulated use. 
(7)  No person operating an adult regulated use shall permit any person under the age of 18 to be on the premises of said use either as an employee or customer. 
(8)  Adult regulated uses shall comply with all applicable federal, state, and local licensing regulations. Initial and annual proof of such compliance shall be a condition of special use approval and the continuance thereof and shall be in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-283. - Drive-in or drive-through restaurants. 
    Drive-in or drive-through restaurants subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The main and any accessory building shall be setback 50 feet from any adjacent public right-of-way line or property line. 
(2)  Such restaurants constructed adjacent to other commercial developments shall have a direct vehicular access connection where possible. 
    A six foot high obscuring wall, fence or landscaping shall be provided along any property line adjacent to a residential zoning district. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-284. - Bed and breakfast. 
    Bed and breakfast operations shall further be subject to the following: 
(1)  Such dwellings shall meet all applicable codes and ordinances of the city, county and state. 
(2)  Floor plans drawn to scale of all floors to be utilized for bed and breakfast activities shall be submitted to the city. 
(3)  Buildings shall be suitable in character for the use proposed and shall not be cause for a change in character of the neighborhood. 
(4)  The dwelling shall be a building with not more than six sleeping rooms available for guests of the bed and breakfast dwelling. 
(5)  There shall be no separate cooking facilities provided for the bed and breakfast occupants. Meals, other than those served as a part of the normal operation of the household, shall be served only to occupants of the bed and breakfast facility. 
(6)  Approved smoke detectors shall be provided in individual sleeping units and in common hallways. 
(7)  Emergency egress lighting to assure continued illumination for a duration of not less than one hour in case of emergency or primary power loss. 
(8)  An approved fire extinguisher in the common hallway accessible to all occupants. 
(9)  Every sleeping unit shall have at least one operable window approved for emergency egress or rescue, except where the sleeping unit is provided with a door to a corridor having access to two remote exits in opposite directions. 
(10)  Occupancy shall be of a transient nature for periods not to exceed one week in duration in any one month by any transient occupant. A guest registry indicating name, address, phone number, vehicle license number, shall be kept indicating dates of arrival and departure of guests and shall be available to the city for inspection upon request. 
(11)  An unlighted sign not exceeding six square feet in area may be provided. Such sign may be provided as a ground sign or a wall sign. 
(12)  Off-street parking shall be provided based upon one space for each rental room and one space for the operator of the facility. It is the city's intent to not encourage yards to be destroyed, landscaping removed or the integrity of the neighborhood altered in order to provide parking. In those instances where parking requirements cannot be met, the applicant may request special consideration from the planning commission. In such a case the applicant shall submit an analysis of parking required and parking provided within a 300-foot radius of the subject parcel. After analyzing this data, the planning commission may lower the number of the required parking spaces based on the fact that sufficient off-street parking exists in the neighborhood. 
    Such bed and breakfast dwelling shall not be located within 200 feet as measured from the nearest property lines, of another such facility. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-285. - Automobile service stations/automobile convenience marts. 
    Automobile service stations and auto convenience marts shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The curb cuts for ingress and egress to a service station shall not be permitted at such locations that tend to create traffic hazards on the streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be no less than 25 feet from a street intersection (measured from the road right-of-way) or from adjacent residential districts. 
(2)  The minimum lot area shall be 20,000 square feet, and as nearly rectangular as possible, and so arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are required to wait for services. 
(3)  Automobile service stations shall only be permitted at the intersection of at least one major thoroughfare with a local street or street of more intense classification and at freeway interchanges. 
(4)  Maximum number of automobile service stations at any intersection shall not exceed two which should be situated diagonally from each other. 
(5)  Automobile service stations shall not be located within 500 feet of any school. 
(6)  Automobile service stations shall not be situated at any intersection where the approach gradient of either street exceeds two percent. 
(7)  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts and street right-of-ways. 
(8)  Pump islands shall be a minimum of 25 feet from any public right-of-way or lot line. Overhead canopies shall be setback at least 15 feet from the public right-of-way. 
(9)  Outside storage shall be limited to small quantities of oil and other supplies needed for servicing at the pumps. Retail sale items such as soda pop, windshield solvent, landscape mulch or other merchandise shall not be displayed or sold outside. Vehicles which are awaiting service shall remain on-site for not more than 72 hours. No outside storage of tires and other parts and accessories and partly dissembled or junked vehicles shall be allowed. All repair work shall be conducted completely within an enclosed building. 
(10)  Full service islands or attendant filling services shall be made available. 
(11)  Tow trucks or other commercial vehicles that are on the premises for reasons other than typical customer activity shall be parked in non-required parking spaces and should not be parked in such a manner to be used as an advertisement. 
(12)  The exterior of the main building shall be harmonious with its surroundings and shall include some brick, stone, wood, or other masonry finished building materials other than glass and metal. The canopies shall be designed within a minimum height of 12 feet, and a maximum height of 15 feet, and the building design, including finished construction shall be related to or directly match the finish building materials and architectural style of the main building. 
(13)  The outdoor use of any electronic or enhanced sound or public announcement system shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Such a system shall not be directed toward adjacent residentially zoned or used property, and shall generally not present an unreasonable disturbance to the neighborhood in which it is located. 
(14)  Landscaping shall be at least 15 percent of the site, and should be designed in such a manner as to provide proper screening of on-site vehicles and paved surfaces and provide beautification on the site. The landscaping should include acceptable live plant, shrub, and tree specimens that will mitigate the view of headlight glare and as permitted in section 78-203, landscape design standards. 
(15)  The installation and use of an oil-water separator with monitoring capabilities in the facility's stormwater management system shall be required, as well as the use of best management practices for pollution prevention for automobile filling/service operations, in order to protect surface water and groundwater quality. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-286. - Garden centers, nurseries and commercial outdoor storage. 
    Garden centers, nurseries and commercial outdoor storage. 
(1)  The storage or materials display areas shall meet all the yard setback requirements applicable to any building in the district. 
(2)  All loading activities and parking areas shall be provided on the same premises off-street. 
(3)  The storage of any soil, fertilizer, or similar loosely package materials shall be sufficiently contained to prevent any adverse effect upon adjacent properties. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-287. - Outdoor sales. 
    Outdoor sales space for the exclusive sale of new/used automobiles or house trailers subject to the following: 
(1)  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
(2)  Ingress and egress to the outdoor sales area shall be at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
(3)  A four-foot, six-inch obscuring wall or fence must be provided when abutting or adjacent districts are zoned for residential use. 
(4)  No major repair or major refinishing shall be done on the lot. 
(5)  Minor repair or refinishing shall be done within a completely enclosed building. 
(6)  No loudspeakers for outdoor broadcasting shall be permitted. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-288. - Motel and hotel. 
    Motel and hotel subject to the following: 
(1)  Provided that it can be demonstrated that ingress and egress do not conflict with adjacent business uses. 
(2)  A four-foot, six-inch obscuring wall or fence must be provided where abutting or adjacent districts are zoned for residential use. 
(3)  No kitchen or cooking facilities are to be provided, with the exception of units for the use of the manager or caretaker. 
(4)  Each unit shall contain not less than two 250 square feet of floor area. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-289. - Commercial outdoor recreation space. 
    Commercially used outdoor recreational space for children's amusement parks, miniature golf courses, subject to the following: 
(1)  Children's amusement park must be fenced on all sides with a four-foot, six-inch wall or fence. 
(2)  Adequate parking shall be provided off the road right-of-way and shall be fenced with a four-foot, six-inch wall or fence where adjacent to the use. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-290. - Funeral homes. 
    Funeral homes provided that the plan shall provide for adequate off-street assembly area for vehicles to be used in funeral processions, provided further that such assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area. A caretaker's residence may be provided within the building of a mortuary establishment 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-291. - Automobile car wash. 
    Automobile car wash subject to the following: 
(1)  All buildings shall have a front yard setback of not less than 40 feet. 
(2)  All washing facilities shall be within a completely enclosed building. 
(3)  Vacuuming and drying areas may be located outside the building but shall not be in the required front yard and shall not be closer than 100 feet from any residential district. Noise from vacuuming or blow drying equipment shall be controlled by appropriate enclosures or sound barrier walls. All noise from such equipment shall comply with the city's noise ordinance. 
(4)  All cars required to wait for access to the facilities shall be provided space off the street right-of-way and parking shall be provided in accordance with sections 78-271 and 78-272. 
(5)  Ingress and egress points shall be located at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
(6)  All off-street parking and waiting areas shall be paved with concrete and dust free. 
(7)  All lighting shall be shielded and directed away from adjacent residential districts. 
(8)  A four-foot, six-inch completely obscuring wall shall be provided where abutting to a residential district. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-292. - Amusement parks and arcades. 
    Amusement arcades which provide space for patrons to engage in playing mechanical amusement devices or similar activities subject to the following: 
(1)  Locations for any such establishment shall be confined to major thoroughfares as defined in the future land use plan and shall have the entrance to both the business and parking area for such establishment on the business street. Access from a street other than a major thoroughfare shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Locations for any such facility shall be no closer than 500 feet to the property line of any elementary, intermediate or high school. 
(3)  No such business shall be located within 500 feet of the property line of a similar business. 
(4)  No such business building shall be located within 500 feet of any front, rear or side yard line of any residential district. 
(5)  Off-street parking areas shall be developed in accord with all of the provisions of section 78-271 et seq. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-293. - Storage facilities for materials or equipment. 
(a)  Open storage facilities for materials or equipment shall be screened. 
(b)  That portion of the land used for open storage facilities for materials or equipment shall be totally obscured by a masonry wall, berm or greenbelt on those sides abutting residential, office or business districts, and on any yard abutting a public thoroughfare. The extent of such a wall, berm or greenbelt shall be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. Such a wall, berm or greenbelt shall not be less than six feet in height and may, depending upon land usage, be required to be eight feet in height and shall be subject further to the requirements of section 78-206. 
(c)  Shrub planting shall be installed abutting the wall on those sides exposed to public view from a public street within six months from the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy. All planting plans shall meet the requirements of section 78-203 and shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission. Planting areas shall be subject to yearly inspection for maintenance and for compliance with the intent of this section. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-294. - Child care facilities. 
(a)  Child care center. 
(1)  Child care centers may be permitted in all zoning districts, except single-family residential and industrial districts, subject to the following minimum standards: 
a.  Operator must be licensed by the Michigan Department of Social Services. 
b.  A compliance permit must be obtained from the building department before operation commences and compliance must be continuous, and the compliance permit must be renewed annually. 
c.  Site plan approval by the planning commission must be obtained. 
d.  Outdoor play areas shall be fenced, and such play areas shall be made and kept safe by the care-givers. 
e.  Maintenance of the property consistent with the visible characteristics of the neighborhood. 
f.  A child care center shall comply with all fire and traffic safety standards set by the Michigan Department of Social Services and the City of Plymouth as determined by the chief of police and fire chief. 
g.  Care-givers shall maintain control of noise to protect the surrounding neighborhood. 
h.  All day care centers shall be currently registered with the 911 dispatch center on forms provided by said center. 
i.  No person other than the licensee or his/her immediate family may reside on the licensed property. No one need reside on the premises. 
j.  License holder and all employees shall be subject to a background check and approval by the chief of police. 
(2)  The fees to be charged in connection with applications for day care center permits and renewals thereof shall be established by resolution of the city council and shall be based on the cost of inspection and administration. 
(3)  The child care center compliance permit shall be issued for a period of one year only. Written renewal request must be made 30 days prior to expiration. After the first year, a follow up 300-foot notice will be sent if there has been a substantiated written complaint. No subsequent annual notices will be sent, unless deemed necessary by the building official. An annual inspection will be made in November of each year to assure compliance with this chapter. After request and inspections are complete and there are no substantiated complaints on file, the zoning or code official can renew at that time. Permits are valid from November 1 to October 31 of each year. 
(4)  No compliance permit for a day care center shall be issued or renewed if the applicant has failed to file an annual personal property statement with the city assessor covering the property used in connection with said day care center, as required by law, or has failed to pay the personal property tax assessed on said personal property. 
(5)  The city permit to operate may be revoked at any time conditions at the home become such that allowing continued operation could prove to be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the children. Appeals to this section will be before the zoning board of appeals as provided for in the Code. 
(b)  Group day care home. 
(1)  Group day care homes may be permitted in single-family residential districts subject to the following minimum standards: 
a.  A compliance permit must be obtained from the building department before operation commences and compliance must be continuous, and the compliance permit must be renewed annually. 
b.  A group day care home shall not be located closer than 500 feet to any of the following: 
1.  Another licensed group day care home. 
2.  An adult foster care small group home or large group home licensed under the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, Act No. 218 of the Public Acts of 1979, being Sections 400.701 to 400.737 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
c.  Outdoor play areas shall be in rear yards only and such rear yards shall be made and kept safe by the care-givers. 
d.  Maintenance of the property consistent with the visible characteristics of the neighborhood. 
e.  Signage shall not be allowed. 
f.  A group day care home shall comply with all fire and traffic safety standards set by the Michigan Department of Social Services and the City of Plymouth as determined by the chief of police and fire chief. Parking shall be in accordance with section 78-270 in addition to residential parking requirement of two spaces. 
g.  Care-givers shall maintain control of noise to protect the surrounding neighborhood. 
h.  All group day care homes shall be currently registered with the 911 dispatch center on forms provided by said center. 
i.  License holder shall be the owner of the premises and shall reside thereon. 
j.  License holder and employees shall be subject to a background check and approval by the chief of police. 
(2)  The fees to be charged in connection with applications for home group day care permits and renewals thereof shall be established by resolution of the city council and shall be based on the cost of inspection and administration. 
(3)  No compliance permit for a group day care home shall be issued or renewed if the applicant has failed to file an annual personal property statement with the city assessor covering the property used in connection with said group day care home, as required by law, or has failed to pay the personal property tax assessed on said personal property. 
The group day care compliance permit shall be issued for a period of one year only. Written renewal request must be made 30 days prior to expiration. After the first year, a follow up 300-foot notice will be sent if there has been a substantiated written complaint. No subsequent annual notices will be sent, unless deemed necessary by the building official. At the time of renewal an annual inspection will be made to assure compliance with the ordinance. After request and inspections are complete and if there are no substantiated complaints on file, the zoning or code official can renew the permit. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-295. - Adult foster care facilities. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for adult foster care facilities which will insure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. 
(b)  Application of regulations. 
(1)  A state licensed adult foster care small family serving six persons or less shall be considered a residential use of property and a permitted use in all residential districts. 
(2)  The city may, by issuance of a special land use permit, authorize the establishment of adult foster care group homes serving more than six persons in the following zoning districts: R-1, RT-1, RM-1, and RM-2. Such facilities shall be prohibited in all other districts. 
(3)  The city may, by issuance of a special use permit, authorize the establishment of an adult foster care congregate facility in the following zoning districts: RM-1 and RM-2. Such facilities shall be prohibited in all other districts. 
(c)  Standards for adult foster care group homes. Such homes shall be considered as a special land use subject to the requirements and standards of section 78-281 and the following additional standards: 
(1)  A site plan, prepared in accordance with Article XX shall be required to be submitted. 
(2)  The subject parcel shall meet the minimum width and set back area, requirements for the zoning district in which it is located, provided there is a minimum site area of 1,500 sq. ft. per adult, excluding employees and/or care givers. 
(3)  The property is maintained in a manner that is consistent with the character of the neighborhood. 
(4)  One off-street parking space per employee and/or caregiver shall be provided. 
(5)  In its sole discretion, the city may determine that landscape screening in accordance with section 78-206 is required. 
(6)  Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan shall be maintained. 
(7)  Be so constructed, arranged, and maintained as to provide adequately for the health and safety and welfare of all occupants. 
(8)  The atmosphere and routine shall be that a resident may spend the majority of his non-sleeping hours outside his bedroom. 
(9)  A toilet, lavatory and bathing or showering facility shall be provided for each six persons. At least one toilet and lavatory shall be provided on each floor having resident bedrooms. 
(10)  Provide distinct living and sleeping areas. All areas shall be well lighted, heated and ventilated. 
(11)  Provide a living or day room area which affords privacy for use by a resident and his visitors. 
(12)  The living and sleeping areas for each resident shall not be in non contiguous wings, units or buildings. 
(13)  A living room, dining room or other room not designed nor ordinarily used for sleeping shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
(14)  A room shall not be used as a bedroom where more than 1/2 of the room height is below grade except where the ceiling of such portion of a building is located five feet or more above grade for more than 25 percent of the perimeter measurement of the room. 
(15)  Bedrooms shall have at least one window with a minimum sash area of eight square feet. 
(16)  A single-occupancy bedroom shall have at least 80 square feet of usable floor area. 
(17)  A multiple-occupancy bedroom shall have at least 70 square feet of usable floor area per person with a maximum of four beds and persons per bedroom. 
(18)  A group foster care home shall be inspected and approved for fire safety prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit and shall be inspected at least annually. 
(19)  Signage shall not be allowed. 
(d)  Standards for adult foster care congregate facilities. Such facilities shall be considered as a special land use subject to the requirements and standards of section 78-281 and the following standards: 
(1)  A site plan, prepared in accordance with Article XX shall be required to be submitted. 
(2)  The subject parcel shall meet the minimum lot area requirements for the zoning district in which it is located, provided there is a minimum site area of 1,500 sq. ft. per adult, excluding employees and/or caregivers. 
(3)  Parking requirements as required for convalescent homes and similar facilities, set forth in Article XXII shall be met. 
(4)  All landscape requirements set forth in section 78-203 shall be met. 
(5)  Appropriate licenses with the State of Michigan shall be maintained. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-296. - Religious institutions. 
(a)  The following regulations shall apply to all religious institutions, including churches, synagogues, temples, and any associated structures utilized for educational purposes: 
(1)  Lot width. The minimum lot width for religious institutions shall be 200 feet. 
(2)  Lot area. The minimum lot area for religious institutions shall be three acres. 
(3)  Parking setback. Off-street parking shall be prohibited in the front setback area and within 15 feet of the rear or side property line. 
(4)  Building setback. Religious institutions shall comply with the following building setback requirements: 
Front yard: 50 feet 
Side Yards: 30 feet 
Rear yards: 50 feet 
(5)  Frontage and access. Religious institutions shall be located on streets which have a paved road having an existing or proposed right-of-way at least 86 feet. 
(6)  Landscaping. Religious institutions shall comply with the landscaping requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(7)  Sole use of site Religious institutions and associated educational facilities shall be the sole use of the site and shall not be located in a multi-tenant building. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-297. - Rooftop seating at establishments serving alcohol. 
    Rooftop seating at establishments serving alcohol is subject to the following: 
(a)  Rooftop seating requires a special land use permit which is to be approved and issued by the City of Plymouth City Commission. This permit is subject to annual review and must be approved on an annual basis at the same time the establishment's liquor license is approved by the local liquor license review committee. The city may revoke the special land use permit permitting rooftop seating in accordance with the proceedings of subsection 78-281(g). 
(b)  The rooftop seating area must be an extension of the interior dining that exists on the same floor or level of the building. 
(c)  The rooftop seating area shall not be higher than the second floor of the structure. 
(d)  The open sides of the dining area must be enclosed by a wall and/or fence that shall be at a minimum 42 inches high. In addition, a kick-plate/guard that allows for the passage of roof water for drainage while preventing dropped items from falling off the roof onto the area below shall be installed. Required kick-plate guards shall not have openings which allow passage of a sphere four (4) inches (102mm) in diameter from the walking surface to the required kick-plate/guard height of six inches. 
(e)  No establishment shall be eligible for a rooftop seating area if that establishment is located in a building that would qualify for and/or be able to have a street level outdoor patio. 
(f)  The second floor of the rooftop seating area may not open for use before 10:00 a.m. and must close by 11:00 p.m. Sunday through Wednesday and must close by 12:00 a.m. on Thursday, Friday, and Saturday. 
(g)  Live music on the rooftop seating area or any part of the rooftop of any building is prohibited. Any music played on the rooftop seating area must be sound-proofed so as to prevent sound from being heard at the street level of the building with the rooftop seating area and surrounding area. 
(h)  The design, operation, and use of the rooftop seating area must be approved by and certified with a seal by a qualified, licensed structural engineer and that individual must certify that the rooftop is capable of the live load to be utilized by the establishment and the design of the load. 
(i)  The rooftop patio seating area must comply with all city codes and ordinances, as well as all applicable state and federal laws. Its seating shall be limited to the space on the approved plans and in accordance with the capacity limits established by the fire department. 
(j)  Any establishment that has been approved for rooftop dining may only use plastic or paper drinking vessels for its outside service. 
(k)  Any establishment that qualifies for and wishes to have rooftop seating must comply with all requirements of the City parking ordinance for the zoning district in which the establishment is located. 
(l)  There shall be a minimum of two staff members assigned to the rooftop seating area during all hours of operation at all times. 
(m)  There must be restrooms located on the second floor. 
(n)  No televisions/monitors/screens shall be visible from the street level. No noise from televisions/monitors/screens shall be able to be heard at the street level. 
(o)  Any modifications to the plans submitted by the establishment for rooftop dining and approved by the city commission must be approved by the city commission before the same is made. 
(p)  The same dining menu which is available for patrons using the inside of the restaurant must also be available to patrons using the rooftop dining area. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02,  3, 1-6-14) 
Secs. 78-298-78-309. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXIV. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 78-310. - Purpose. 
    The planned unit development (PUD) is provided as a design and planning option, intended to permit flexibility in the regulation of land development; to encourage innovation in land use, form of ownership (such as site condominiums) and variety in design, layout, and type of structures constructed; to preserve significant natural, historical, and architectural features and open space; to promote efficient provision of public services and utilities; to minimize adverse traffic impacts; to provide adequate housing and employment; to encourage development of convenient recreational facilities; and to encourage the use and improvement of existing sites or existing buildings when the uniform regulations contained in other zoning districts alone do not provide adequate protection and safeguards for the site or its surrounding areas or flexibility to consider adaptive re-use of existing structures. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-311. - General authority, criteria. 
(a)  A planned unit development (PUD) may be applied for in any zoning district. The grant of a planned unit development application shall require a rezoning by way of amendment of this chapter upon the recommendation of the planning commission and approval of the city commission. 
(b)  Any land use authorized in this article may be included in a planned unit development, subject to adequate public health, safety, and welfare protection mechanisms being designed into the development to ensure the compatibility of varied land uses both within and outside the development. 
(c)  The applicant for a planned unit development must demonstrate all of the following criteria as a condition to being entitled to planned unit development treatment: 
(1)  Grant of the planned unit development will result in one of the following: 
a.  A recognizable and material benefit to the ultimate users of the project and to the community, where such benefit would otherwise be unfeasible or unlikely to be achieved without application of the planned unit development regulations; 
b.  Long-term protection and preservation of natural resources and natural features of a significant quantity and/or quality, where such benefit would otherwise be unfeasible or unlikely to be achieved without application of the planned unit development regulations; 
c.  Long-term protection of historic structures or significant architecture worthy of historic preservation; or 
d.  A nonconforming use shall, to a material extent, be rendered more conforming, or less offensive, to the zoning district in which it is situated. 
(2)  The proposed type and density of use shall not result in an unreasonable increase in the need for or burden upon public services, facilities, roads and utilities. 
(3)  The proposed planned unit development shall be consistent with the public health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(4)  The proposed planned unit development shall not result in an unreasonable negative environmental impact or loss of a historic structure on the subject site or surrounding land. 
(5)  The proposed planned unit development shall not result in an unreasonable negative economic impact upon surrounding properties. 
(6)  The proposed planned unit development shall be under single ownership and/or control such that there is a single person, corporation, or partnership having responsibility for completing the project in conformity with this article. 
(7)  The proposed planned unit development shall be consistent with the goals and policies of the city master plan. 
(8)  The proposed use or uses shall be of such location, size, and character as to be in harmony with the zoning district in which it is situated, and shall not be detrimental to the adjoining zoning districts. 
(9)  A demonstration that the PUD is not proposed in an attempt by the applicant to circumvent the strict application of zoning standards. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-312. - Residential design standards. 
(a)  Residential uses shall be permitted with the following maximum density, based upon the zoning district in which the property is situated immediately prior to classification under this article. Land area under water, public road rights-of-way and private road easements shall not be included in the gross density calculation. 
District Maximum Density Permitted 
(Dwelling Units/Gross Acres) R-1, one-family residential One family unit per 7,200 square feet RT-1, two-family residential One family unit per 3,500 square feet RM-1, multiple-family residential (refer to section 78-191) RM-2, multiple-family residential (refer to section 78-191)  
(b)  An additional density of up to 25 percent greater than specified above may be allowed at the discretion of the planning commission based upon a demonstration by the applicant of design excellence and conformance to the standards listed in section 78-313. 
(c)  The non-residential uses, including parking and vehicular traffic ways, shall be separated and buffered from residential units as required in section 78-206. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-313. - General design standards. 
(a)  All regulations within the city zoning ordinance applicable to setback, parking and loading, general provisions, and other requirements shall be met in relation to each respective land use in the development based upon zoning districts in which the use is listed as a principal permitted use. In all cases, the strictest provisions shall apply. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, deviations with respect to such regulation may be granted as part of the overall approval of the planned unit development, provided there are features or elements demonstrated by the applicant and deemed adequate by the city commission upon the recommendation of the planning commission designed into the project plan for the purpose of achieving the objectives of this section. 
(c)  The uses proposed will have a beneficial effect, in terms of public health, safety, welfare, or convenience, on present and future potential surrounding land uses. 
(d)  The uses proposed will not adversely affect the public utility and circulation system, surrounding properties, or the environment. 
(e)  The public benefit shall be one which could not be achieved under the regulations of the underlying district alone, or that of any other zoning district. 
(f)  The number and dimensions of off-street parking shall be sufficient to meet the minimum required by the ordinances of the city. However, where warranted by overlapping or shared parking arrangements, the planning commission or city commission may reduce the required number of parking spaces. 
(g)  All streets and parking areas within the planning unit development shall meet the minimum construction and other requirements of city ordinances, unless modified by city planning commission. 
(h)  Landscaping shall be preserved and/or provided to ensure that proposed uses will be adequately buffered from one another and from surrounding public and private property. 
(i)  Effort shall be used to preserve significant natural, historical, and architectural features and the integrity of the land, including MDEQ regulated and non MDEQ regulated wetlands or floodplains. 
(j)  Thoroughfare, drainage, and utility design shall meet or exceed the standards otherwise applicable in connection with each of the respective types of uses served. 
(k)  There shall be underground installation of utilities, including electricity and telephone. 
(l)  The pedestrian circulation system, and its related walkways and safety paths, shall be separated from vehicular thoroughfares and ways. 
(m)  Signage, lighting, landscaping, building materials for the exterior of all structure, and other features of the project, shall be designed and completed with the objective of achieving an integrated and controlled development, consistent with the character of the community, surrounding development or developments, and natural features of the area. 
(n)  Where nonresidential uses adjoin off-site residentially zoned property, noise reduction and visual screening mechanisms such as earthen and/or landscape berms and/or decorative walls, shall be employed in accordance with section 78-206. 
(o)  The proposed density of the planned unit development shall be no greater than that which would be required for each of the component uses (measured by stated acreage allocated to each use) of the development by the district regulations of the underlying zoning district. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-314. - Procedure for review. 
(a)  Pre-application conference. prior to the submission of an application for planned unit development approval, the applicant shall meet with the building official, together with any staff and consultants the building official deems appropriate. The applicant shall present at such conference, or conferences, at least a sketch plan of the proposed planned unit development, as well as the following information: Total size of the project; a statement of the number of residential units, if any; the number and type of nonresidential uses, the size of the area to be occupied by each type of use; the known deviations from ordinance regulations to be sought; the number of acres to be preserved as open or recreational space; and, all known natural features or historic features to be preserved. 
(b)  Preliminary plan. Following the pre-application conference, the applicant shall submit a preliminary site plan of the proposed planned unit development. A narrative report shall accompany the site plan providing a description of the project, discussing the market concept of the project, and explaining the manner in which the criteria set forth in the preceding design standards has been met. The applicant may request that the planning commission review the preliminary PUD plans under this subsection and final PUD plans under subsection (c) of this section concurrently rather than under two separately phased applications. 
(1)  Information required. The preliminary site plan for a PUD shall contain at a minimum the following information: 
a.  One copy of the preliminary PUD site plan, reduced in size to 81/2 by 11 inches, on clear acetate or similar material suitable for use with an overhead projector. 
b.  Sheet size of submitted drawings shall be at least 24 inches by 36 inches, with graphics and scale. 
c.  Plans providing: 
1.  The applicant's name; 
2.  Name of the development; 
3.  The preparer's name and professional seal of architect, engineer, surveyor or landscape architect indicating license in the state; 
4.  Date of preparation and any revisions; 
5.  North arrow; 
6.  Property lines and dimensions; 
7.  Complete and current legal description and size of property in acres; 
8.  Small location sketch of the subject site and area within 1/2 mile; and scale of no less than one inch equals 1,000 feet; 
9.  Zoning and current land use of applicant's property and all abutting properties and of properties across any public or private street from the PUD site; 
10.  Lot lines and all structures on the property and within 100 feet of the PUD property lines; 
11.  Location of any access points on both sides of the street within 100 feet of the PUD site along streets where access to the PUD is proposed; 
12.  Existing locations of significant natural, historical, and architectural features, existing drainage patterns, surface water bodies, floodplain areas, MDEQ designated or regulated wetlands with supporting documentation and a tree survey indicating the location and diameter (in inches, measured four feet above grade) trees greater than 12 inches in diameter; 
13.  Existing and proposed topography at five-foot contour intervals, or two-foot contour intervals (two-foot intervals required for final site plan), and a general description of grades within 100 feet of the site; 
14.  Dimensions of existing and proposed right-of-way lines, names of abutting public streets, proposed access driveways and parking areas, and existing and proposed pedestrian and/or bicycle paths; 
15.  Existing buildings, utility services (with sizes), and any public or private easements, noting those which will remain and which are to be removed; 
16.  Layout and typical dimensions of proposed lots, footprints and dimensions of proposed buildings and structures; uses with the acreage allotted to each use. For residential developments: the number, type and density of proposed housing units; 
17.  General location and type of landscaping proposed (evergreen, deciduous, berm, etc.) noting existing trees and landscaping to be retained; 
18.  Size, type and location of proposed identification signs; 
19.  If a multiphase planned unit development is proposed, identification of the areas included in each phase. For residential uses identify the number, type, and density of proposed housing units within each phase; 
20.  Any additional graphics or written materials requested by the planning commission or city commission to assist the city in determining the appropriateness of the pud such as, but not limited to: aerial photography; market studies; impact on public primary and secondary schools and utilities; traffic impacts using trip generation rates recognized by the Institute of Transportation Engineers for an average day and peak hour of the affected roadways; impact on significant natural, historical, and architectural features and drainage; impact on the general area and adjacent property; description of how property could be developed under the regulations of the underlying district; preliminary architectural sketches; and estimated construction cost; 
21.  An explanation of why the submitted planned unit development plan is superior to a plan which could have been prepared under strict adherence to related sections of this chapter. 
(2)  Planning commission action. The preliminary plan shall be noticed for public hearing before the planning commission in accordance with section 78-377. Following the hearing, the planning commission shall review the preliminary site plan and shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approval. Upon finding that the preliminary plan meets the criteria set forth in the purpose and intent and this section, the planning commission shall grant preliminary approval. Approval shall constitute approval of the uses and design concept as shown on the preliminary plan and shall confer upon the applicant the right to proceed to preparation of the final plan. Approval of the preliminary plan by the planning commission shall not bind the city commission to approval of the final plan. 
b.  Approval with changes or conditions. The planning commission may grant conditional approval subject to modifications as performed by the applicant. 
c.  Postpone. Upon finding that the preliminary plan does not meet the criteria set forth in the purpose and intent of this section, but could meet such criteria if revised, the planning commission may postpone action until a revised preliminary plan is resubmitted. 
d.  Denial. Upon finding that the preliminary plan does not meet the criteria set forth in the purpose and intent of this section, the planning commission shall deny preliminary approval. 
(c)  Final plan. Within six months following receipt of the planning commission comments on the preliminary plan, the applicant shall submit a final plan and supporting materials conforming with this section. If a final plan is not submitted by the applicant for final approval within six months following receipt of planning commission comments, the preliminary plan approval becomes null and void. 
(1)  Information required. A final site plan and application for a PUD shall contain the following information: 
a.  A site plan meeting all requirements and standards of article XX. 
b.  A separately delineated specification of all deviations from this chapter which would otherwise be applicable to the uses and development proposed in the absence of this article. 
c.  A specific schedule of the intended development and construction details, including phasing or timing. 
d.  A specific schedule of the general improvements to constitute a part of the development, including, without limitation, lighting, signage, the mechanisms designed to reduce noise, utilities, and visual screening features. 
e.  A specification of the exterior building materials with respect to the structures proposed in the project. 
f.  Signatures of all parties having an interest in the property. 
(2)  Planning commission final action. The planning commission shall review the final site plan and shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approval. Upon finding that the final plan meets the criteria established in the purpose and intent of this article and this section, the planning commission may grant final approval. 
b.  Approval with changes or conditions. The planning commission may grant conditional approval subject to modifications as performed by the applicant as long as the plan meets the criteria established in the purpose and intent of this article and this section. 
c.  Postpone. Upon finding that the final plan does not meet the criteria set forth in the purpose and intent of this article and this section, the planning commission may postpone action until a revised plan is submitted. 
d.  Denial. Upon finding that the final plan does not meet the criteria set forth in the purpose and intent of this article and this section, the planning commission shall deny final approval. 
(3)  City commission final action. If the proposed development has been approved or approved with conditions, the planning commission recommendation shall be submitted to and reviewed by the city commission. The city commission shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approval. Upon finding that the final plan meets the criteria established in the purpose and intent of this article and this section, and any conditions placed by the planning commission, the city commission may grant final approval. 
b.  Approval with changes or conditions. The city commission may grant approval and attach additional conditions if the plan meets the criteria established in the purpose and intent of this article and this section. 
c.  Postpone. Upon finding that the final plan does not meet the criteria set forth in the purpose and intent of this article and this section, the city commission may postpone action until a revised plan is submitted. 
d.  Denial. Upon finding that the planning commission has denied the application for final plan and that the application does not meet the criteria set forth in the purpose and intent of this article or this section, the city commission shall deny such application. 
(4)  Reasons for action. All actions on the preliminary plan or final plan by the planning commission and the city commission shall state the reasons for approval, conditional approval, postponement or denial within the body of the motion. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-315. - Conditions. 
(a)  Reasonable conditions may be required by the planning commission before the approval of a planned unit development, to the extent authorized by law, for the purpose of ensuring that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, protecting the natural environment and conserving natural resources and energy, ensuring compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and promoting the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Permit conditions may be drafted in writing specifying conditions of approval and use. Conditions may stipulate that the PUD may only be used for selective land uses provided the restraints advance, rather than injure, the interests of adjacent landowners; are a means of harmonizing private interests in land thus benefiting the public interest; are for the purposes of ensuring that the PUD fulfills the purposes and intent of this section and thus benefit the public interest; and/or possess a reasonable relationship to the promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare. A change of land use (as defined in section 78-21) during operation of the PUD will render the PUD null and void or will require application for a revised PUD. 
(b)  Conditions imposed shall be designed to protect natural resources and the public health, safety, and welfare of individuals in the project and those immediately adjacent, and the community as a whole; reasonably related to the purposes affected by the planned unit development; and, necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this article, and be related to the objective of ensuring compliance with the standards of this article. All conditions imposed shall be made a part of the written record of the approved planned unit development which shall include a site plan and written PUD permit conditions signed by the city and the applicant. 
(c)  If the conditions set forth herein are not complied with, then the building official shall have the right to compel a show cause hearing by the planning commission or issue a violation pursuant to article XXIV of this chapter. At the show cause hearing, additional conditions may be imposed by the planning commission or the city may require submittal of a new PUD application. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-316. - Phasing and commencement of construction. 
(a)  Phasing. Where a project is proposed for construction in phases, the planning and designing shall be such that, upon completion, each phase shall be capable of standing on its own in terms of the presence of services, facilities, and open space, and shall contain the necessary components to ensure protection of natural resources and the health, safety, and welfare of the users of the planned unit development and the residents of the surrounding area. In addition, in developments which include residential and nonresidential uses, the relative mix of uses and the scheduled completion of construction for each phase shall be disclosed and determined to be reasonable in the discretion of the city commission after recommendation from the planning commission. 
(b)  Commencement and completion of construction. Construction shall be commenced within one year following final approval of a planned unit development and shall proceed substantially in conformance with the schedule set forth by the applicant and in accordance with article II [this article] of this chapter. If construction is not commenced within such time, the planning commission shall take one of the following actions: 
(1)  The planning commission may approve a request from the property owner for an extension of the final PUD site plan for a specified period of time, not to exceed one year for each such extension. This request may be granted by the planning commission for good cause if the request is made prior to the expiration of the initial period or any extension thereof. 
(2)  The planning commission may approve on their own initiative an extension of the final PUD site plan for a specified period of time, not to exceed one year for each such extension. Such extension shall be granted no later than the first regular meeting following the expiration of the current approval period. 
(3)  If neither subsection (b)(1) or (2) of this section is taken, then the final PUD site plan shall be deemed to have expired, and the planning commission shall recommend to the city commission a rezoning of the affected property in accordance with article XXIV. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-317. - Effect of approval. 
    When approved, the planned unit development amendment, with all conditions imposed, if any, shall constitute the land use authorization for the property, and all improvement and use shall be in conformity with such amendment. Notice of adoption of the final PUD site plan and PUD permit conditions shall be recorded with the county register of deeds at the applicant's expense. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-318. - Deviations from approved final PUD site plan. 
    Deviations from the approved final PUD site plan may occur only under the following conditions: 
(1)  An applicant or property owner who has been granted final PUD site plan approval shall notify the building official of any proposed amendment to such approved site plan or PUD conditions. 
(2)  Minor changes may be approved by the city building official upon certification in writing to the planning commission that the proposed revision does not alter the basic design nor any conditions of the plan imposed upon the original approval by the planning commission. In considering such a determination, the building official shall consider the following to be a minor change: 
a.  For residential buildings, the size of structures may be reduced, or increased by five percent provided that the overall density of units does not increase; 
b.  Square footage of nonresidential buildings may be decreased, or increased by up to five percent or 10,000 square feet, whichever is smaller; 
c.  Horizontal and/or vertical elevations may be altered by up to five percent; 
d.  Movement of a building or buildings by no more than ten feet; 
e.  Designated "Areas not to be disturbed" may be increased; 
f.  Plantings approved in the final PUD landscape plan may be replaced by similar types of landscaping on a one-to-one or greater basis; 
g.  Improvements to site access or circulation, such as inclusion of deceleration lanes, boulevards, curbing, pedestrian/bicycle paths, etc.; 
h.  Changes of building materials to another of higher quality, as determined by the building official; 
i.  Changes in floor plans which do not alter the character of the use; 
j.  Slight modification of sign placement or reduction of size; 
k.  Relocation of sidewalks and/or refuse storage stations; 
l.  Internal rearrangement of parking lot which does not affect the number of parking spaces or alter access locations or design; 
m.  Changes required or requested by the city for safety reasons shall be considered a minor change. 
(3)  Should the building official determine that the requested modification to the approved final PUD site plan is not minor or if a change in land use has occurred which is different than land uses previously approved, re-submittal to the planning commission shall be necessary and new public hearing and notification under section 78-377 shall be required. 
(4)  Should the planning commission determine that the modifications to the final PUD site plan significantly alter the intent of the preliminary PUD site plan, a new submittal illustrating the modification shall be required. 
(5)  Any deviation from the approved PUD site plan, except as authorized in this section, shall be considered a violation of this article and treated as a misdemeanor, and subject to article XXIV of this chapter. Further, any such deviation shall invalidate the PUD designation. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Secs. 78-319-78-329. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXV. - GENERAL EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 78-330. - Area, height and use exceptions. 
    The regulations in this chapter shall be subject to the following interpretations and exceptions. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-331. - Essential services. 
    It is the intent of this chapter to place essential services or property owned, leased, or operated by public agencies, including local, state, federal or any other public or governmental body or agency or public utilities under the provisions of this chapter, as follows: 
(1)  Where such uses are specifically listed they shall be governed as indicated. 
(2)  Where such uses are not specifically listed, they shall be permitted only in districts permitting private uses of a similar nature. 
(3)  Property owned, leased, or operated by the State of Michigan or the United States shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter only to the extent that said property may not be constitutionally regulated by the city. 
(4)  Although exempt from certain regulations, proposals for construction of essential services shall still be subject to site plan review, or administrative site plan review, it being the intention of the city to achieve efficient use of the land and alleviate adverse impact on nearby uses or lands. Essential services shall comply with the applicable regulations that do not affect the basic design or nature of operation of said services. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-332. - Voting place. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be so construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a municipal or other public election. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-333. - Height limit. 
    The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to farm buildings, chimneys, church spires, flag poles, public monuments or wireless transmission towers excluding cellular telephone facilities; provided, however, that the zoning board of Appeals may specify a height limit for any such structure when such structure requires authorization as a special use under section 78-281. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-334. - Lot area. 
    Any lot existing and of record at the time this chapter became effective [February 11, 1992] may be used for any principal use, other than uses permitted on special approval for which special lot area requirements are specified in this chapter, permitted in the district in which such lot is located. This provision applies whether or not such lot complies with the lot area requirements of this chapter, provided that all requirements other than lot area requirements prescribed in this chapter are complied with; and provided that not more than one dwelling unit shall occupy any lot except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter for required lot area for each dwelling unit. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-336. - Residential yard fences. 
    Fences or walls in residential districts may be constructed within a required rear or side yard, or along such property line as provided in accordance with City Code, Chapter 18, Article 10. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-337. - Condominium. 
(a)  Condominium ownership imposes, in any use district, problems which are separate and distinct from those under other established types of development, control and ownership. A single structure or a group of structures incorporates several different real estate and tax entities, thus creating new aspects of municipal responsibility and administration affecting the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  In order to adequately and properly protect the interests of the community, assure a desirable and stable environment in harmony with that of the surrounding area and provide the special amenities and safeguards considered essential to the characteristics of individual ownerships, condominiums shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  No condominium shall be developed, nor shall any existing structure be converted to a condominium in any use district until after a permit has been issued. Such permit shall be issued only upon the approval of the planning commission. As a basis for issuance of a permit, the complete plans, specifications and master deed shall be submitted, and shall be reviewed as to compliance with the following objectives: 
a.  Parking provisions shall be adequate to fulfill expected requirements, which may exceed otherwise prescribed criteria and may necessitate enclosed or covered parking in closer proximity to units. 
b.  Complete pedestrian circulation shall be provided within the development via corridors or adequate sidewalks, which shall connect with public sidewalks at convenient intervals. 
c.  Outdoor open space shall be provided to meet the health and recreational needs of the owners and, where individual open spaces are considered necessary, privacy of each shall be assured by effective screening. 
d.  Privacy of individually owned units shall be assured by orientation or other means to assure visual privacy from casual pedestrian traffic and from nearby units. In addition, protection against noise infiltration shall be assured by special and adequate acoustic treatment of walls, floors, ceilings, window openings and of utility lines (water and sewer) to eliminate or reduce to an acceptable level sound transmission into, between or from individual units. 
e.  Security of individual units shall be provided by adequately fire-rated vertical and horizontal partitions separating units. 
(2)  No condominium shall be permitted in any use district unless it complies fully with use, area, height, bulk and all other requirements of that district as provided by other sections of this chapter. 
(3)  A site plan prepared in accord with Article XX shall be submitted for the entire site proposed to be developed for review by the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Secs. 78-338-78-349. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXVI. - NONCONFORMANCE 

Sec. 78-350. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of this chapter to permit legal nonconforming lots, structures or uses to continue until they are removed but not to encourage their survival. 
(b)  It is recognized that there exists within the districts established by this chapter and subsequent amendments, lots, structures and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments. 
(c)  Such uses are declared by this chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
(d)  To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding such demolition or removal, it shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved and provided further that all work shall be done pursuant to a valid permit. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-351. - Nonconforming lots and sites-Governing regulations. 
(a)  Nonconforming lots shall be governed by the following regulations: 
(1)  In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district; provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district a variance shall be obtained through approval of the zoning board of appeals. 
(2)  In other multi-family or non-residential zoning districts, uses permitted may be constructed on a nonconforming lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district; provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance to yard requirements shall be obtained through approval of the zoning board of appeals. 
(3)  If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by this chapter, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this chapter. No portion of said parcel or lot shall be used or sold which does not meet lot width and area requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of the parcel or lot be made which leaves remaining any parcel or lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this chapter. 
(b)  Nonconforming sites shall be governed by the following regulations: 
(1)  Intent. It is recognized that certain sites do not comply with the current paving, lighting, landscaping and other non-safety related site development requirements. This section is intended to: 
a.  Allow for reasonable re-use, maintenance and improvements to these sites that will gradually improve compliance with these requirements. 
b.  Permit a proportionate amount of improvements to nonconforming sites relative to the amount of expansion or improvement proposed to the use or building. 
c.  Allow the needed flexibility in the regulations to encourage gradual site improvements and increased compliance with the intent of the zoning ordinance requirements. 
(2)  Required reviews. This section provides for the conditions under which re-occupancy, improvement and modification to nonconforming sites may occur. It does not replace other reviews and requirements contained elsewhere in this chapter. Therefore, where improvements and modifications are proposed to nonconforming sites, they shall be subject to site plan review according to article XX. 
(3)  Standards for review. Applications to improve or modify nonconforming sites shall be reviewed in accordance with article XX for new development, redevelopment, or change of use as listed in section 78-242. Such activity may only be permitted if all of the following standards are met: 
a.  General standards. 
1.  Expansions to nonconforming structures or buildings comply with section 78-353, nonconforming structures. 
2.  Changes to nonconforming uses comply with section 78-354, nonconforming uses of structures and land. 
3.  The applicant is proposing reasonable site improvements to the overall site in relation to the scale and construction cost of any proposed building improvements or expansion on site. 
4.  The applicant has addressed safety related site issues on the overall site. 
5.  The improvements or minor expansion will not increase noncompliance with other site requirements. 
b.  Driveways. Driveways that do not conform to current safety design standards, as determined by the city engineer, shall be removed or redesigned to the greatest extent possible. Where required to maintain reasonable access to sites, driveway designs shall be evaluated by the city engineer for conformance with safety standards. 
c.  Sidewalks. Whenever modifications or expansion to the building, parking lot or site are proposed, the sidewalks shall be installed along the site frontage and within the interior of the site to provide a safe passageway for pedestrians from the street to the principal building and use on site. Sidewalk designs shall be evaluated by the city engineer for conformance with safety standards. 
d.  Parking. Existing parking areas must be in good condition, as determined by the building official or city engineer, and any improvements necessary to provide a safe durable surface have been proposed. For projects involving new development, redevelopment, or change of use, parking areas that are nonconforming in terms of required number of spaces, landscaping, setbacks, lighting or other requirements of this section, shall be brought into full compliance with this section if any of the following occur: 
1.  The nonconforming parking area is expanded or altered by an area that is 50 percent or more of the original area. 
2.  Twenty-five percent or more of the surface area of the parking area is reconstructed (existing pavement removed and replaced). 
3.  Where full compliance is not possible due to existing site conditions, a variance may be requested from the zoning board of appeals. 
4.  Whenever re-occupancy is proposed, or the parking area is not proposed to be expanded or reconstructed beyond the percentages noted in 1. and 2. above, then any necessary repairs shall be made to the existing parking lot pavement, as determined by the building official and/or city engineer. 
e.  Screening. Whenever modifications are proposed, or any expansion to the building or site proposed, then required screening walls for waste receptacles, fencing of outdoor storage or screening from adjacent residential uses shall be provided. 
1.  Where existing screening walls are in disrepair, they shall be improved to a sturdy and attractive condition. 
2.  All outdoor storage areas shall be screened from adjacent residential uses, and all waste receptacles shall be screened. 
f.  Landscaping. For projects involving new development, redevelopment, or a change of use on sites that are nonconforming by reason of landscaping required by this section, either by required area, materials, or other requirements of this section, the site shall be brought into compliance with this section under the following conditions: 
1.  Whenever the size of the nonconforming site (building, parking and outdoor storage) is redeveloped or expanded by an area that is 50 percent or more of the original nonconforming area, all landscaping on the site shall be brought into compliance with this section; or 
2.  Whenever 25 percent or more of the surface area of the landscaped area is redeveloped or reconstructed (existing materials and ground cover removed and replaced) the reconstructed portion of the landscape area shall be brought into compliance with this section. 
3.  Landscape buffer strips shall be installed between the right-of-way and parking lot per section 78-203. 
g.  Lighting. To the greatest extent reasonable, lighting should be brought into compliance with section 78-204. At a minimum, existing lighting must be shielded to prevent off-site glare. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10 ,  1, 1-2-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-10 ,  1, adopted Jan. 2, 2018, amended  78-351 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former  78-351 pertained to nonconforming lots-governing regulations, and derived from Ord. of 10-6-03. 
Sec. 78-352. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
    Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter, as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. 
(2)  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. 
(3)  If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than six months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is located. 
(4)  Nonconforming use status shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Retail use (One space per 500 sq. ft.) converted to restaurant or medical office (one space per 250 sq. ft.). 
b.  Office use (one space per 500 sq. ft.) converted to restaurant or medical office (one space per 250 sq. ft.). 
For the above listed conversions, the proposed use shall comply with the parking requirements of subsection 78-270(a)(10). 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2012-02,  7, 1-3-12) 
Sec. 78-353. - Nonconforming structures. 
    Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Such structures may be enlarged or altered in a way which does not increase its nonconformity. 
(2)  Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 60 percent of its market value, it shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(4)  Nonconforming structure status shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Retail use (One space per 500 sq. ft.) converted to restaurant or medical office (one space per 250 sq. ft.). 
b.  Office use (one space per 500 sq. ft.) converted to restaurant or medical office (one space per 250 sq. ft.). 
For the above listed conversions, the proposed use shall comply with the parking requirements of subsection 78-270(a)(10). 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2012-02,  8, 1-3-12) 
Sec. 78-354. - Nonconforming uses of structures and land. 
    If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, that would not be permitted in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(2)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(3)  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
(4)  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, is discontinued or ceases to exist for six consecutive months or for 12 months during any two year period, the structure, or structure and land in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. Structures occupied by seasonal uses shall be excepted from this provision. 
(5)  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-355. - Repairs and maintenance. 
(a)  On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding 60 percent of the market value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the building, as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter, shall not be increased. 
(b)  In calculating whether the cost of repair work exceeds 60 percent of the market value of the building, the cost of roofing, plumbing, electrical wiring or siding shall not be included. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-356. - Uses under exception provisions not nonconforming uses. 
    Any existing use for which a special exception or a use permitted subject to special conditions is permitted as provided in this chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall, without further action, be deemed a conforming use in such district. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-357. - Change of tenancy or ownership. 
    There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, of structures or of structures and land in combination. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Secs. 78-358-78-369. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXVII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 78-370. - Building official to enforce zoning provisions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the building official or by such deputies of his department as the building official may delegate to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-371. - Duties of building official. 
(a)  The building official shall have the authority to grant zoning compliance and occupancy permits, to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for the building official to approve any plans or issue any permits or certificates of occupancy for any excavation or construction until he has inspected such plans in detail and found them to conform with this chapter. 
(b)  The building official is under no circumstances permitted to make changes in this chapter nor to vary the terms of this chapter in carrying out his duties as building official. 
(c)  The building official shall not refuse to issue a permit when conditions imposed by this chapter are complied with by the applicant despite violations of contracts, such covenants or private agreements which may occur upon the granting of such permit. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-372. - Plot plan. 
    The building official shall require that all applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans and specifications including a plot plan, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the following: 
(1)  The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot. 
(2)  The shape, size, and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered or moved on the lot and of any building or other structures already on the lot. 
(3)  The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures upon it including, in residential areas, the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate. 
(4)  Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the building official, after he shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved. The second copy shall be retained in the office of the building official. 
(5)  Any guarantee required under this chapter shall be deposited with the city treasurer prior to the issuance of permits, i.e., temporary occupancy requires a bond. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-373. - Permits. 
    The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit: 
(1)  Not to be issued. No building permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration, or use of any building or structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  New use of land. No land heretofore vacant shall hereafter be used or an existing use of land be hereafter changed to a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
(3)  New use of building. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be changed to or occupied by a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
(4)  Required. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved, or repaired unless a building permit shall have been first issued for such work. The terms "altered" and "repaired" shall include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type, class or kind of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of egress and ingress, or other changes affecting or regulated by the city building code, state housing law, or this chapter, except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of such features. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-374. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  No land, building, structure, or part thereof, shall be occupied by or for any use unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such new use. The following shall apply in the issuance of any certificate: 
(1)  Not to be issued. No certificates of occupancy pursuant to the building code of the city shall be issued for any building, structure or part thereof or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Required. No building or structure, or part thereof, which is hereafter erected or altered, shall be occupied or used or the same caused to be done, unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such building or structure. 
(3)  Existing buildings. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued for existing buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or existing uses of land if, after inspection, it is found that such buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or such use of land, are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Guarantees. Guarantee in the form of a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit or surety bond shall be provided in a form acceptable to the city. The amount of such guarantee shall cover all improvements not normally covered in the building permit, e.g., berms, walls, landscaping, lighting, surfacing of drives, parking, service drives, acceleration/deceleration lanes, bypass lanes and other traffic control devices, etc. The guarantee shall include a schedule of costs assigned to the different improvements. Monies may be released to the applicant in proportion of work completed on the different elements after inspection of work and approval of the building official. Any partial release of funds shall be less than 90 percent, ten percent which shall be retained by the city until all work has been completed and subsequently inspected and approved by the building official. 
a.  If more than one bond or guarantee is involved in construction of the improvements required in this section, each such assurance shall be treated as a separate agreement and the ten percent holdback may be released upon satisfactory completion of such phase of construction and approval of the building official. 
b.  In instances where all improvements, as required in this section, are not completed, and a temporary certificate of occupancy is requested, the estimated cost of such improvement shall be verified by the building official, particularly with respect to any delay to another construction season. The building official, in evaluating the adequacy of the financial guarantees, may request any necessary input from the city engineer, planner, and landscape architect. If the estimated cost has changed, then a revised guarantee, acceptable to the city, shall be filed with the treasurer covering such improvements. 
(5)  Temporary certificates. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy for a portion of a building or structure in process of erection or alteration, and provided further that such portion of the building, structure, or premises is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. A surety bond shall be obtained to bring all items in line with the site plan and building code. 
(6)  Records of certificates. A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the building official, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved. 
(7)  Certificates for dwelling accessory buildings. Buildings accessory to dwellings shall not require separate certificates of occupancy but may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the dwelling when shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same time as such dwellings. 
(8)  Applications for certificates. Application for certificate of occupancy shall be made in writing to the building official on forms furnished by the department, and such certificate shall be issued within ten days after receipt of such application if it is found that the building or structure, or part thereof, or the use of land is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant therefore shall be notified in writing of such refusal and cause thereof, within the ten-day period. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-375. - Final inspection. 
    The holder of every building permit for the construction, erection, alteration, repair, or moving of any building, structure, or part thereof, shall notify the building official immediately upon the completion of the work authorized by such permit, for a final inspection. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-376. - Fees. 
    Fees for inspection and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof, required or issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall be collected by the city treasurer in advance of issuance. The amount of such fees shall be established by resolution of the city commission and shall cover the cost of inspection and the supervision resulting from enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-377. - Public hearings. 
    In instances where a public hearing is required under this chapter with the planning commission, the zoning board of appeals, or the city commission, written notice of the public hearing shall be in accordance with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006 as amended, MCL 125.3101 et seq., and the Open Meetings Act, MCL 15.261 et seq. Notice shall be as follows: 
(a)  Notice content. The notice shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Describe the nature of the request; 
(2)  Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used; 
(3)  State when and where the request will be considered; 
(4)  Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
(b)  Notice publication and mailing. Notice shall be published and mailed no less than fifteen days prior to the public hearing as follows: 
(1)  Notice of the request shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(2)  Notice shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered. 
(3)  Notice shall also be sent to all persons to whom real property is assessed within three hundred feet of the subject property and to the occupants of all structures within three hundred feet of the subject property regardless of whether the property or structure is located in the zoning jurisdiction. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different persons, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall be given notice. If a single structure contains more than four dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different persons, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure, who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used for the intended recipient of the notice. 
(4)  The notice under subsection (b)(3) of this section is considered to be given when personally delivered or when deposited during normal business hours for delivery with the United States Postal Service or other public or private delivery service. 
(c)  Ordinance amendments and rezoning of more than ten properties. Public hearings for an amendment to this title, or the zoning map, that affects more than ten properties shall only require notice in a newspaper, which shall not be required to indicate the property subject to the request under subsection (a)(2) of this section, and notice shall not be required to be mailed to individual properties under subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section. 
(d)  Zoning board of appeals interpretations and appeals. Public hearings for ordinance interpretations and appeals of administrative decisions by the zoning board of appeals shall only require notice in a newspaper, as required in subsection (a)(2) of this section and if the interpretation or appeal of an administrative decision involves a specific property, notice shall also be given to the person bringing the appeal, as required in subsection (b)(2) of this section. Variances shall require full notification under subsections (b)(1) through (b)(3) of this section. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2012-04,  14, 11-5-12) 
Sec. 78-378. - Interpretation, purpose and conflict. 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comforts, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises and likewise not in conflict with this chapter, nor is it intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings, or premises or upon height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces or larger lot areas than are imposed or required by such ordinance or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-379. - Zoning commission. 
    The city planning commission is hereby designated as the commission specified in Section 4, of Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2931 et seq.), as amended, to perform the duties of such commission as provided in the statute in connection with the amendment of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-380. - Changes and amendments. 
    All amendments to the zoning ordinance must be reviewed by the city planning commission. Amendments may be initiated by the city commission, planning commission, staff initiated recommendations, or individual petitions, for either zoning text or zoning district boundary changes. in any event, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing as required in Public Act 110 of 2006 as amended. After the public hearing has been closed, or at a subsequent meeting, the planning commission shall submit a recommendation to the city commission on the proposed change. 
    Notification for public hearings shall be in accordance with section 78-377. 
    Petitions for zoning ordinance amendments or conditional zoning amendments shall be submitted to the building department on standard forms provided by the third Tuesday of each month, before the next regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. If the planning commission or building department determines that the application is administratively complete, the planning commission shall set a date for a public hearing to receive public comment. The standard forms shall be completed in the manner prescribed and such documents, as required by the ordinance, shall be filed with the building department. A fee schedule, as provided by resolution of the city commission, shall be levied against each petition to covers the costs of administering the application, advertising public hearings, consultant review, and other incidental costs relative to said petition. The building department shall transmit the application to the planning commission. 
    In reviewing any petition for a zoning map amendment, the planning commission shall evaluate all factors relevant to the petition and shall make its recommendations for disposition of the petition to the city commission following a public hearing. 
    The factors to be considered by the planning commission may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  Whether the rezoning is consistent with the policies and uses proposed for that area in the city's master land use plan. If conditions have changed since the master plan was adopted, the consistency with recent development trends in the area as well as other factors or conditions which may have changed. 
(b)  Whether there are substantial reasons why the property cannot be reasonably used as currently zoned. 
(c)  Whether adequate sites are available elsewhere that are already zoned to accommodate the proposed use. 
(d)  Whether the rezoning would constitute a spot zone granting a special privilege to one landowner not available to others. 
(e)  Whether all of the uses allowed under the proposed rezoning would be compatible with other zones and uses in the surrounding area. 
(f)  Whether any public services, facilities, traffic flow, or natural features would be significant and adversely impacted by a development or use allowed under the requested rezoning. 
(g)  Whether the uses allowed under the proposed rezoning would be equally or better suited to the area than uses allowed under the current zoning of the land. 
(h)  Whether the condition and/or value of property in the city or in adjacent communities would be significantly and adversely impacted by a development or use allowed under the requested rezoning. 
(i)  Whether or not the requested zoning change is justified by a change in conditions since the original ordinance was adopted or by an error in the original ordinance. 
(j)  Whether precedents might result from approval or denial of the petition, and the possible effects of such precedents. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03; Ord. No. 2012-04,  15, 11-5-12) 
Sec. 78-381. - Fees, petition for amendment. 
    Consideration of an amendment to this chapter may be initiated upon presentation of a petition for amendment by the owner of real estate affected. Such petition shall be accompanied by a fee, the amount of which shall be set by resolution of the city commission and shall be used to defray the expense of publishing the required notices of public hearings, and the expenses of such public hearing. A period of not less than six months is required between presentation of petitions for a change or amendments applying to a specific piece of property, where such petition was denied in the first instance. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-382. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 and the cost of prosecution or, in default of the payment thereof, by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of any sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-383. - Public nuisance per se. 
    Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted, or any use of premises or land which is begun or changed subsequent to the time of passage of this chapter [February 11, 1992] and in violation of any of the provisions thereof is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-384. - Rights and remedies are cumulative. 
    The rights and remedies provided in this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-385. - Planning commission approval. 
(a)  In cases where the planning commission is empowered to approve certain use of premises under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant shall furnish such surveys, plans or other information as may be reasonably required by the planning commission for the proper consideration of the matter. 
(b)  The planning commission shall investigate the circumstances of each such case and shall notify such parties who may, in its opinion, be affected thereby of the time and place of any hearing which may be held relative thereto as required under its rules of procedure. 
(c)  The planning commission may impose such conditions or limitations in granting approval as may in its judgment be necessary to fulfill the spirit and purpose of this chapter. 
(d)  Any approval given by the planning commission, under which premises are not used or a building permit issued within 12 months or when such use or work has been abandoned for a period of 12 months, shall lapse and cease to be in effect. 
(e)  The planning commission shall not have the power to change the zoning classification of any property, nor to grant exceptions or variances from any terms or requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-386. - Vested right. 
    Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification or any permissible activities therein; and, they are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-387. - Conditional rezoning. 
(a)  Intent. It is recognized that there are certain instances where it would be in the best interests of the city, as well as advantageous to property owners seeking a change in zoning classification, that certain conditions could be proposed by property owners as part of a request for rezoning. This is especially true since the city must consider all potential uses which may be made of property when considering a traditional rezoning request, some of which may be inappropriate for a particular piece of property considering items such as, but not limited to, the surrounding land uses, the city master plan, available infrastructure and utilities, and natural features. It is the intent of this section to provide a process consistent with the provisions of section 405 of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 as amended, MCL 125.3101 et seq., by which an owner seeking a rezoning may voluntarily propose conditions regarding the use and/or development of land as part of the rezoning request. 
(b)  Application and offer of conditions. An owner of land may voluntarily offer in writing conditions relating to the use and/or development of land for which a conditional rezoning is requested. This offer may be made either at the time the application for conditional rezoning is filed, or additional conditions may be offered at a later time during the conditional rezoning process as set forth below. 
(1)  General procedure. A request for a conditional rezoning shall be commenced by filing an application with the building department, on the required forms, accompanied by the specified fees. The application and process for considering a conditional rezoning request will be the same as that for considering a rezoning request without any conditions, except as modified by this section. The application shall explicitly describe the proposed conditional rezoning and shall be signed by the owner of the property. Applications for conditional rezoning of a specific site shall be accompanied by a plot plan or survey, as well as a conceptual plan showing the specific proposed use of the property. The conceptual plan shall contain the following details: 
a.  A scaled map or drawing of the property. 
b.  Existing and proposed uses, buildings, and structures. 
c.  Proposed parking arrangements and on-site circulation. 
d.  Relationship of the site to adjoining parcels. 
e.  Proposed landscape screens, walls, or buffers. 
f.  Detailed information regarding topography, site engineering, building architecture, or other items not relevant to the zoning decision may be waived by the planning commission. 
(2)  Pre-application conference. Prior to filing a formal request for a conditional rezoning, and prior to a public hearing, the applicant is encouraged to meet with the city building official, city planning consultant, and other representatives as deemed necessary by the city, to discuss the proposed development. The pre-application conference is intended to be informative and advisory in nature, and affords the applicant the opportunity to discuss the land use and planning policies of the City of Plymouth. 
The applicant must present a conceptual plan for the contemplated conditional rezoning at or before the pre-application conference. Any and all statements made by the representatives of the city at the pre-application conference have no legal force and are not legal and binding promises, commitments, or contracts. 
(c)  Review procedures. The owner's offer of conditions may not purport to authorize uses or developments not permitted in the requested new zoning district. The owner's offer of conditions shall bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the property for which the conditional rezoning is requested. 
(1)  Other required approvals by the City of Plymouth. 
a.  Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require a special land use permit under the terms of this chapter may only be commenced if a special land use permit for such use or development is ultimately granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
b.  Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require a variance under the terms of this chapter may only be commenced if a variance for such use or development is ultimately granted by the zoning board of appeals in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
c.  Any use or development proposed as part of an offer of conditions that would require site plan approval under the terms of this chapter may only be commenced if site plan approval for such use or development is ultimately granted in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(2)  Amendment of conditions. The offer of conditions may be amended during the process of conditional rezoning consideration, provided that any amended or additional conditions (other than minor or technical adjustments) are entered voluntarily by the owner, and confirmed in writing. An owner may withdraw in writing all or part of its offer of conditions any time prior to final rezoning action of the city commission provided that, if such withdrawal or change occurs subsequent to the planning commission's public hearing on the original rezoning request, then the rezoning application may be referred back to the planning commission for a new public hearing with appropriate notice and a new recommendation, if such change is deemed to be significant. 
(d)  Planning commission review. The planning commission, after public hearing and consideration of the factors for rezoning set forth in section 78-380, may recommend approval, approval with recommended changes, or denial of the rezoning; provided, however, that any recommended changes to the offer of conditions are acceptable to and thereafter offered by the owner in writing. 
(e)  City commission review. After receipt of the planning commission's recommendation, the city commission shall review the planning commission's recommendation and deliberate upon the requested conditional rezoning, and may approve or deny the conditional rezoning request. If the applicant initiates additional or different conditions not considered by the planning commission subsequent to the recommendation of the planning commission, then the city commission shall refer such proposed additional or different conditions to the planning commission for report thereon within a time specified by the city commission, and the city commission shall thereafter proceed to deny or approve the conditional rezoning. 
(f)  Approval. If the city commission finds the conditional rezoning request and offer of conditions acceptable, the offer of conditions shall be incorporated into a formal written statement of conditions acceptable to the owner and conforming in form to the provisions of this section. The statement of conditions shall be incorporated by attachment or otherwise as an inseparable part of the ordinance adopted by the city commission to accomplish the requested conditional rezoning. The statement of conditions shall: 
(1)  Be prepared in a form recordable with the county register of deeds; 
(2)  Contain a legal description of the land to which it pertains; 
(3)  Contain a statement acknowledging that the statement of conditions runs with the land, and is binding upon successor owners of the land; 
(4)  Incorporate by attachment the conceptual plan which formed the basis of the conditional rezoning; 
(5)  Contain the notarized signatures of all the owners of the property proceeded by a statement attesting to the fact that they are the only parties having an interest in the property, and that they voluntarily offer and consent to the provisions contained within the statement of conditions; 
(6)  The statement of conditions may be reviewed and approved by the city attorney, with the applicant to pay all costs associated with such review and approval. 
    The approved statement of conditions shall be filed by the owner with the county register of deeds within 30 days after approval of the conditional rezoning. the owner shall provide the city with a recorded copy of the statement of conditions within 60 days of receipt. The city commission shall have the authority to waive this requirement if it determines that, given the nature of the conditions and/or the time frame within which the conditions are to be satisfied, the recording of the statement of conditions would be of no material benefit to the city or to any subsequent owner of the land; and 
    Upon the conditional rezoning taking effect, the zoning map shall be amended to reflect the new zoning classification, together with a designation that the land was a conditional rezoning with a statement of conditions. Upon the conditional rezoning taking effect, and after the required recording of the statement of conditions, unless waived, use of the land so rezoned shall conform thereafter to all the requirements regulating use and development within the new zoning district as modified by any more restrictive provisions contained in the statement of conditions. 
(g)  Compliance with conditions. Any person who establishes development or commences a use upon land that has been conditionally rezoned shall continuously operate and maintain the development or use in full compliance with all the conditions set forth in the statement of conditions. Any failure to comply fully with the conditions contained within the statement of conditions shall constitute a violation of this chapter and be punishable accordingly. Additionally, any such violation shall be deemed a nuisance per se and subject to judicial abatement as provided by law. 
(h)  Time period for establishing development or use. The approved development and/or use of the land pursuant to building and other required permits must be commenced upon the land within 18 months after the effective date by publication of the conditional rezoning action, and must thereafter proceed diligently to completion. This time limitation may, upon written request, be extended by the city commission if: 
(1)  It is demonstrated that there is a strong likelihood that the development and/or use will commence within the period of extension and proceed diligently thereafter to completion; and 
(2)  The city commission finds that there has not been change in circumstances that would render the conditional rezoning with statement of conditions incompatible with other zones and uses in the surrounding area or otherwise inconsistent with sound zoning policy. 
(i)  Reversion of zoning. If the approved development and/or use of the rezoned land does not occur within the time frame specified under subsection (h) above, then the land shall revert to its former zoning classification as set forth in MCL 125.3405(2). The reversion process shall be initiated by the city commission, and proceed pursuant to section 78-380. Reversion to a different zoning classification may also be considered by the city. 
(j)  Subsequent rezoning of land. When land that is conditionally rezoned with the statement of conditions is thereafter rezoned to a different zoning classification, or to the same zoning classification but with a different or no statement of conditions, whether as a result of a reversion of zoning pursuant to subsection (i) above, or upon application of the landowner, or otherwise, the Statement of Conditions imposed under the former zoning classification shall cease to be in effect. Upon the owner's written request, the city clerk shall record with the county register of deeds a notice that the statement of conditions is no longer in effect. 
(k)  Amendment of conditions. During the time period for commencement of an approved development or use specified pursuant to subsection (h) above, or during any extension thereof granted by the city commission, the city shall not add to or alter the conditions in the statement of conditions. The statement of conditions may be amended thereafter in the same manner as was prescribed for the original conditional rezoning and statement of conditions. 
(l)  City right to rezone. Nothing in the statement of conditions nor in the provisions of this section shall be deemed to prohibit the city from rezoning all or any portion of land that is subject to a statement of conditions to another zoning classification. Any rezoning shall be conducted in compliance with this chapter and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act No. 110 of 2006 as amended, MCL 125.3101 et seq. 
(m)  Failure to offer conditions. The city shall not require an owner to offer conditions as a requirement for rezoning. The lack of an offer of conditions shall not affect an owner's rights under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04,  16, 11-5-12) 
Sec. 78-388. - Required signage. 
(a)  Required signage. An applicant requesting a zoning map change, conditional rezoning or PUD shall construct and install a sign indicating the requested change of zoning. City-initiated rezonings involving eleven or more parcels shall be exempt from the signage requirements. The sign shall be installed no less than 15 days prior to the scheduled public hearing. The sign shall be installed on the parcel(s) requested for rezoning and shall be clearly visible from an adjoining roadway. The sign shall not be placed within a public right-of-way, nor shall the sign obstruct clear vision for motorists. 
The sign shall comply with the following sign specifications: 
  Black letters on white background. 
  Size: minimum 4 feet (vertical) by 6 feet (horizontal). 
  Signs face must be exterior plywood, aluminum, or similar material. 
  Wording shall be as follows: 
This Property is Proposed for Zoning Change (min. 8? high letters) Current Zoning       (min. 3? high letters) Proposed Zoning       (min. 3? high letters) For more information call: (min. 3? high letters) City of Plymouth (min. 3? high letters) Building Department (min. 3? high letters) (734) 453-1234 (min. 3? high letters)  
  Sign support system must be structurally sound and mounted with 4? 4?s or "u" channel steel posts. The posts shall be set in the ground at least 30 inches below the surface. The bottom of the sign shall be no less than three feet above the ground level. 
Rezoning or PUD signs shall be removed within: 
  Seven days of action by city commission. 
  Seven days of withdrawing rezoning or PUD application. 
  Failure to remove sign within this period may result in removal of the sign by the city, following notice and an opportunity to remove the sign, at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04,  17, 11-5-12) 
Sec. 78-389. - Traffic impact study. 
(1)  A traffic impact study shall be required for projects that would be expected to generate 100 directional vehicle trips (i.e. 100 inbound or 100 outbound trips) during the peak hour of the traffic generator or the peak hour on the adjacent streets. Forecasted trip generation shall be based upon equations/rates outlined in the most recent version of the Institute of Transportation Engineer's (ITE) Trip Generation Manual. The ITE data may be supplemented by actual trip generation data from similar establishments in Michigan. Any supplemental data must be reviewed and approved by the city prior to use in the study analyses. 
(2)  The requirement for a traffic study may be appealed to the city zoning board of appeals. Such appeals shall be made in writing and shall be submitted at least ten days prior to a regular meeting of the zoning board of appeals. The appeal may be to waive the requirement or eliminate the need for some of the information required. To receive such a modification, the applicant shall demonstrate that the impacts will be relatively minor and/or the existing infrastructure has ample capacity available. 
(3)  An applicant is required to comply with the following procedures and submit the following items of information for a traffic study: 
(a)  The applicant is required to contact the city building official and the traffic engineering consultant prior to preparation of a traffic impact study to discuss available data, extent of study area and inclusion of other projects or growth factors as part of the background conditions. 
(b)  Existing conditions, including daily and peak-hour traffic volumes on adjacent street(s), intersections within the vicinity that are expected to be impacted and a description of any sight distance limitations along the site's frontage. 
(c)  Existing traffic counts shall be taken on a Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday of nonholiday weeks. Additional counts, i.e., on a Saturday for a proposed commercial development, may also be required. The following times/situations should also be avoided where possible so that the traffic count data would represent a typical day, construction detours in the area, summer days for a site near a school, etc. The firm performing the impact study must make every effort to complete traffic counts during average or higher-than-average volume conditions, i.e., regarding weather or seasonal variations for the area under study. Traffic data between one and two years old will not be accepted unless the applicant can document that volumes have not changed more than two percent. Traffic data older than two years old will not be accepted. 
(d)  Forecasted trip generation of the proposed use shall be provided for the a.m./p.m. peak-hour and average daily traffic generated. The forecasts shall be based on the data and procedures outlined in the Institute for Traffic Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual. The applicant may use other commonly accepted sources of data or supplement the standard data with data from similar projects in Michigan. For rezoning requests when such change represents a departure from the future land use map, the study should contrast the trip generation of typical uses permitted in the requested zoning district with uses permitted in the current zoning district. The determination of typical uses shall be made by the building official. 
(e)  All traffic impact studies will include an analysis of background conditions for the year that the project is to be completed (or in phases if applicable). Background traffic includes historic annual percentage increases and/or acknowledges the traffic impacts of other uses approved or in the review process, but not yet constructed, which may affect traffic operations for roadways and intersections near the subject site, as determined by the city. This may include projects in adjacent communities. 
(f)  The projected traffic generated shall be distributed onto the existing street network to identify expected turning movement volumes at site driveways and nearby intersections and illustrated in the report. A description of the application of standard engineering procedures for determining the distribution shall also be included. The expected trip distribution shall be approved by the building official prior to continuation of the analyses. The assignment of forecasted site traffic shall be clearly illustrated in graphic form in the study report. 
(g)  Capacity analysis at the proposed access points using the procedures outlined in the most recent edition of the Highway Capacity Manual published by the Transportation Research Board shall be provided. "Before" and "after" capacity analyses shall also be performed at all street intersections where the expected project traffic will comprise at least five percent of the existing intersection capacity and/or for roadway sections and intersections experiencing congestion or a relatively high accident rate, as determined by the city, Michigan Department of Transportation, or Wayne County Department of Public Services staff. The "after" analysis shall include a scenario with no improvements and separate analysis for various mitigation options or packages of improvements. Any proposed change to signal timing should include documentation of acceptance by Wayne County staff. 
(h)  Traffic crash data at analyzed intersections covering the past three years shall be summarized in collision diagrams if the segment of roadway adjacent to or near the subject site has experienced crash problems. In addition, data charts including times of day, days of week, crash types, months of year, alcohol or drug involvement, weather, pavement, and light conditions shall be submitted. Raw crash data shall be used for the analysis. 
(i)  The location and design of proposed access for a driveway or new street intersection shall be provided with a map and narrative description. In addition, analysis shall include any sight distance limitations, dimensions from adjacent driveways and intersections within 250 feet and other data to demonstrate that the design and number of proposed driveways are the fewest necessary. The driveway(s) shall provide safe and efficient traffic operation and be in accordance with the standards of this chapter. Proposed driveway design shall include location of signs, signals, and/or pavement markings. 
(j)  The potential need for bypass lanes or deceleration tapers/lanes, including attachment of any correspondence by the Wayne County Department of Public Services. 
(k)  The fire department shall approve the size and location of fire lanes and emergency vehicle access. 
l.  The city may require analysis using a corridor simulation software (i.e., SYNCHRO) rather than an isolated intersection capacity analysis. If such analyses are required, submittals shall include electronic copies of the simulation files. 
(Ord. No. 2012-04,  18, 11-5-12) 
Secs. 78-390-78-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXVIII. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 

Sec. 78-400. - Creation and membership. 
(a)  There is hereby established a Board of Zoning Appeals which shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided in Section 5 of Act No. 207 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1921 (MCL 125.581 et seq., MSA 5.2931 et seq.), as amended, and in such a way that the objectives of this chapter shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. 
(b)  The board shall consist of five regular members and two alternate members appointed by the mayor, by and with the consent of the city commission for three year terms. Each member of the zoning board of appeals must be a resident of the city. Appointed members may be removed for cause by the city commission only after consideration of written charges and a public hearing. An alternate member may be called to sit on the board as a regular member by the chairperson, vice-chairperson or recording secretary in the absence of a regular member. An alternate member may also be called to serve in the place of a regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. 
(c)  Should any vacancy occur among the members of the zoning board of appeals by reason of death, resignation, disability, or otherwise, immediate notice thereof shall be given by the recording secretary to the city clerk. Should any vacancy occur among the officers of the zoning board of appeals, the vacant office shall be filed in accordance with the provisions of the rules of procedures, such officer to serve the unexpired term of the office in which such vacancy shall occur. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-401. - Meetings. 
(a)  Procedure. All meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the board may determine. All hearings conducted by the board shall be open to the public, and shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order. 
(b)  Quorum. At any meeting of the zoning board of appeals a quorum shall consist of three members of the board. No action shall be taken in the absence of a quorum except to adjourn the meeting to a subsequent date. Only when just four members are present shall the appellant be given the option to delay until a board of more than four members can hear his appeal. 
(c)  Order of business. The order of business at meetings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Roll call; 
(2)  Approval of the minutes of the previous meetings; 
(3)  Public hearings; 
(4)  Deliberations and determinations; 
(5)  Old business; 
(6)  New business. 
(d)  Speaking. No member or other person shall speak until duly recognized by the chairperson, and he shall immediately cease speaking if ruled out of order. Speakers other than members, after being recognized, shall commence by identifying themselves by name and address. 
(e)  Annual meeting. The annual meeting of the zoning board of appeals shall be the first regular meeting in the month of January each year. Such meetings shall be devoted to the election of officers for the ensuing year and such other business as shall be scheduled by the board. 
(f)  Regular meeting. Regular meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held in the city hall at 7:00 p.m. on the first Thursday of each month. At such meetings, the board shall consider all matters properly brought before it. A regular meeting may be canceled or rescheduled by the board at a prior meeting or by a majority of the members of the board with sufficient public notice of such change. Pursuant to the requirements of section 78-404 limiting the number of appeals to not more than five at any board meeting, a second meeting will be held on the fourth Thursday of the month whenever more than five appeals have been received as required in section 78-405. If a quorum of board members is not present at the regular meeting, the meeting shall be rescheduled to the fourth Thursday of the month. 
(g)  Special meetings. Special meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held at a time and place designated by the officer calling the same, and shall be called by the chairperson, vice-chairperson, or recording secretary with the permission of a majority of the members of the board, which permission may be obtained by telephone. Sufficient notice thereof as required by law or the rules of procedures shall be given by the recording secretary. 
(h)  Adjourned meetings. The zoning board of appeals may adjourn a regular or special meeting if all business cannot be disposed of on the day set, and no further public notice shall be necessary for such meeting if the time and place of its resumption is stated at the time of adjournment and is not changed after adjournment. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-402. - Voting. 
    At all meetings of the zoning board of appeals, each member attending shall be entitled to cast one vote. Voting to pass pursuant to law, shall be by roll call. All other action shall be by voice vote, except when a majority of the members present prefers a roll call or ballot vote. The concurring vote of the members of the board shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of an administrative official or body, or to decide in favor of the applicant a matter upon which the board is required to pass under an ordinance, or to effect a variation in an ordinance except that a concurring vote of 2/3 of the members of the board shall be necessary to grant a variance from uses of land permitted in an ordinance. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-403. - Disclosure. 
    If any member of the zoning board of appeals shall have a personal interest in a matter when brought before the board, he shall disclose his interest and be disqualified from voting upon the matter, and the recording secretary shall so record in the minutes that no vote was cast by such member. Personal interest includes matters brought before the board by family members, business associates, or close friends of a board member. A conflict of interest arises when the personal interest of a board member creates a situation in which one cannot execute public duties without affecting private interest, thus denying the public the fair, impartial, and objective judgment to which it is entitled. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-404. - Appeals. 
    In addition to all other matters properly brought before the board of zoning appeals, the board shall hear and decide appeals from, and review any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building official in his enforcement of this chapter. The building official shall appear in person to present information to the board when the work has been started before the appeal was brought to the board. All appeals to the board from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building official shall be made not later than ten days after the start of construction or alterations or a change in use authorized by any permit or certificate issued by the building official or within 30 days of any action, order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building official. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-405. - Schedule of hearings. 
    All appeals to the board of zoning appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building official, shall be heard, if scheduling permits, at the next regular meeting of the board, if an application for appeal and grounds therefore has been submitted to the building official and the board on or before the third Tuesday of the previous month during regular business hours the recording secretary shall, at least ten days prior to any scheduled hearing, mail all notices that are required. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-406. - Notice. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall make no recommendation except in a specific case and after a hearing conducted by such board. A written notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be mailed to the owners, at the addresses given in the last assessment roll, of all lots or parcels of land lying within 300 feet of the property in question. Such notices to be delivered personally or by first class mail addressed to the respective owners at the addresses given in the last assessment roll of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-407. - Fees. 
    The city commission may, from time to time, prescribe and amend by resolution a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for appeals to the zoning board of appeals. At the time the notice for appeal is filed, such fee shall be paid to the city treasurer. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-408. - Jurisdiction. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall not have the power to alter or change the zoning district classification of any property, nor to make any change in the terms of this chapter nor to permit any use in a district in which it is not permitted, but does have power to act on those matters where this chapter provides for an administrative review, interpretation or exception and to authorize a variance as defined in this section and laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-409. - Exceptions. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall hear and decide in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, requests for exceptions, for interpretations of the zoning map, and for decisions on special approval situations on which this chapter specifically authorizes the board to pass. Any exception shall be subject to such conditions as the board may require to preserve and promote the character of the zoning district in question and otherwise promote the purpose of this chapter including the following: 
(1)  Interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the zoning map fixing the use districts, accompanying and made part of this chapter, where street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map aforesaid. 
(2)  Permit the erection and use of a building or use of premises for public utility purposes; provided the board shall seek the review and recommendation of the planning commission prior to taking any action. 
(3)  Permit the modification of the automobile parking space or loading space requirements where, in the particular instance, such modification will not be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such requirements. 
(4)  Permit such modification of the height and area regulations as may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a lot which is of such shape, or so located with relation to surrounding development or physical characteristics, that it cannot otherwise be appropriately improved without such modification. 
(5)  Permit temporary buildings and uses for periods not to exceed two years in undeveloped sections of the city and for periods not to exceed six months in developed sections. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-410. - Findings of fact. 
    Following the hearing of any appeal to the board of zoning appeals, the board shall make a finding of fact upon which they shall base their decision. A finding of fact shall consist of the facts and circumstances relied upon by the board in its determination of an appeal, and shall be based upon the evidence presented to the board. The findings of fact and the decision thereon shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-411. - Variance. 
    Upon an appeal, the board of zoning appeals is authorized to grant a variance from the strict provisions of this chapter, whereby extraordinary or exceptional conditions of such property, and the strict application of the regulations enacted would result in peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional undue hardship upon the owner of such property, provided such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter. In granting a variance the board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed uses as it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this chapter. Further, in granting a variance, the board shall state the grounds upon which it justifies the granting of a variance as outlined below. When granting any variance, the board must ensure that the spirit of the ordinance is observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. 
(1)  Use variance. The applicant must present evidence to show that if the zoning ordinance is applied strictly, unnecessary hardship to the applicant will result, and that all four of the following requirements are met: 
a.  That the property could not be reasonably used for the purposes permitted in that zone; 
b.  That the appeal results from unique circumstances peculiar to the property and not from general neighborhood conditions; 
c.  That the use requested by the variance would not alter the essential character of the area; and 
d.  That the alleged hardship has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the property. 
(2)  Non-use variances. The applicant must present evidence to show that if the zoning ordinance is applied strictly, practical difficulty will result to the applicant and: 
a.  That the ordinance restrictions unreasonably prevent the owner from using the property for a permitted purpose; 
b.  That the variance would do substantial justice to the applicant as well as to other property owners in the district, and a lesser relaxation than that requested would not give substantial relief to the owner of the property or be more consistent with justice to other property owners; 
c.  That the plight of the landowner is due to the unique circumstances of the property; and 
d.  That the alleged hardship has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the property. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-412. - Decision. 
    The board of zoning appeals shall adopt a decision on all matters properly brought before it within 90 days from the date of the filing of the appeal. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-413. - Conditions to appeals. 
    Unless otherwise specified by the board of zoning appeals, all variances granted shall become null and void if not exercised within one year from the date of granting. Also, unless otherwise specified by the board, all variances granted are granted in accordance with the site plan submitted to the board for consideration. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-414. - Reconsideration. 
    Following any decision adopted by the board of zoning appeals, a motion to reconsider may be made at any time during the same meeting, or within five days thereof. The motion may be made only by a member who either voted with the prevailing side or did not vote, and shall be filed in writing with the recording secretary. It may be seconded by any member. No decision shall be reconsidered more than once, nor shall a vote to reconsider be reconsidered. The applicant or aggrieved person who originally appealed to the board shall be given a notice if a motion to reconsider is made and filed in writing with the recording secretary. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Sec. 78-415. - Rehearing. 
    Any person having an interest affected by this chapter may, upon a change in circumstances or the existence of new evidence for the board of zoning appeals to consider, file for a rehearing which the board may hear if it decides that there has in fact been a change in circumstances or that new evidence does exist. 
(1)  Such requests shall be submitted to the building/engineering department in writing, concisely stating the grounds for a rehearing and any new evidence or change of circumstance. 
(2)  Such rehearings shall require a renotice at least ten days prior to any scheduled hearing as outlined under section 78-405. 
(Ord. of 10-6-03) 
Secs. 78-416-78-419. - Reserved. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1982 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1982 Code, as updated through January 20, 1982, which are included herein. Sections of the 1982 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1982 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1.2 1-16 1.4 1-11 1.5 1-1 1.6 1-5 1.8-1.10 1-2 1.11 1-14 1.12 1-13 1.13 1-8 1.51-1.53 2-36-2-38 1.54 2-51 1.71, 1.72 46-26, 46-27 1.76-1.79 46-51-46-54 1.81, 1.82 38-26, 38-27 1.83-1.85 38-29-38-31 1.91 2-52 1.101-1.103 2-76-2-78 1.110-1.112 18-26-18-28 1.121-1.123 2-91-2-93 1.131, 1.132 26-1, 26-2 1.201-1.216 2-126-2-141 1.231 2-156 1.232, 1.233 2-166, 2-167 1.271-1.274 30-86-30-89 2.61-2.63 74-46-74-48 2.64 74-26 2.65-2.68 74-31-74-34 2.72-2.74 74-61-74-63 2.81 74-106 2.82-2.85 74-116-74-119 2.87-2.90 74-141-74-144 2.92-2.97 74-156-74-161 2.99-2.108 74-120-74-129 2.110-2.114 74-1-74-5 2.121-2.137 74-181-74-197 2.151-2.157 74-76-74-82 3.7 54-156-54-162 3.21 26-8 3.22-3.26 26-3-26-7 3.27, 3.28 26-9, 26-10 3.70(1) 18-721 3.70(2)-3.70(19) 18-723-18-740 3.70(20) 18-722 4.1-4.13 62-26-62-38 4.18 62-51, 62-52 4.26, 4.27 62-76, 62-77 4.31, 4.32 62-2, 62-3 4.36 62-1 4.37-4.39 62-39-62-41 4.41-4.45 62-78-62-82 4.47-4.54 62-83-62-90 5.1 66-1 5.5-5.7 66-41-66-43 5.8-5.14 66-56-66-62 5.21-5.29 66-86-66-94 5.31-5.42 66-95-66-106 5.46-5.50 66-126-66-130 5.55-5.60 66-2-66-7 5.271-5.274 18-29-18-32 6.61-6.69 22-91-22-99 6.91 18-401 6.95 18-416, 18-417 6.98-6.102 18-431-18-435 6.105 18-446 6.111-6.119 18-456-18-464 6.125-6.133 18-476-18-484 6.141-6.149 18-496-18-504 6.151-6.157 18-516-18-522 6.161-6.167 18-536-18-542 6.171-6.181 18-556-18-566 6.185-6.190 18-576-18-581 6.195, 6.196 18-402, 18-403 7.1-7.7 22-27-22-33 7.9-7.16 22-34-22-41 7.17 22-26 7.18-7.22 22-42-22-46 7.31 22-66 7.32-7.38 22-67 7.51(1), (2) 22-166 7.51(3)-(5) 22-167 7.52-7.55 22-168-22-171 7.56 22-172, 22-173 7.57-7.61 22-174-22-178 7.70 22-257 7.71, 7.72 22-256, 22-257 7.73 22-265 7.74 22-259 7.75-7.77 22-261-22-263 7.78 22-260 7.79 22-266 7.80 22-258 7.81 22-264 7.111 10-161 7.112 10-162-10-164 7.113 10-166 7.114 10-165 7.121-7.125 22-201-22-205 7.141 10-61-10-63 7.145 10-86-10-89 7.151(1) 10-111 7.151(2) 10-112 
10-114, 10-115 7.151(3) 10-113 7.155 10-136-10-138 7.156 10-139 7.161 10-1 7.221, 7.222 10-26, 10-27 7.223(1) 10-28 7.223(2) 10-32-10-34 7.224(1)-(4) 10-29 7.224(5) 10-30 7.225 10-31 7.226 10-36 7.226(1) 10-35 7.227-7.230 10-37-10-40 8.41 18-286 8.42(1)-8.42(8) 18-316-18-323 8.43(1), 8.43(2) 18-336, 18-337 8.43(3) 18-290 8.43(4)-8.43(13) 18-338-18-347 8.44, 8.45 18-348, 18-349 8.46(1) 18-287 8.46(2) 18-291 8.46(3) 18-288 8.46(4) 18-292 8.46(5) 18-289 8.46(6), 8.46(7) 18-293, 18-294 8.46(8), 8.46(9) 18-324, 18-325 8.47 18-326 8.73-8.82 18-121-18-130 8.86-8.93 18-141-18-148 8.106, 8.107 18-161, 18-162 8.108 18-164 8.109 18-163 8.171 18-108 9.1 34-51, 34-52 9.2 34-54 9.3 34-56 9.11-9.14 34-71-34-74 9.21-9.24 34-86-34-89 9.41, 9.42 34-101, 34-102 9.51, 9.52 54-186 9.61-9.66 18-751-18-756 9.68 34-53 9.69 34-55 9.70 34-57 9.76-9.78 34-26-34-28 9.126, 9.127 54-291 9.131, 9.132 54-201, 54-202 9.133(1)-9.133(3) 54-203-54-205 9.133(5), 9.133(6) 54-207, 54-208 9.138 54-101 9.141-9.146 54-341-54-346 9.151-9.154 54-127-54-130 9.155 54-126 9.201 38-32 9.202 38-28 9.241-9.249 6-1-6-9 9.271-9.280 42-36-42-45 9.341-9.343 54-326-54-328 9.361-9.365 54-276-54-280 10.1-10.4 70-26-70-29 10.4(8.25) 70-91 10.4(8.26), 10.4(8.27) 70-92, 70-93 10.4(8.27b) 70-95 10.4(8.29), 10.4(8.30) 70-96, 70-97 10.21-10.25 70-111-70-115 10.26-10.29 70-117-70-120 10.41 70-61 10.42 70-64 10.42(1)-(3) 70-62 10.43 70-65, 70-66 10.44 70-67 10.45 70-63 10.51 70-241 10.61-10.66 70-131-70-136 10.81-10.104 70-177-70-200 10.105 70-176  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1982 Code, as updated through January 20, 1982, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1982 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede January 20, 1982, but which were never included in the 1982 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since January 20, 1982, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 82-8  6- 7-82 1-7 22-226-22-232 82-10  7-19-82 2-8 70-146-70-152 82-11  8-16-82 1(8.21), 1(8.22) 18-371, 18-372 1(8.23) 18-377 1(8.24), 1(8.25) 18-379, 18-380 1(8.26)-1(8.29) 18-373-18-376 1(8.30) 18-378 83-2  6-20-83 2-4 30-56-30-58 6-8 30-60-30-62 83-5 1-10 30-26-30-35 84-1  1- 3-84 1(3.26) 26-7 84-3  2- 6-84 1(3.7(1))-1(3.7(7)) 54-156-54-162 84-6 11-19-84 1(10.26) 70-116 85-5  3-18-85 1 18-256-18-258 18-261, 18-262 1(1), 1(2) 18-259, 18-260 85-6  4- 1-85 1(3.1)-1(3.6) 54-141-54-146 85-10  7-15-85 1 54-5 85-14 12- 2-85 1 6-3 86-2  3-17-86 1, 2 2-134 3, 4 2-135 86-3  3-17-86 1, 2 18-751, 18-752 3, 4 18-755, 18-756 87-3  3-16-87 1 70-161-70-168 87-4  4- 6-87 10-106, 10-107 70-211, 70-212 10-108-10-112 70-214-70-218 10-113 70-213 89-6 10-16-89 30-60 90-1  1-15-90 1 70-118 90-2  8- 6-90 1 70-94 90-3  8-20-90 1(2.2) 58-1 58-4 1(2.3) 58-2 1(2.4)-1(2.8) 58-6-58-10 1(2.9(A))-1(2.9(G)) 58-41-58-47 1(2.10), 1(2.11) 58-11, 58-12 1(2.12(A))-1(2.12(K)) 58-71-58-81 1(2.13)-1(2.16) 58-13-58-16 1(2.17) 58-3, 58-4 1(2.18) 58-5 1(2.19) 58-4 90-5 12- 3-90 1 74-197 91-3  3-18-91 1(4.54) 62-90 91-7  6-17-91 1(9.370)-1(9.373) 54-46-54-49 91-8  7- 1-91 1-5 2-151-2-155  1-13-92(Ord.) 5.83 78-1 5.84-5.90 78-2 5.95-5.99 78-26-78-30 5.105-5.109 78-51-78-55 5.111-5.113 78-76-78-78 5.118-5.122 78-101-78-105 5.126-5.130 78-126-78-130 5.134-5.138 78-176-78-180 5.141-5.144 78-201-78-204 5.148-5.151 78-226-78-229 5.155 78-251, 78-252 5.156-5.159 78-253-78-256 5.164-5.168 78-276-78-280 5.171-5.180 78-301-78-310 5.186, 5.187 78-332, 78-333 5.191, 5.192 78-356, 78-357 5.193 78-446 5.193(2)-5.193(4) 78-447-78-449 5.193(5)-5.193(11) 78-451-78-457 5.195 78-507 5.195.1 78-507 5.196-5.198 78-508-78-510 5.199-5.201 78-358-78-360 5.202 78-386 5.202(1) 78-387 5.202(2)-5.202(6) 78-389-78-393 5.202(8) 78-388 5.203-5.208 78-361-78-366 5.209(1)-5.209(5) 78-416-78-420 5.209(6) 78-421 
78-423 5.210 78-424 5.221-5.230 78-561-78-570 5.235-5.249 78-591-78-605 5.255-5.270 78-631-78-646 art. XX 78-606 art. XXIV 78-607 92-3  1-21-92 3-5 70-29 92-1  2-18-92 1(12.1)-1(12.3) 34-126-34-128 1(13.1)-1(13.13) 18-601-18-613 92-4  2-18-92 3(9.122(1)) 54-231 3(9.122(2)) 54-71 3(9.122(3)) 54-234 3(9.122(4)) 54-233 3(9.122(5)) 54-232 3(9.122(6)) 54-206 3(9.122(8))-3(9.122(11)) 54-72-54-75 3(9.122(12))-3(9.122(15)) 54-256-54-259 3(9.122(16)), 3(9.122(17)) 54-2, 54-3 3(9.122(19)) 54-76 3(9.122(20)) 54-4 3(9.122(21)) 54-312 3(9.122(22)) 54-77 3(9.122(23)) 54-313 3(9.122(24)) 54-311 3(9.122(25)) 54-264 3(9.122(26)) 54-263 3(9.122(27)) 54-262 3(9.122(28)) 54-261 3(9.122(29)) 54-260 3(9.122(30)) 54-33 3(9.122(31)) 54-32 3(9.122(32)) 54-31 3(9.122(33)) 54-80 3(9.122(34)) 54-79 3(9.122(35)), 3(9.122(36)) 54-102, 54-103 3(9.122(37)) 54-1 3(9.122(38)) 54-78 3(9.122(39)) 54-116 3(9.122(40)) 54-115 3(9.122(41)) 54-114 3(9.122(42))-3(9.122(44)) 54-111-54-113 3(9.122(45)) 54-110 3(9.122(46)) 54-109 3(9.122(47)) 54-108 3(9.122(48)) 54-107 3(9.122(49)) 54-106 3(9.122(50)) 54-105 3(9.122(51)) 54-104 92-5  4- 6-92 1 30-59 92-6  4- 6-92 1 30-26 92-8  4-20-92 3 78-151-78-153 3(5.209.7) 78-422 4 78-26 92-10  5-18-92 2(9.219(1))-2(9.219(8)) 38-81-38-88 92-11  8-17-92 2 22-121 3-23 22-124-22-144 25 22-145 26, 27 22-122, 22-123 92-12  9-21-92 2 50-2 3 50-1 5-19 50-3-50-17 26-32 50-18-50-24 36-49 50-25-50-38 51-55 50-39-50-43 62-66 50-44-50-48 71-78 50-49-50-56 86-90 50-57-50-61 96-106 50-62-50-72 116, 117 50-73, 50-74 92-14  9-21-92 3(9.122(7)) 54-187 92-15 12-18-92 1(8.10)-1(8.16) 18-776-18-782 93-1  2-16-93 2(2.138) 74-198 93-2  3- 5-93 1 50-55 93-7  9- 7-93 1(8.1), 1(8.2) 18-56, 18-57 1(9.1), 1(9.2) 18-186, 18-187 1(10.1), 1(10.2) 18-106, 18-107 1(11.1), 1(11.2) 18-81, 18-82 1(14.1), 1(14.2) 18-211, 18-212 93-9 12-20-93 1(1.131) 26-1 94-1  1-18-94 1 18-226, 18-227 2-8 18-228-18-234 11 18-235 94-2  1-18-94 1(5.231) 78-531 1(5.231.1)-1(5.231.8) 78-532-78-539 93-6  2-17-94 3 78-2 5.197.2 78-509 5.205.4 78-363 94-6  3-22-94 1(A), 1(B) 18-636, 18-637 2, 3 18-639, 18-640 4(A) 18-651 4(B) 18-652, 18-653 4(C), 4(D) 18-654, 18-655 5(A)-5(F) 18-686-18-691 6-8 18-656-18-658 9(A)-9(D) 18-671-18-674 10 18-675 12 18-641 13 18-638 94-7  4-18-94 1 78-508 94-9  7-11-94 1 74-26, 74-27 74-29, 74-30 1(a) 74-28 94-10  8-15-94 1 78-331 2 78-450 3, 4 78-481, 78-482 94-11 11-21-94 1 38-56-38-58 2 38-59 94-12  1- 2-95 art. I,  1-71 74-221 art. II 74-222 art. III,  1, 2 74-292 art. III,  3, 74-293, 74-294 art. III,  4 art. III,  5 74-296 art. III,  6 74-295 art. III,  7- 74-297-74-305 art. III,  15 art. IV,  1- 74-241-74-249 art. IV,  9 art. V,  1 74-291 art. VI,  1 74-224 art. VII,  1, 2 74-250 art. VIII,  1-3 74-253 art. IX,  1-8 74-251 art. X,  1, 2 74-252 art. XI 74-254 art. XII 74-223 art. XIII,  1-6 74-271 art. XIV,  1-5 74-272 art. XV,  1 74-273 art. XVI,  1 74-274 art. XVI,  2 74-279 art. XVI,  3- 74-275-74-278 art. XVI,  6 art. XVI,  7 74-280 95-2  6-19-95 1-3       Added 70-1 95-3  6-19-95 1-6       Added 70-2 95-4  6-19-95 1-7       Added 70-3 95-5  6-19-95 1-27       Added 70-256-70-282 95-6  6-19-95 1-16       Added 70-296-70-311 95-7  6-19-95 1-10       Added 70-4 95-8  7- 5-95 1-3 78-387 4 78-389 5, 6 78-390(4), (8) 7 78-392(2) 8 78-393 95-9  7- 5-95 1 78-508(3)j. 95-10  8-21-95 1-7 Adopting ord., p.ix 95-15  1- 2-96 1 18-778 18-780 96-1  2-20-96 1 1-13 96-2  2-20-96 1 54-401-54-407 96-4  7-15-96 1 78-508(3)j. 96-8 12-16-96 1       Added 78-508(7) 2 78-508(3)j. 97-2  4- 7-97 2 70-241 97-3  5-19-97 1 34-53 97-4  7- 7-97 2       Dltd 70-211-70-218       Added 70-211-70-220 97-5  9-29-97 4 78-26(2) 5 (note) 6 78-331       Added 78-332(u)-(y) 7 78-360 8 78-363(a) 9       Added 78-392(3) 10 78-417(3) 11       Added 78-507(12) 12       Added 78-701-78-711 98-1  5- 4-98 1 34-86-34-94 98-2  7- 6-98 1 78-507(a) 2       Rpld 78-507(7) 98-3  8- 3-98 1 2-95-2-100 98-4  8- 3-98 54-361-54-363 98-5  8- 3-98 26-7, 26-10(30) 98-6 11- 2-98 78-26, 78-721-78-724 98-7 11- 2-98 1 70-118(c) 98-8 12- 7-98 1 18-56, 18-57, 18-81, 18-82, 18-106, 18-107, 18-186, 18-187 98-9 12- 7-98 1 38-56, 38-57 98-10 12-21-98 1 51-1, 51-2, 51-5, 51-6, 51-7-51-16, 51-17-51-25, Ch. 51, App. A, Ch. 51, App. A-1 99-1  4- 5-99 1       Rpld 74-183-74-187, 74-189-74-194, 74-196 2       Added 74-199 99-9  6-21-99 14-1-14-21 99-10 10-18-99 1 70-29 99-10A 10-24-99 2 18-390(10) 2000-02  6- 5-00 1       Rpld 54-256-54-264       Added 54-256 2000-3  7-17-00 34-95-34-97 2000-4  8- 7-00 2-168-2-170 2000-5  9- 5-00 54-144 00-06  9- 5-00 2 78-481 3 78-2 00-7  9- 5-00 2 78-361 00-8  9- 5-00 2 78-176-78-180 00-10 10- 2-00 26-3 2000-11 10-16-00 2 70-93 2000-12 10- 2-00 1, 2 78-331-78-332 2000-14 11-20-00       Rpld 54-46-54-49       Added 54-46-54-51 01-01  2- 5-01 1 17-778 01-04  5-21-01 2 78-367 01-05  7- 2-01 1 1-13(a)(1)-(4), 18-56       Rpld 18-57       Added 18-58       Amd 18-81       Added 18-83       Amd 18-106       Rpld 18-107, 18-108       Added 19-109       Rpld 18-121-18-130, 18-141-18-148, 18-161-18-164       Amd 18-186       Rpld 18-187       Added 18-188 2001-11  9- 4-01 1, 2 18-639 01-13 10-15-01 1 18-1 02-01  1-22-02       Rpld 74-221-74-224, 74-221-74-254, 74-271-74-280, 74-291-74-305       Added 74-221-74-224, 74-241-74-255, 74-271-74-275, 74-291-74-306 02-02  2-19-02 1 78-331 2 78-332(c) 2002-4  5-20-02 1 1-13(a)(5) 2       Rpld 18-211, 18-212, 18-225-18-235       Added 18-211, 18-212, 18-226-18-228, 18-230, 18-233, 18-235 02-05  7-15-02 2, 4 78-393 3 78-387 2002-6 11-18-02 1, 2, 4 70-26 2002-7 11-18-02 1       Rpld 51-1, 51-2, 51-5, 51-6, 51-7-51-13, 51-15, 51-16, 51-17-51-19, 51-21-51-25       Added 51-1-51-21 02-8 12-16-02 2 78-331 3 78-332 2003-4  5-19-03 1-12 6-31-6-42 Ord. of 10- 6-03       Rpld 78-1-78-3, 78-26-78-30, 78-51-78-55, 78-76-78-78, 78-101-78-105, 78-126-78-130, 78-151-78-153, 78-176-78-180, 78-201-78-204, 78-226-78-229, 78-251-78-256, 78-276-78-280, 78-301-78-310, 78-331-78-333, 78-356-78-367, 78-386-78-393, 78-416-78-425, 78-446-78-457, 78-481, 78-482, 78-507-78-511, 78-531-78-539, 78-561-78-570, 78-591-78-607, 78-631-78-646, 78-701-78-711, 78-721-78-724       Added 78-1-78-6, 78-20, 78-21, 78-30-78-34, 78-40-78-44, 78-50-78-54, 78-60, 78-61, 78-70-78-74, 78-80-78-83, 78-90-78-94, 78-100-78-103, 78-110-78-113, 78-120-78-125, 78-130-78-135, 78-140-78-149, 78-160-78-170, 78-180-78-183, 78-190, 78-191, 78-200-78-216, 78-220-78-230, 78-240-78-253, 78-260, 78-270-78-274, 78-280-78-296, 78-310-78-318, 78-330-78-337, 78-350-78-357, 78-371-78-386, 78-400-78-415 Ord. of  6- 7-04       Rpld 78-160-78-170       Added 78-161-78-171 Ord. of 12- 6-04 70-116, 70-119, 70-135 2005-01  3- 7-05 1 54-72 2005-02  4- 4-05 1 54-187 2005-03  4- 4-05 1 74-297(b), (c) 2005-04  6-20-05 2 74-171, 74-172 2005-06  6-20-05 2 74-83 2005-08  7- 8-05 2 78-221 2006-02  7-17-06 1 1-13(a)(5) 2, 3 18-751-18-752 4 18-211, 18-212 3 78-231 06-03  9- 5-06 2 78-21 3 78-43 06-04 10-16-06 2 30-24 3 30-25 4 30-27 2006-05 12-18-06 1 26-2 2006-06 12-18-06 1 54-233 2007-01  5-21-01 2 78-21 3 78-101, 78-104 4 78-105 5 78-207 6 78-270(a)(10) 2007-02  6- 4-07 1 62-100-62-112 2007-03  7-16-07 2 78-104(b) 3 78-105(f)(5) 2008-01  3-17-08 1 34-126 2 34-127 2008-02  4- 7-08       Rpld 14-5-14-21       Added 14-5-14-28 2008-03  8- 4-08 2, 3 78-169 4 78-221 78-225 2010-01  4- 5-10       Rpld 6-31-6-42       Added 6-31-6-42 2010-02  4- 5-10 2, 3 78-21 4 78-260 5 78-261 6 78-120-78-123, 78-130-78-133 2010-03  5-17-10 78-35 2010-4 11- 1-10       Rpld 74-221-74-224, 74-241-74-256, 74-271-74-275, 74-291-74-306       Added 74-221-74-224, 74-241-74-252, 74-254, 74-256, 74-271-74-287, 74-293-74-307, 74-312-74-318 2011-01  1-17-11       Rpld 34-86-34-97       Added 34-86-34-93 2011-02  1-17-11 1 18-372, 18-373, 18-375, 18-379, 18-380 2011-03  1-17-11 1 78-206 2 78-208 2011-04  5- 2-11 1, 2 78-101 2011-05  6-20-11 1, 2 6-33 2011-06  6-20-11 1 18-26 2011-05(2)  1- 3-12 1, 2 18-778, 18-779 2012-02  1- 3-12 2 78-21 3 78-242 4-6 78-270 7 78-352 8 78-354 2012-03  2-20-12 1 18-776 2 18-779 3 18-778 2012-04 11- 5-12 2 Ch. 78(note) 3       Added 78-7 4       Amd 78-21 5 78-52 6 78-62 7 78-90, 78-92 78-93 8 78-183 9 78-190 10 78-212 11 78-243 12 78-260 13 78-270 14 78-377 15 78-380 16-18 78-387-78-389 2012-05 12-17-12 1 70-26(b)(2) 2013-01  6-17-13 54-46-54-48 2013-02  6-17-13 54-6-54-8 2013-03  6- 3-13       Rpld 70-1-70-4, 70-256-70-282, 70-296-70-311       Added 70-3, 70-256 2013-04 10- 7-13 2 78-91, 78-92 3 78-101, 78-102 4 78-111, 78-112 5 78-161, 78-162 2013-05 10-21-13 2 78-120-78-123 3 78-130-78-132, 78-134 2013-06 10-21-13 2 78-91 3 78-111 4 78-71 2014-01  1- 6-14       Added 22-288-22-298 2014-02  1- 6-14 2 78-280, 78-281 3       Added 78-297 2014-03  2-17-14 2, 3 78-21 4 78-120-78-122 5 78-130, 78-131 6 78-216 2014-05  6-2-14 2 78-21 3 78-191 4 78-260 2014-06  7-21-14 2       Added 55-6-55-13 2014-07 10-20-14 1       Added 22-321-22-333 2015-01  2-16-15 18-211, 18-212 2015-02  3-16-15 38-56, 38-57 2015-03  5- 4-15       Rpld 34-126, 34-128       Amd 34-127 2015-04  7- 6-15 2 78-43 3 78-53 4 78-190 5 78-191 16-02  7-18-16 2 78-21 78-43 78-53 78-191 78-217 78-273 16-03  8- 1-16 62-89 62-90 16-04  8- 1-16       Rpld 18-751-18-756       Added 18-751-18-756 16-06 10-17-16 1 78-21 2       Added 78-218, 78-219 3 78-260 16-07  9- 6-16 14-8 14-14 14-23 2017-01  1- 3-17 1 78-21 2 78-190, 78-191 2017-02  1-16-17       Rpld 78-220-78-231       Added 78-220-78-223, 78-225-78-231 17-04  4-17-17 6-33 17-05  8- 7-17       Added 2-1-2-5 2017-01(A)  8-21-17 1 78-21 17-06 10-16-17 18-733, 18-734 18-376       Rpld 18-721-18-732 18-738-18-740 66-130       Added 34-1-34-9 17-07 11- 6-17 38-56 2017-09  1- 2-18 1 78-260 2017-10  1- 2-18 1 78-351 18-03  3- 5-18 6-1 6-33 6-36, 6-37 18-04  7- 2-18 2-3(l) 18-05 12- 3-18       Added 22-1, 22-2 18-06 12-17-18       Added Art. V, Div. 1, 
34-150-34-165  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Michigan Compiled Laws and to the 1963 Michigan Constitution. 
MCL Section  
this Code 8.3 et seq. 1-2 15.231 et seq. Ch. 2, 2-99 15.231-15.246 Char.  3.1, 51-4 15.261 et seq. Char.  5.7 Ch. 2, 2-98 78-377 15.341 et seq. Ch. 2 2-4 15.361 et seq. 2-4 24.201 et seq. 70-29(5.82) 28.451 et seq. 54-6, 54-8 29.1 et seq. Ch. 38, 38-56 78-202 36.1-36.12 78-21 35.441 et seq. 22-167 37.2101 et seq. Ch. 42 37.2102 42-36 37.2502 42-38 117.1 et seq. Char.  3.8 38-56 117.3(k) 18-108 117.4i 1-13 117.5b 1-1 123.241 et seq. Ch. 58 123.361 et seq. Ch. 58 125.31 et seq. 18-28 125.71 et seq. 34-26 125.581 et seq. 18-776 78-379 78-400 125.651 et seq. 2-91, 2-92 
18-602 Ch. 30 125.901 et seq. Ch. 30 125.941 et seq. 34-26 125.1401 et seq. 2-156 125.1415a 2-156 125.1501 et seq. 78-271 2-166, 2-167 2-166, 2-167 125.1501 et seq. Ch. 18 125.1601 et seq. 30-86 
30-88 125.1651 et seq. 30-26 30-33 30-56 125.3101 et seq. Ch. 78 78-7 78-377 78-387 78-388 125.3405 78-378 125.3514 78-216 131.1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV 141.101 et seq. 74-197 141.441 et seq. Char.  8.4 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 3 2-151 213.21 et seq. Char.  2.1 257.1 et seq. 34-87, Ch. 70 70-63 257.212 70-29(5.62a) 257.252 70-200 257.321a 70-29(5.62a) 257.601a 70-280(c) 257.605, 257.606       Ch. 70 257.610 Ch. 70 257.625 70-26 70-29(1.010d) 257.625 et seq. 70-29(5.15a) 257.625(1) 70-29(1.010d) 70-29(5.15) 257.625(1), (3) 70-29(5.15) 257.625(1), (3), (4), (5)       70-29(5.15) 257.625(1), (4), (5)       70-29(5.15) 257.625a(3) 70-29(5.15c) 70-29(5.15d) 70-29(5.15e) 257.625b 70-29(1.010e) 257.625c 70-29(5.15a) 257.625c(1) 70-29(5.15d) 257.625d 70-29(5.15a) 257.625e 70-29(5.15a) 257.625f 70-29(5.15a) 257.675c(1) 70-29(5.15a) 257.907 70-29(5.62a) 257.942a 70-146 257.951 et seq. 70-26 287.301-287.308       14-16 299.401 et seq. 58-2 324.101 et seq. 34-152 333.1101 et seq. 54-276 54-279 333.6107 6-9 333.7109 54-276 333.7212 22-328 333.12601 et seq.       22-322 338.41 et seq. 22-128 349.101 et seq. 34-127 393.351 14-10 399.171 et seq. 18-655 399.201 et seq. Ch. 18, Art. XIII 18-638 400.701 et seq. 78-21, 78-294 436.1 et seq. Ch. 6 6-1 6-8 484.2102 51-3 484.2251 51-4 559.101 78-21 560.101 et seq. Ch. 66 66-1, 66-2 66-5 66-56 66-101 78-243 600.8101 70-131 600.8312 70-29(2.5e) 692.1201 et seq. 34-1 701.1 et seq. 54-311 712A.1 et seq. 70-29(1.007b) 750.1 et seq. 22-228 750.200 et seq. Ch. 38 750.240 et seq. Ch. 38 750.463 et seq. Ch. 10 753.61 14-10 752.811 Ch. 10 760.1 et seq. 70-29(5.15)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE MICHIGAN STATUTES ANNOTATED 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Michigan Statutes Annotated. 
MSA Section  
this Code 2.212 et seq. 1-2 3.548(101) et seq.       Ch. 42 3.548(102) 42-36 3.548(502) 42-38 3.560(101) et seq.       70-29(5.82) 4.559(1) et seq. Ch. 38 
78-359 4.1241 et seq. 22-167 4.1700(71) et seq.       Ch. 2 4.1800(11) et seq.       Ch. 2 4.1801(1) et seq. Ch. 2 5.15c(1) 70-29(5.15a) 5.15e 70-29(5.15a) 5.207 et seq. Char.  6 Char.  8.5 5.1591 et seq. Char.  7.12 5.2071 et seq. Char.  3.8 5.2073(k) 18-108 5.2082 1-13 5.2084(2) 1-1 5.2531(1) et seq. Char.  13.6 5.2661 et seq. Ch. 58 5.2726(1) et seq. Ch. 58 5.2731 et seq. 74-197 5.2931 et seq. 18-776 78-598 78-600 78-631 5.2949(1) et seq. Ch. 18 78-508 5.2991 et seq. 18-28 5.3010(1) et seq. 30-26 30-33 30-56 5.3011 et seq. 2-91, 2-92 
18-602 Ch. 30 5.3057(1) et seq. Ch. 30 5.3058(1) et seq. Ch. 30 5.3188(1) et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV 5.3230(1) et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 3 2-151 5.3407(1) et seq. Ch. 18, Art. XIII 18-638 
18-655 5.3501 et seq. 34-26 5.3520(1) et seq. 30-86 
30-88 5.3521 et seq. 34-26 8.11 et seq. Char.  2.1 9.1801 et seq. Ch. 70 70-63 9.1912 70-29(5.62a) 9.1952 70-200 9.2021(1) 70-29(5.62a) 9.2305, 9.2306 Ch. 70 9.2310 Ch. 70 9.2325 70-29(1.010d) 9.2325 et seq. 70-29(5.15a) 9.2325(1) 70-29(5.15) 70-29(5.15c) 70-29(5.15d) 70-29(5.15e) 9.2325(1), (3) 70-29(5.15) 9.2325(1), (3), (4), (5) 70-29(5.15) 9.2325(2) 70-29(1.010d) 70-29(1.010e) 9.2325(3) 70-29(5.15a) 70-29(5.15d) 9.2325(4)-9.2325(6) 70-29(5.15a) 9.2607 70-29(5.62a) 9.2642(1) 70-146 9.2651 et seq. 70-26 13.29(1) et seq. 58-2 13.1820(1) et seq.       34-126, 34-127 13.1820(7) 34-126 14.15(1101) et seq.       54-276 54-279 14.15(6107) 6-9 14.15(7109) 54-276 16.114(1) et seq. 2-156 2-166, 2-167 16.114(15a) 2-156 2-166, 2-167 18.971 et seq. Ch. 6 6-1 6-8 18.1208(1) et seq.       22-128 26.50(101) et seq.       78-2 26.430(101) et seq.       Ch. 66 66-1, 66-2 66-5 66-56 66-101 27.3178(1) et seq.       54-311 27.3178(598.1) et seq.       70-29(1.007b) 27.3911 et seq. Char.  8.9 27.4071 et seq. Char.  8.2 27A.8101 et seq. 70-131 27A.8312 70-29(2.5e) tit. 28 Ch. 54 28.191 et seq. 22-228 28.397 et seq. Ch. 38 28.437 et seq. Ch. 38 28.643(101) Ch. 10 28.718 et seq. Ch. 10 28.841 et seq. 70-29(5.15)  
